Virender Singh, J - The present writ petition was admitted way back on November, 8, 2000 and it was ordered to be heard within six months.
As it could not be disposed of finally within the said period, an application was moved by the petitioner for hearing the present petition.
The same was also allowed on 722003 and it was ordered to be heard within six months.
The petitioner after expiry of the said period moved another application praying for final disposal of the present writ petition.
For this reason, with the consent of both the sides, the present petition is taken up.
2.
The petitioner had filed the present writ petition primarily for two claims viz. firstly, for suitable adjustment/absorption on a vacant post of State Textile Officer or any other managerial post commensurate with his educational qualifications and secondly for protection of his last pay of Rs. 5450/- per month which was drawn in Punjab State Handlooms and Textiles Development Corporation Ltd (PUNTEX) as per last pay certificate in terms of the policy decision taken by the Punjab Government to protect the pay of PUNTEX employees upon their absorption in the Government department; with further prayer of arrears of pay and allowances w.e.f.
27.7.1993 along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
3.
I need not enter into detailed discussion as it has been conceded at the Bar by both the sides that the present petition is squarely covered by the decision rendered in Balbir Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 11379 of 1997, decided by this Court on December 22, 1998 wherein it was specifically held and directed that the petitioners therein would be entitled to the last pay which they had drawn in the Corporation at the time of their re-employment in the Government service and they would accordingly be entitled to the increments thereon.
4.
It would be worth mentioning here that the State of Punjab had filed SLP(C) No. 5955 of 1998 against the above said writ petition in the Hon'ble Apex Court, but the same stands dismissed vide order dated 27112001.
5.
So far as petitioner's claim for absorption on the post of Textile Officer (Handlooms) or State Textile Officer was concerned, the writ of the petitioner was dismissed by this Court on November 5, 1998.
However, it was observed while deciding the said petition that the petitioner shall be free to institute fresh petition for protection of his pay and grant of other related reliefs.
Aggrieved with the said judgment, the petitioner filed SLP (C) No. 4721 of 1999 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court which was decided on 22.11.1999 and the judgment of this Court rendered on 5111998 pertaining to the question of pay protection was set aside and the matter was remitted back to this Court to decide the question of pay protection, in accordance with law.
6.
In this situation, so far as the claim for absorption/adjustment is concerned, the same stands rejected.
Now the short controversy is for pay protection and its consequential benefits.
7.
Respondent No. 5 (PUNTEX) is in fact a defunct public sector undertaking.
The pervasive control over it is of the State of Punjab.
This appears to be the reason that no written statement has been filed by respondent No. 5.
8.
The salient features of the connection of the petitioner with the present case can be set out as under.
9.
The petitioner joined as Manager (Projects) with PUNTEX (respondent No. 5) on 1171983.
On 26111991 the Governor in Council had wound up PUNTEX and in order to redeploy surplus staff of PUNTEX, the policy dated 28.1.1992 was framed for the smooth adjustment of the employees of the PUNTEX in other Government Departments/Boards/Corporations of the State of Punjab with an assurance of pay protection which they had last drawn while being in the office of PUNTEX.
It was decided in the said policy that all the employees of PUNTEX should be asked to give their option to accept the offer to job/employment/absorption in other Government Departments/Corporations with pay protection but no seniority.
The petitioner asserts that when despite his best efforts he could not be adjusted or absorbed on an equivalent post, he joined as Treasury Officer on 26.7.1993 (AN) in order to keep wolf away from his door.
10.
The perusal of the file shows that the petitioner had been hammering away at the problem by repeated representations to respondents No. 1 to 4 to get his last pay of Rs. 5450/- as on 26.7.1993 protected as per his pay certificate (Annexure P-31) issued by the PUNTEX and release his arrears of pay and allowances w.e.f.
26.7.1993 including all consequential benefits.
11.
The respondents vide Annexure P-20 dated 311998 rejected the claim of the petitioner for protection of pay by relying upon the decision taken by them in pursuance of the interim directions given by this Court in CWP No. 11379 of 1997 (Balbir Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) wherein on 781997, this Court vide interim order had directed therein to take final decision for pay protection of the petitioners.
This was mainly the reason that the respondents equated the case of the petitioner with the interim directions given in Balbir Singh case and rejected the case of the petitioner for pay protection.
12.
The said writ petition was finally decided and this Court quashed the decision of the Government of not protecting the pay drawn by the surplus employees and allowed the said writ petition wherein it was specifically held that the petitioners would be entitled to the last pay which they had drawn in the Corporation at the time of their re-employment in the Government service and they would also be accordingly entitled to the increments thereon.
At the cost of repetition, it may be stated that the SLP filed by the State also stands dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
13.
The only stand taken by respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 4 in their written statement for denying the claim of the petitioner is that the judgment passed in Balbir Singh's case (CWP No. 11379 of 1997) has been stayed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 5955 of 1998.
14.
Mr. Thiara, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab representing respondents No. 1 to 4 has now very fairly conceded that the case of the present petitioner is squarely covered by Balbir Singh and others case (supra) as after the dismissal of SLP by the Hon'ble Apex Court the judgment rendered therein has attained finality.
15.
Thus, in my view, there remain no justifiable grounds with the respondents for not acceding to the claim of the petitioner for pay protection.
16.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is allowed and the order dated 12121997 (Annexure P-20) of the State Government whereby the claim of the petitioner for protection of his last pay drawn at the time of re-employment was rejected, is quashed.
The petitioner is held to be entitled to the last pay which he drew in the Corporation at the time of his re-employment in Government service as per the last pay certificate (Annexure P-31) in the pay scale of Rs. 4125-5600.
The petitioner would also be entitled to all the increments thereon.
17.
The pay of the petitioner will accordingly be calculated and the arrears would be paid within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order either from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner whichever is earlier.
In the context of facts and circumstances of this case, there would be no order either with regard to payment of interest or costs.
Petition allowed.