JS Narang, J - ASI Sham Lal has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents No. 2 and 3 not to proceed with departmental enquiry of the petitioner on the ground that on similar allegations FIR No. 1 dated 212003 under Sections 5/13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been registered against him at Ambala.
Vide order dated 722003, a regular departmental enquiry was ordered against the petitioner.
The enquiry officer Shri Raj Gopal DSP Head Quarters, Ambala, was further directed to complete the enquiry day-to-day holding the proceedings and submit the report expeditiously.
The petitioner challenges the action of the respondents to continue with the departmental enquiry in face of registration of a criminal case against him.
2.
The necessary facts are that petitioner is an employee of Haryana Police and has been working on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
When the petitioner was posted at Police Station, Naraingarh, and he on a routine patrolling saw some persons gambling, he caught all of them red handed and FIR No. 204 dated 4122002, under Section 13 of the Gambling Act was registered against them.
However, later they were released by the police.
Banarsi Dass, one of the co-accused in that case, who himself was a retired police personnel, on 212003 approached the petitioner and requested him to struck off his name from the FIR dated 4122002.
He quickly put Rs. 1400/- before the petitioner with ulterior motive and they were put in the hands of the petitioner.
Before the petitioner could re-act, Vigilance Bureau employees caught him and FIR No. 1 dated 212003 under the Prevention of Corruption Act was registered against the petitioner.
Thereafter, on 822003 respondent No. 3 as afore-noticed was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
On 2222003, charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner, which is based on same cause of action as the FIR.
Thus, the petitioner prays for installing the departmental enquiry during the pendency of criminal proceedings.
Interim order in the same terms has also been prayed.
3.
Upon notice, the State has filed a detailed reply wherein it is stated that the departmental enquiry should not be stayed during the finalisation of criminal proceedings.
The mere fact that the petitioner has been charged under the criminal law, per se is not a bar to initiation or continuation of the departmental proceedings.
According to the respondents, the charges are different and distinct and are based upon different evidence.
The petitioner is stated to have assured Banarsi Dass of the fact that he would strike off the name of that accused only if illegal gratification was given, while accepting the same, he was caught red handed.
It is also stated that officers like petitioner have lowered the image of the police department in the eyes of public and the act is highly condemnable.
The respondents, thus, submitted that the writ petition should be dismissed.
4.
From the above narrated facts, it is clear that controversy in the present case falls in a very narrow compass.
The petitioner has been charged under Sections 7/13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act by registration of FIR No. 1 dated 212003.
The scope of the charge is obviously somewhat similar but is much wider.
It has been specifically stated in the charge-sheet that, "you released all the accused on police bail and also took out all the money from the pockets of the accused persons."
This is in addition to the charge of accepting Rs. 1400/- as illegal gratification, which rendered the petitioner liable for prosecution under provisions of the Special Act.
However, lowering of image of the police is an additional factor.
5.
FIR against the petitioner was registered on 212003, but as it appears from the record, there has been hardly any progress by the investigating agency.
On the other hand, the departmental proceedings have been commenced on larger issues with a specific stipulation that they should be completed expeditiously.
The mere fact that there are common factors in the FIR and charge-sheet or even some witnesses would be common by itself cannot operate as a bar for initiation of departmental proceedings.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon the cases of Corporation of the City of Nagpur, Civil Lines, Nagpur and another v. Ramchandra and others, 1981(2) SLR 274 as well as Kurukshetra Dubey v. M/s Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd, 1988(4) SCC 329 in support of his contentions that departmental enquiry should not proceed any further and that it will cause him prejudice as disclosing his defence in the departmental proceedings may prejudicially affect his defence in the criminal Court.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State also relied upon the judgments in the cases of Punjab State through Collector, Ferozepur v. Kulwinder Singh, 1996(2) SCT 8 (P&H); Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd & Anr., 1999(2) SCT 660; Ved Parkash v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, 2000(1) SCT 526 (SC) and Darshan Kumar Gupta v. Punjab National Bank and another, 2003(2) SCT 873.
7.
It must be noticed that the law in regard to staying of departmental proceedings during the pendency of criminal investigation/trial is not a straight jacket formula.
It will have to be construed keeping in mind the facts and circumstances of each case.
A Division Bench of this Court in a recent judgment in CWP No. 15743 of 2000 titled as HC Inderjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 2252003, while referring to most of the Supreme Court judgments on the subject, held that unless the conditions are satisfied, normally the departmental proceedings should be permitted to continue.
Reference was also made to the case of Ramchandra (supra) where the Hon'ble Apex Court itself held that merely because the accused is acquitted, the power of the authority concerned to continue with the departmental enquiry is not taken away nor is its discretion in any way fettered.
It will be appropriate to refer to the concluding discussion of the Bench in that case, as it has a direct bearing on the matter in issue in the present case.
The same reads as under :-  "Upon analysing the application of principles enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court, a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sarita Kumari and others v. The Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and others, 1995(2) SCT 143 (P&H) : 1995(1) PLR 495 spelled out the conditions which need to be satisfied before the Court could grant stay of departmental proceedings because of pendency of criminal trial of the departmental official.
The Court held as under :- "It is true that Court may not be able to evolve any hard and fast rule or formula on the basis of which stay of departmental proceedings can or cannot be granted in cases of simultaneous invocation of remedies by an employer.
Equally true is the position of law that emergers from various other pronouncements including the judgments referred to supra that there can be no legal bar for simultaneous proceedings being taken against delinquent employee i.e. disciplinary as well as criminal action.
Thus, we feel that it may be appropriate to satisfy certain basic conditions or criteria which the Courts may consider while dealing with the cases specifically of the present nature.
These are intended to be general guiding factors and are not exhaustive.
Thus, the Courts may have to consider the existence of the following conditions in their right perspective to determine and decide whether the stay may or may not be granted in a given case :- i) The criminal action and the disciplinary proceedings are grounded upon the same set of facts; ii) Identical and or similar question(s) arise for determination before the criminal court of competent jurisdiction and the disciplinary/enquiring authority; iii) The complexity of the merits of the case, that is to say, the case is of grave nature and involves questions of fact or law which are not simple and normally should be decided by a Court of law alone; and iv) Whether it will be unfair to the delinquent employee, to permit continuation of simultaneous proceedings because it would prejudicially affect the case of the said employee, or the delinquent employee would face serious prejudice in his criminal trial because of continuation of disciplinary proceedings."
"In a recent judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court has also taken the view that even (if) the proceedings before the Civil Court and/or the criminal Court are based on the same cause of action, the proceedings before both should be permitted to continue simultaneously as it is not necessary that findings arrived at by the Civil Court shall be binding over the criminal court.
They would also not supersede the findings recorded by the others.
This view was taken in the case of KG Premshanker v. Inspector of Police and another, JT 2002(7) SC 30 and it was held that the view expressed by the Apex Court in the case of VM Shah v. State of Maharashtra and anr., 1995(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 416 : 1995(3) RRR 300 : JT 1995(6) SC 433 is not the correct view.
It is indicative of the fact that continuation of proceedings founded on the common cause necessary need not lead to an inevitable result of staying one during the pendency of the other.
This view can be appropriately applied to the proceedings before the criminal and departmental proceedings on the principle of ratio decidendi.
Therefore, it may not be appropriate to hold as a principle of law that the departmental proceedings ought to be stayed if on somewhat similar facts or cause criminal proceedings were initiated before the competent Court of jurisdiction against the delinquent officer.
It is a settled principle of law that the ambit, scope and consequences of these two proceedings are entirely distinct and different.
On the analysis of the afore-stated principle it could fairly be stated that stay of departmental proceedings on the ground of pendency of criminal proceedings would not be a rule but an exception which could be applied only upon satisfaction on the afore-noticed conditions precedent."
We may also refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of Som Parkash Wadhawan v. The Uttari Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam and others, CWP No. 4037 of 2000, decided on 1242000 and Birbal ALM v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula and others, 2003(1) SLR 39 where the Court declined to stay the departmental proceedings as a result of pendency of criminal proceedings against the delinquent officers.
Expeditious conclusion of departmental proceedings is in the interest of the employer as well as the employee.
Pendency of these proceedings is more prejudicial to the service career of the delinquent employee.
Unless seriously substantial and complicated questions of fact and law, based on identical facts, arise in the departmental and criminal proceedings, which require to be determined by the Court of competent jurisdiction, it will not be appropriate to stay the departmental proceedings during pendency of the criminal trial as a matter of rule.
In the present case as well, only charge has been framed against the accused and the departmental proceedings have been stayed by order of the Court since November, 2000.
We are unable to appreciate who is the gainer in this state of affairs ?
Certain enough, petitioner is a looser as he has been placed under suspension and presumably faces financial hardships.
The petitioner is exposed to this stress now for last more than four years.
Nothing has progressed on any front.
We are informed that charge has been framed in the proceedings before the criminal Court on 27.5.2003.
The delayed conclusion of departmental proceedings can cause serious prejudice to the petitioner and, thus, its expeditious conclusion would mean the ends of justice.
We are of the considered views that it will serve a greater purpose and benefit all concerned if the departmental proceedings themselves are concluded as expeditiously as possible so as to lift the sword of the threatened order of disciplinary proceedings hanging on the petitioners for a considerable period now.
Thus, we direct that the departmental proceedings should be concluded within one year from the date a certified copy of this order is brought to the notice of the concerned authorities.
We hope, the petitioner shall fully co-operate in the departmental enquiry.
However, we are unable to appreciate what prejudice is likely to be caused to the petitioners as a result of continuation of departmental proceedings.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show what are the complicated questions of fact and law which require record based investigation or mode of proof before conclusion of the proceedings.
In terms of law, mode of proof, onus, appreciation of evidence and effect of its conclusion are bound to be differ and distinct in both these proceedings."
8.
From the facts of the case it is clear that the evidence in the present case is neither so complex nor requires expertise to appreciate and decide the departmental proceedings.
The scope of the departmental proceedings apparently is of a larger dimensions than the pending criminal proceedings against the petitioner.
The scope and evidentiary value in the criminal proceedings or the departmental enquiry is distinct and different.
We hardly see any reason to stay the departmental proceedings in the present case.
We are of the opinion that no prejudice would be suffered or caused to the petitioner, as he has already disclosed his defence in the present writ petition to the knowledge of the State itself.
The case of the petitioner is of a false implication and that no proper procedure for trapping a public servant has been adhered to.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the considered view that it is not a fit case where the High Court should exercise its power under Article 226 to stay the departmental proceedings till pronouncement of the verdict in pursuance to criminal proceedings, which in fact have not even started as yet by presentation of a report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.