Swatanter Kumar, J - 84 petitioners have approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction commanding the respondents to consider the petitioners for promotion to the post of Hindi/Punjabi/Sanskrit Teachers, as they possess the essential qualification or equivalent thereof.
For claiming the relief, the petitioners have heavily relied upon the judgments of this Court in the cases of Smt. Indira Kumari v. The State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 2439 of 1998 decided on 1931998 and Balwan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 13552 of 2000 decided on 2132002, which are squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case and copy whereof are annexed with the writ petition as Annexures P/3 and P/5 respectively.
2.
The necessary facts giving rise to this petition are that the petitioners joined the service in the Department of Education of Haryana, as JBT Teachers.
As per the service rules, promotion to the post of Language Teachers to the extent of 25% quota is to be filled from amongst the teachers like the petitioners.
The respondents issued a notification on 5th May, 1995, wherein it declared that the teachers possessing the qualification of Giani Parbhakar with LTC (OT) or its equivalent are eligible for promotion to the post of Language Teachers.
3.
According to the petitioners, they possess this essential qualification.
The notification dated 551995 was subject matter of consideration and adjudication before a Division Bench of this Court in writ petition being Civil Writ Petition No 12450 of 1997, Smt. Indira Kumari v. The State of Haryana, which was allowed, vide judgment dated 19th March, 1998 (Annexure P/3) with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners therein in their own quota treating them as qualified in terms of academic qualification.
4.
Another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Haryana Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) SCT 509 (P&H) : 1999(3) RSJ 87 directed the respondents to promote the petitioners in terms to the post of JBT Teachers possessing requisite qualification in terms of 1988 rules for promotion to the post of Language Teachers.
This case was decided on 5111998.
The petitioners in those case have already been promoted.
Another batch of similar situated JBT Teachers with Giani and Parbhakar qualification filed another writ petition being Civil Writ Petition No 13552 of 2000 titled Balwan Singh etc. v. State of Haryana, which was decided by another Division Bench of this Court and similar relief was granted to those petitioners as well, vide judgment dated 21st March, 2002.
Copy thereof is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/5.
5.
All the petitioners claim that they possess equivalent qualification, as prescribed under the rules.
They have been working as regular JBT Teachers since their appointments, and they possess the prescribed qualification, for promotion to the post of Language Teachers to the extent of their quota of 25%.
6.
Upon the notice, the respondents have filed written statement wherein it is stated that according to the rules of 1998, the petitioners cannot be promoted, as they do not possess the essential qualification of Hindi/Punjab/Sanskrit Teachers i.e. LTC (OT).
Other facts are not in dispute.
It is also stated that the petitioners cannot take benefit of the provisions of the notification, in face of the revised modification having released by the State.
JBT Training and OT training are quite different and distinct, as such, the petitioners are not entitled to any relief.
7.
It is also stated that against the judgment, Annexure P/3, a Special Leave Petition has been preferred by the State, which is pending, and in any cases relied upon by the petitioners are distinguishable.
8.
Under Rule 9 of the Haryana State School Cadre (Group-C) Rules 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the rules) Language Teachers in each subject to the extent of 25% have to be promoted from amongst JBT Teachers, while 75% by direct recruitment or in accordance with law.
Other mode of recruitment is provided under the recruitment rules.
Appendix B, Rule 12 provides qualification, required for such promotion.
It reads as under :-  Appendix B 12 HINDI TEACHER (i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an Equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board; (ii) Prabhakar/BA (Hons.
in Hindi) from a recognised university; (iii) LTC/OT in Hindi conducted by Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department or BA Hons.
in Hindi with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject from a recognised University.
Or BA with Hindi as an Elective subject with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject from a recognised university.
9.
Vide notification dated 551995, some clarifications were issued and the teachers selected on similar qualifications were promoted.
Even as per the rules re-produced by the respondents, in their written statement, Language Teachers should be matric from Haryana School or from such institution which is recognised by the Haryana State, should have passed Prabhakar, BA (Hons.)
from a recognised university, should have done LTC/OT/Hindi conducted by Haryana Education Board or equivalent or BA (Hons.)
with B.T./B.Ed.
as Hindi being one of the subjects.
10.
The only question the petitioners are now urging before the Court is that they are similarly situated, like the petitioners in Annexures P/3 and P/5 and all of them possess JBT/Prabhakar qualification or other equivalent qualification.
Earlier under the rules, Language Teacher was to have Matric/Prabhakar/Giani with training S.T.C.
or OT Certificate.
STC Training was abolished in 1958 and in place thereof J.B.T.
was proscribed as a substitute course.
The petitioners possess that qualification.
11.
All the contentions raised before us, were considered at great length by a Division Bench of this Court, while deciding the case of Smt. Indira Kumari (supra) and also in the case of Gurcharan Singh v. State of Haryana, Civil Writ Petition No 206 of 1984 decided on 241984.
The matter was considered by a Single Judge was challenged by the State in Letters Patent Appeal No. 687 of 1984 and the same was dismissed by the Letters Patent Bench on 2481994.
The matter was again considered by the Division Bench in the case of Balwan Singh (supra).
12.
From the above narrated facts, it is clear that there has been consistent view of this Court that the petitioners possess the essential/equivalent qualification in terms of the rules and there is no notification of change thereof.
It is also conceded that the judgment of this Court in some cases have attained finality and have also been implemented by the respondents authority by giving relief to the petitioners therein.
Even in the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State, operation of the judgment of the High Court has not been stayed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
13.
In these circumstances and for the reasons stated above, we see no reason to take a different view than the one, which has consistently been taken by this Court since 1988.
14.
Resultantly, we allow this writ petition with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Hindi/Punjabi/Sanskrit Teachers in accordance with law in their own quota by treating them as qualified, having possessed equivalent qualification in terms of the existing rules.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.