Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India petitioners seek to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court to examine whether the questions, which appeared in the test, taken by the petitioners along with number of other candidates, is out of prescribed syllabus or not.
3.
The Haryana Public Service Commission published an advertisement for examination for filling up 93 posts of Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services which was to be held in May/June, 2003.
The petitioners being eligible, and working as lecturers, took competitive examination along with other candidates however, they were unsuccessful and thus they filed a writ petition before this Court bearing Civil Writ No. 9955 of 2003, titled as `Naresh Kumar and Another v. Haryana Public Service Commission.
That writ petition was disposed of, vide order dated 772003 passed by a Division Bench of this Court.
The relevant part of the order read as under :  "In view of the facts and circumstances noticed above, without going into the merits of the case, we consider it just and appropriate to dispose of the instant writ petition with a direction to the Haryana Public Service Commission to consider the representations made by the petitioners (Annexure P-4 and P-7), so as to determine whether the question paper of mathematics was beyond the syllabus depicted in the brochure, by passing a well reasoned speaking order within a period of three weeks from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order accompanied by a copy of the instant writ petition.
Disposed of accordingly.
Order dasti on payment of usual charges".
4.
In furtherance of the direction of this Court, the representation made by the petitioners was considered and pleas taken therein were adjudicated vide Annexure P-9 order dated 3172003.
While adjudicating the contention raised by the petitioner, the concerned authority has recorded the following findings :  "You have raised the following points in your representations :- a) Some questions were asked from the topics such as (i) Rings (ii) Integral Domain (iii) Fields, (iv) Vector Space (v) Liner Transformations, which are not mentioned in the prescribed syllabus of preliminary exams in appendix II page 30-31 of the Brochure issued by HPSC.
(b) There were some questions which were having all the four choices of Answers wrong.
(c) Questions paper of mathematics was so lengthy that the time allotted 2 hrs was not sufficient to solve all 100 questions.
In compliance of Hon'ble High Court order dated 772003, the representations (P-4 & P-7) were considered by the Commission.
In reply to point raised `A' you are informed that the matter has been discussed with the examiner of Mathematics paper who is of the considered view that the question paper was in accordance with the prescribed syllabus as provided in the Brochure.
Regarding point `B' it is informed that all the questions which were having all the four choices of answer bear one correct choice.
Regarding point C, it is informed that the question paper was set by the examiner keeping in view the allotted time.
All the candidates have been given equal time and no discrimination has been made against any body."
5.
Now the challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 3172003 on the ground that it is a non-speaking order and the contentions raised by the petitioners in the representations have not been properly dealt with.
6.
We are afraid that while exercising the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court does not sit as a Court of appeal over an administrative or executive action.
The scope of judicial review is limited and it must be exercised within the limitations defined by the well established principles of law.
7.
The syllabus is stated to have been provided in terms of Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The petitioners are not ordinary persons as they are lecturers/teachers in Mathematics.
If the competent authority has applied its mind and find that the paper is within the syllabi provided, it is not proper for this court to examine the factual controversy.
8.
It may also be noticed that Mr. Mehtani, learned counsel appearing for the Haryana Public Service Commission who was given an advance copy of this petition and is present in Court, has stated at the bar that other 560 candidates took competitive examination with the same subject and only 3 have preferred the present writ petition before this Court, with the plea that question paper is outside the purview of prescribed syllabus.
We see no reason to interfere.
Petition dismissed.