Swatanter Kumar, J - Constable Ranbir Singh was dismissed from the service of the Police Department of the State of Punjab with immediate effect vide order dated 791993 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the said order of dismissal which was also dismissed by the Deputy inspector General of Police, Ludhiana, vide order dated 1461995.
Both these orders, which have been annexed with the writ petition as Annexures P/3 and P/5 respectively, have been challenged in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, on the ground that they are arbitrary, violative of principles of natural justice and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled and joined as Constable in the Punjab Police in the year 1988.
According to him, he has an excellent service record and was even given commendation certificates during the course of his service.
On 1st October, 1999, a certificate was issued by the Senior Superintendent of Police, stating that the petitioner was on the hit list of the extremists and as such recommended issuance of a weapon for his personal protection.
The petitioner was involved in a case being F.I.R. No. 228 dated 23.12.1992, under Sections 382, 411 of the Indian Penal Code registered at Police Station Division No. 5, Ludhiana.
Another case was registered against the petitioner being F.I.R. No. 135 under Section 328/506 in Police Station Division No. 6, Ludhiana.
The petitioner was called by CIA Staff on 791993 and was interrogated in relation to these F.I.Rs.
On the same date, the Senior Superintendent of Police dismissed the petitioner from service, while exercising his powers under Rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules read with Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
It was stated that the petitioner has links with extremists and thus he could not be proved a good police office nor was it possible to hold a regular departmental inquiry in accordance with law.
3.
As already noticed, the petitioner had preferred an appeal, which was also dismissed.
The petitioner was acquitted by the learned trial Court in both the above noticed cases vide judgments dated 2411998 and 2251998 respectively.
Against the judgments of the acquittal the State did not prefer any appeal.
On or about 14th June, 1995, the petitioner also filed a writ petition No. 14079 of 1995 in this Court, which was dismissed by an order by the Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 22nd of September, 1995.
4.
After the petitioner was acquitted in both the criminal cases registered against him, the petitioner through his counsel served a notice upon the respondents on 4th August, 1999 requesting the State-respondents to withdraw the order of dismissal and reinstate him as Constable in the Punjab Police.
The emphasis was on the judgments of acquittal recorded by the learned Trial Court.
The petitioner again served a notice through his counsel dated 19th January, 2000, but of no avail.
Ultimately, the respondents vide their letter dated 7th April, 2000 informed the petitioner that his request has been considered and ignored.
The petitioner thus, challenges these actions of the respondents in this writ petition.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that the present writ petition is not maintainable as the writ filed by the petitioner has already been dismissed.
6.
There is not much dispute with regard to the facts stated by the petitioner.
Registration of the cases and acquittal of the petitioner thereof is admitted.
Further, it is stated that in exercise of the power conferred under statute, the services of the petitioner were terminated for the reason that he was helping the terrorists by keeping their weapons.
He was also involved in the crime like money grabbing and anti-national activities with the help of these weapons.
Initiation and conclusion of the departmental inquiry was not practicable as the terrorism was on its peak at that time and taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances, the petitioner has been dismissed from service in accordance with law.
The case of the petitioner was considered in compliance to the directions of the Court passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 7598 of 1995 dated 24th May, 1995, by the concerned authority and it was felt that it would not be in the interest of the force to recall the order of dismissal.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd and another, 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC) : AIR 1999 Supreme Court 1416, contended that once the petitioner was acquitted of the criminal charges, order of dismissal ought to have been recalled and the petitioner ought to have been reinstated as Constable in the Punjab Police.
There is patent fallacy in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the facts and circumstances of that case held that where articles of charges and criminal trial were based on identical set of facts, the order of dismissal could not stand after acquittal of the delinquent/accused by the court of competent jurisdiction.
That is not the case herein.
The cases registered against the petitioner related to different kind of offences i.e. theft, (under section 382) and administering drug with the intention to cause hurt (under section 328).
Acquittal of the petitioner in these proceedings subsequent to the order of dismissal has no bearing on the controversy.
The petitioner has been dismissed from service on the ground that he was helping the terrorists and was giving them protection.
He was using the weapons of the terrorists for committing offences.
He was grabbing money from the persons and encouraging anti-national activities.
The competent authority in its order dated 7th September, 1993 has clearly come to the conclusion that it was not possible to conduct regular departmental inquiry as extremists are not likely to depose against the petitioner on account of their links with him.
These findings have been recorded on the basis of the record.
The Senior Superintendent of Police before passing the impugned order had satisfied himself that it was not possible to conduct departmental inquiry.
As per the record produced before us, the authorities had conducted inquiry in regard to the above allegations and after recording on the file that the petitioner had definite links with terrorists dismissed him from police service including Gurnam Singh, Hakam Singh, Sarwanjit Singh etc.  8.
It is settled principle of law that Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction will not sit as a Court of Appeal to determine whether such sensitive decision taken by the administrative authority is correct or not.
The jurisdiction is very limited so far the order is in consonance with the settled principle of law and the provisions regulating such matter.
The Court would decline to interfere on the ground that another view was also possible.
9.
The disciplinary authority for sufficient and good reasons can come to the conclusion that it is not possible to hold the departmental inquiry and once such opinion is formed particularly on the basis of the record, the validity of the order of dismissal on this ground can hardly be challenged.
In our view, there were sufficient grounds for dispensation of regular departmental inquiry as the terrorists were not likely to depose against the petitioner particularly when terrorism was in its peak in Punjab at that time.
10.
At this stage, it may be appropriate to refer the judgment of the Division Bench in the case of Kuldeep Kaur and others v. The State of Punjab etc., C.W.P.
No. 4881 of 1999 decided on 692002 wherein somewhat similar question arose before the Court and the writ petition raising similar challenge was dismissed.
The Court observed as under :-  "We must notice, at this stage, that no replication/rejoinder was filed by the petitioners denying the averments made in the written statement filed by the State.
If Mangal Singh was threatening the superior officers/Inquiry officer and the witnesses, who were to appear in the departmental inquiry, the decision of the competent authority that it was reasonably not practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry can hardly be said to be erroneous or unjustified.
In fact, it has been specifically pleaded that the witnesses, who were to appear on behalf of the prosecution, in the case under section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, against deceased Mangal Singh, were won over by him and as such they had to be declared hostile in the court.
Threats to the superior officers to the effect that they would be eliminated are extra- ordinary circumstances, under which it can hardly be said to be feasible to hold a regular departmental inquiry and to establish the charges rendered by the competent authority.
The order of competent authority is based on sufficient material and has been passed on appropriate grounds.
Such exercise of discretion by the disciplinary authority is, of course, open to judicial review but within a very narrow compass and jurisdiction.
The contention of the petitioners that nature of charges is such that a regular departmental inquiry could have been held in due course, is without any merit.
The reason stated by the appellate authority is not to be viewed from nature of the gravity of the offence or the charges alone but must be examined in the backdrop of the attendant circumstances such as threats to the superiors officers, witnesses, and most indisciplined behaviour of the deceased in the department.
The concerned authority has taken a view and the High Court, in exercise of its extra- ordinary writ jurisdiction, would not interfere with such view only for the reason that it was possible to take another view in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The circumstances disclosed on record certainly constitute sufficient ground for the competent authority to come to such conclusion.
We do not see any error in exercise of the power vested in the authority.
Thus, we reject the first two contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in support of his third contention has mainly relied on the judgment of this court in case of Swaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(3) SCC 113.
Not only the facts of that case are different but even the question of law decided by the Hon'ble Division Bench is not one raised in the present petition.
It cannot be disputed that under the prescribed table under Rule 161(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, the power to impose the punishment of dismissal of a constable is with the Superintendent of Police.
Under proviso 2 of Rule 16.24(ix), it is specifically provided that such order can be passed without granting a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed penalty against a constable where the authority, empowered to dismiss such constable, is of the considered view that it was not reasonably practicable to give to that officer an opportunity of showing cause.
Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India, which makes an exception to the protection available to a person, under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, reads as under :-  "(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or" Article 311(3) of the Constitution of India further grants a finality to the order of the competent authority passed in exercise of above powers.
Articles 311(3) of the Constitution of India reads as under :-  "(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final."
The cumulative effect of the bare reading of the above statutory provisions seen in the light of the specific provisions of the Punjab Police Rules make it clear that a competent authority is empowered to exercise such power and come to the conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold a regular departmental inquiry before dismissing a member of police force.
Such decision would be open to judicial review but within a limited scope.
The pre-requisites of exercise of such discretion are formation of an opinion based on reasonable ground and recording of satisfaction thereupon by the competent authority.
These ingredients are satisfied in the present case and the authority concerned has exercised its power under the relevant provisions of Punjab Police Rules read with Article 311(ii)(b) of the Constitution of India, as mentioned supra.
It will be very difficult for the court to go into the merits or demerits of such orders unless they were patently illogical or unsustainable on any canons of law, as was the circumstances in Swaran Singh's case (supra).
The impugned orders were passed by the appropriate authority not only keeping in view the security of the State as only ground for dispensing with the services of Mangal Singh but there were other reasons like indiscipline, behaviour of terror, threatening senior officers and witnesses, unauthorised absence and to maintain public order required by his superiors, which were considered by the appropriate authority within the purview of Article 311(b) of the Constitution of India as reasonable ground for dispensing with regular departmental inquiry, which ultimately dismissed the services of Mangal Singh and, as such, the present case of the petitioners cannot be placed at parity with the case cited by the petitioner.
In that case, no reasons whatsoever had been stated by the authority concerned except mentioning that the "petitioner was dangerous and desperate persons".
The plea of the State that the power was exercised under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution of India was held to be not sustainable.
The court had found, as a matter of fact, that there was no application of mind by the authorities concerned.
The petitioners have placed no document on record which would directly or indirectly indicate that the respondents have not justifiably exercise the discretion in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
On the contrary, the respondents have placed sufficient material on record to support the action taken in dismissing Mangal Singh from service.
In the present case, we are unable to see any valid reason which would justify interference by the court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
In view of the above enunciated principle of law and the records produced before us, we are satisfied that the order of dismissal passed by the competent authority is not questionable on the ground raised by the petitioner.
11.
It may also be noticed at this stage that earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 14079 of 1995 was filed by the petitioner, challenging the order of dismissal dated 7th September, 1993.
This writ petition was dismissed by the Division Bench, vide its order dated 27th September, 1995, which reads as under :-  "C.W.P.
No. 14079 of 1995 Present :- Mr. HS Mann, Advocate for the petitioner.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
In our opinion, the order of dismissal passed by the authorities below taking recourses to Article 311 (2) (b) of the Constitution of India is good and calls for no interference.
Writ petition to stand summarily rejected.
Sd/-  SP Kurdu Kar Chief Justice September 22, 1995 Sd/- VK Bali Judge" The order of dismissal has become final and would operate as a bar to the very maintainability of the present writ petition.
Their Lordships while dismissing the objections had upheld that the impugned order of dismissal was good and called for no interference.
In these circumstances, we have no hesitation in observing that the present writ petition is even an abuse of the process of law, particularly when the petitioner did not challenge the order of this Court dated 2291995.
12.
The disciplinary authority taking into consideration various aspects of the matter and keeping in mind the exigencies of services exercised the jurisdiction vested in it under Rules 16.1 and 24(3) of the Punjab Police Rules read with Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and rightly so.
We are unable to trace any legal or otherwise infirmity with the impugned order.
The appellate authority has also passed a detailed order affirming the findings recorded by the lower authority as well as the fact that it was not possible to practicably hold regular inquiry against the petitioner.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merit in this writ petition.
Dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.