Vineet Saran, J - This petition has been filed by the UPSEB challenging the award dated 12-8-1983 passed in favour of respondent No. 2 by which the termination of his service has been set aside and he has been reinstated with full backwages.
2.
The brief facts of this case are that on 21-3-1985, along with 26 other candidates, the respondent No. 2, Sheo Mohan Singh was selected for the post of apprentice.
By order dated 9-4-1985, the petitioner UPSEB appointed the respondent No. 2 as an apprentice Boiler Attendant under the Apprentices Act, 1961 for a period of three years from 11-4-1985 to 10-4-1988.
Since the petitioner stopped taking work from the said respondent No. 2 w.e.f.
11-4- 1988, the said respondent No. 2 raised a dispute and a reference under Section 4-K of the UP Industrial Disputes Act was made by the State Government to the Labour Court.
The terms of the reference were as to whether the termination of service of Sheo Mohan Singh as Boiler Attendant w.e.f.
11-4- 1988 was valid and legal, and if not, then to what benefit was he entitled to and from which date ?
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondent No. 2 it was stated that he was initially given appointment as apprentice in the trade of boiler attendant.
It was his specific case that regular work of Boiler Attendant was being taken from him and he was even working in all the three shifts as well as at times, independent charge of boiler operator was also handed over to him.
It had been categorically stated that he was not an apprentice as defined either under Section 2(aa) of the Apprentice Act or Section 2(a) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He claimed to be covered by the definition of 'workman' under Section 2(z) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and that his services could not be terminated except in accordance with Section 6-N of the said Act.
4.
The petitioner contested the claim on the ground that the respondent No. 2 was appointed as an apprentice under the Apprentices Act, as such he could not be treated to be a workman and the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act were thus not applicable to the facts of the present case.
5.
After considering the evidence adduced by the parties, the Labour Court gave a specific finding that since the petitioner did not file any 'contract of apprenticeship' nor gave any proof of its registration as required under the Apprentices Act; as such the respondent No. 2 could not be treated as an 'apprentice' as defined in the Apprentices Act, 1961.
Further, the Labour Court also held that the petitioner failed to show any scheme approved by the State Government under which an apprentice could be employed for training; as such he could not also be said to be an apprentice under Section 2(a) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act also.
The Labour Court thus gave a finding that the respondent No. 2 was to be treated as a workman under Section 2(z) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act and accordingly the services of the respondent No. 2 could not be terminated except in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-N of the Act, which were not complied with.
The reference was accordingly answered in favour of the respondent No. 2 and his claim was allowed and he was directed to be reinstated with full backwages.
6.
I have heard Shri Ranjit Saxena, learned counsel for the petitioner, as well as Shri Devendra Pratap Singh, learned counsel appearing for the contesting respondent No. 2 at length and have perused the record.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 initially raised an objection that this writ petition challenging the award dated 12-8-1983 was filed on 8-8- 1985, after nearly two years of the passing of the award and that the award with regard to the payment of backwages was partly paid as the petitioner, in part compliance of the award, had paid to the respondent No. 2, a sum of Rs. 91,456/-; as such it was contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that the writ petition was highly belated and should not be entertained.
In para 20 of the writ petition, a weak explanation for the delay has been given stating that there was some confusion and some files were lost from the office of the petitioner and hence the writ petition could not be filed within time.
Although prima facie the explanation for the delay is not at all satisfactory, however, since more than seven years have passed and the pleadings between the parties have been exchanged, I shall proceed to decide the writ petition on merit.
8.
The main controversy involved in this writ petition is as to whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the respondent No. 2 would be covered by the definition of `Apprentice' as given in Section 2(aa) of the Apprentices Act or Section 2(a) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; or would be a workman under Section 2(z) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act.
The relevant provisions of the Acts and Rules.
which need consideration, are as under :  Apprentices Act, 1961 2(aa).
'apprentice' means a person who is undergoing apprenticeship training in pursuance of a contract of apprenticeship."
"4."
Contract of apprenticeship - (1) to (3) ....... (4) Every contract of apprenticeship entered into under sub-section (1) shall be sent by the employer within such period as may be prescribed to the Apprenticeship Adviser for registration.
(5) and (6) ....................... Apprentices Rules, 1991 "12.- Hours of work.
................. (2) No trade apprentice shall be engaged on such training between the hours of 10.
00 p.m. to 600 am except with the prior approval of the Apprenticeship Adviser who shall give his approval if he is satisfied that it is in the interest of training of the trade apprentice or in public interest.
(3) .................... UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 : "2(a).
- 'Apprentice' means a person employed in an industry for the purpose of training therein in accordance with a scheme prepared in that behalf and approved by the State Government.
2 (z).
- 'Workman' means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled manual, supervisory, technical or electrical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but ........ 6-N - Condition precedent to retrenchment of workmen.
- No workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until (a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice wages for the period of the notice : Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the retrenchment is under an agreement which specifies a date for the termination of service;  (b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of six months, and (c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the State Government.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has strenuously urged that since respondent No. 2 had himself admitted in his rejoinder statement that he was appointed as an apprentice in the trade of Boiler Operator from 11-4-1985 to 10-4-1988, hence there was no further need to prove that he was an apprentice and not a workman.
If may be relevant to note that the specific case of the respondent No. 2 before the Labour Court was that although he had been appointed as apprentice, during the said period of three years, the work of a regular Boiler Operator was being taken from him even to the extent that at times he was given regular charge of Boiler Operator and he was working in all the three shifts including the night shift, and also that he was not an 'apprentice' as defined in the Apprentice Act or the UP Industrial Disputes Act.
10.
The Labour Court has given a categorical finding of fact that the petitioner did not file any contract of apprenticeship nor was any such agreement registered as required under the Apprenticeship Act, and as such the respondent No. 2 could not be treated as an apprentice under the said Act.
In my view the said finding appears to be justified as the definition of apprentice as given in Section 2(aa) of the Apprenticeship Act, 1961 itself requires that apprentice would be a person who undergoes training in pursuance of the contract of apprenticeship.
Further Section 4(4) of the said Act also requires that every contract of apprenticeship shall be sent by the employer to the Apprenticeship Advisor for registration.
As such in the absence of any proof with regard to the aforesaid two conditions, I do not find any reason to interfere in the finding of fact arrived at by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court also held that the respondent No. 2 could not be treated as apprentice under Section 2(a) of UP Industrial Disputes Act.
Such a finding of the Labour Court cannot be interfered with as the respondent No. 2 was not a person employed by the UPSEB for the purposes of training in pursuance of any scheme prepared in that behalf.
Further, since it was well established by the respondent No. 2 that he had actually worked with the UPSEB for three consecutive years to the extent that he even worked as a regular Boiler Operator and that too in all the three shifts including the night-shift, which, under R 12(2) of the Apprenticeship Rules, was barred or an apprentice without obtaining the prior approval of the Apprentice Adviser, and as such the Labour Court has rightly held that the respondent No. 2 was covered within the definition of workmen as given in Section 2(z) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the judgment of the Apex Court in UP Rajya Vidyut Parishad Apprentice Welfare Association v. State of UP, 2000(3) SCT 255 (SC) : (2000) 5 SCC 438 : (2000 All LJ 2332), wherein it has been held that apprentices have to go through the procedure of examination and interview and they cannot claim regular appointment on the basis that they have worked as apprentice.
He has relied on certain other decisions also in support of his contention that a person working as Apprentice is not entitled to regular employment as a matter of right.
There is no dispute about this position.
But in the present case, the petitioner has been unable to establish that the respondent No. 2 was an apprentice as defined under the Apprentice Act, 1961 or the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
As such the ratio of such decisions would not apply to the present case.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon two decisions of this Court rendered in UPSEB v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court-1, 2002 (93) Fac LR 942; as well as in Writ Petition No. 18 of 1995 (UPSEB v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court-II) decided on 6-2-2001.
In the aforesaid two cases also, the persons were engaged by the UPSEB as apprentices but since the UPSEB could not establish that they were actually covered under the definition of apprentice as given in the Apprentice Act, as the contract had not been filed nor was sent to the Apprentice Adviser for registration, as such this Court held that their services could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 6-N of the UP Industrial Disputes Act.
Learned counsel for the respondent also relied on a Division Bench decision of Patna High Court in Ram Dular Paswan v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1998 (80) FLR 399 : (1999 Lab IC 1026) wherein it has been held that while determining whether the person is working as Apprentice or not, the nature of work done by the said person would be the most important factor.
It was held that even though the petitioner was enrolled as an apprentice trainee "it is not the label the person has but the type of work which he does, which is relevant criteria for determining as to whether he is or is not a workman."
13.
In the present case the respondent No. 2 has clearly established that he had been working as a regular Boiler Operator during the period of his engagement/service with the UPSEB and that too in all the shifts, as such he could not be treated as an apprentice but could only be treated as a workman.
This Court does not normally interfere with the finding recorded by the Labour Court unless the same is perverse or against the record.
In my opinion, the findings recorded by the Labour Court are based on evidence adduced by the parties.
I do not find any reason to interfere with the same.
As such the award of the Labour Court is liable to be confirmed.
14.
In the result, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.