Swatanter Kumar, J - DAV College for Girls, Yamuna Nagar (hereinafter referred to as `the College') on 313200 advertised the post of Principal as the incumbent of the post had retired.
In response to the advertisement, the petitioner also applied.
In terms of the advertisement dated 25102000 the post of Principal was to be filled on the basis of unrevised qualifications.
The applicant was to be PhD degree holder with 15 years of academic experience.
On the basis of revised qualification the post was advertised on 6122000.
Haryana Government adopted the UGC norms on 8122000.
Upon adoption of the UGC norms, a corrigendum was also issued.
Vide interview call letters dated 1622001 the candidates including the petitioner were required to appear for the interview before the Selection Committee on 2622001.
As per the amended qualification non-PhD candidates were not eligible and permitted to appear for the interview as such they filed the Civil Writ Petition before the High Court being Civil Writ Petition No. 265 of 2001 in which writ petition vide order dated 2332002 the non-PhD candidates were also permitted to appear in the interview.
The Selection Committee duly constituted in accordance with the rules interviewed the candidates for the post.
Result of the interview was kept in a sealed cover which was opened in terms of the order of the Court, before the Court on 12.10.2001.
Petitioner was selected for the post of Principal by majority of 7:1 and the nominee of the Director, Higher Education, Haryana had given the dissenting note on the minutes of the Selection Committee not concurring with the selection of the petitioner.
In accordance with the conditions of the notification the management of the respondent-college sent the recommendations of the Selection Committee to the Vice-Chancellor of the Kurukshetra University to which respondent-college is affiliated.
Vice-Chancellor, Kurukshetra University granted his approval on 29102001 for appointment of the petitioner as Principal of the respondent-college.
Later no appointment was issued to the petitioner despite her request.
It was for the reasons that the Director, Higher Education, Haryana vide his letter dated 7122001 had declined to grant approval to the appointment of the petitioner to the post in question on the ground that petitioner was second divisioner and favouritism was shown to her.
Vide letter dated 22.12.2001 petitioner made a detailed representation to the respondents, which was replied to by the management of the respondent-college on 212002 informing the petitioner that appointment letter cannot be issued to the petitioner as Director, Higher Education, Haryana-respondent No. 2 had declined to grant his approval.
This compelled the petitioner to the file the present writ petition challenging the letter dated 7122001 as well as 212002 as being arbitrary, violative of principle of natural justice and being in conflict with the statutory provisions.
2.
Upon notice, different written statements were filed.
The Assistant Director (Colleges) for Higher Education Commissioner filed a detailed reply in which it was stated that the Selection Committee had not acted fairly.
There were seven candidates who appeared before the Selection Committee for interview and the recommendations in favour of the petitioner was not fair as she was certainly not best candidate to be selected.
The nominee of the Director, Higher Education Haryana had noticed the following remarks :-  "I disagree with the decision taken in the meeting in view of strong and sound academic career and good performance in the interview of another candidates."
3.
The vacancies of the Principal in the respondent-college was filled as per revised qualifications.
The approval of the Director, Higher Education Haryana, being mandatory was rightly fully declined by the concerned authority and as such selection of the petitioner is vitiated in law.
The precise objection of this respondent has been precisely stated in paragraph 6 of the Preliminary objection/submission which reads as under :-  "The selection is to be made from amongst the candidates applying and facing interview for the post of Principal purely on the basis of merit and appreciable performance.
The Government cannot be presumed to be just a rubber stamp to approve each and every recommendation made by the selection committee without application of mind.
The approval of the Vice-Chancellor and the State Govt. for any selection in the Private Aided Colleges is essential and in absence of the approval from either of these two, no appointment against the aided post can be made by the Managing Committee.
Appearing in the interview for a post, mere eligibility to the post or the recommendations of a particular candidate by the Selection Committee does not create absolute right in his/her favour of appointment on that post.
The Vice-Chancellor and the respondent No. 2 have been provided with the power for approval/denial of the recommendation of selection committed under the rules and this power has to be exercised with due diligence and care based on independent appreciation of the facts of each case of selection.
In case any of the two deems it proper not to approve the recommendations of the selection committee on cogent grounds, then the approval to the recommendations can be denied.
The respondent No. 2 by duly applying mind, after going through the recommendation made by the selection committee the dissent note of the Director Higher Education's nominee and after scrutinizing the relevant records of the candidates who appeared in the interview declined approval for the appointment of the petitioner as Principal in DAV College for Girls, Yamuna Nagar.
Therefore, the letter dated 7122001 vide which the approval for appointment to the petitioner for the post of Principal has been declined has been issued with due application of mind and on the basis of cogent reasons."
4.
To the written statement of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, petitioner filed replication where it is averred that majority view of the Selection Committee has to prevail and dissenting note by any one of the members would not vitiate or frustrate the selection on merits.
As per the notification dated 8122000, the quorum for meeting of the Selection Committee is four and total eight members with atleast two experts.
It is denied that the petitioner was not meritorious and ought not to have been selected by the Selection Committee.
Allegation of favouritism has been denied.
Assessment of a candidate is not to be made only on the basis of academic achievements but on over all assessment of which academic achievement is only a part.
From the above noticed pleadings of the parties the basic controversy that requires consideration by the Court is whether dissenting note by nominee of the Director, Higher Education Haryana, could frustrate or vitiate the entire selection made by the Selection Committee by majority of 7:17.
5.
It is not disputed before us that petitioner satisfies all the prescribed qualifications even in terms of the revised qualification provided by the corrigendum dated 30112000 which were amended after adoption of UGC guidelines.
Petitioner is a Ph.D with sufficient experience of various posts including functioning as a Reader in the Department of English, Kururkshetra University for more than two years.
Keeping in view the academic qualifications of the petitioner and the entire service profile, the Selection Committee had selected the petitioner by majority view of 7:1.
Not only this the Vice-Chancellor of the Kurukshetra University also granted his approval for appointment of the petitioner to the post of Principal.
The denial of approval by the Director, Higher Education is based upon the note of dissent recorded by his nominee who was one of the Member of the Selection Committee.
The Selection Committee was constituted in accordance with the rules as notified.
Not only this the guidelines which are to be followed by the Selection Committee have also been spelled out by the respondents.
To the reply of the respondents, constitution of the Selection Committee and guidelines to be followed have been annexed as Annexure R-1.
Portion of the said instructions which in turn makes reference to the notification issued for the selection to the post of Principal reads under :-  For The Post of Principal 1.
Chairperson of the Governing Board as Chairperson.
2.
One member of the governing Board to be nominated by the Chairperson.
3.
Two Vice-Chancellor's nominees out of whom one should be an expert.
4.
Director Higher Education's nominee.
5.
Three experts consisting of the Principal of a College, a Professor and an accomplished educationist not below the rank of a Professor (to be nominated by the governing Board) out of a panel of experts approved by the Vice-Chancellor.
At least four member, including two experts, should constitute the quorum.
The process of selection should involved the following :-  1.
Assessment of aptitude for teaching and research.
2.
Ability to communicate clearly and effectively.
3.
Ability to analyse and discuss.
4.
Optional : Ability to communicate to communicate may be assessed by requiring the candidate to participate in a group discussion or by exposure to a class room situation/lecturer wherever it is possible.
Note : Recommendations of Selection Committee in respect of Private colleges to be got approved from Vice-Chancellor and Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
A representative of SC/ST, women and physical handicapped person should be in the selection committee whenever a candidate from any of these categories appears for the interview.
It should be mandatory for the university and colleges to utilize the seminar and colloquium as a method for selection of lecturer, Reader or Professor."
6.
Evident from the afore-noticed extract of the notification/instructions, it is clear that the selection committee consists of highly educated and expert members whose decision would normally not call for interference particularly in the absence of any specific allegation of mala fide or bias.
Even in the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, no such allegations have been made, however, the nominee of the Director, Higher Education Haryana, has only questioned the selection on the basis of merit of other candidates who have better academic qualifications.
This per se cannot be ground for setting aside the selection.
Selection of a candidate by the selection committee is based upon collective wisdom of the Selection Committee.
In terms of rules of business of such Selection Committee, the selection has to be by majority opinion.
The seven members of the selection committee including nominees of the Vice-Chancellor, experts all were in favour of selection of the petitioner, thus selection of the candidate by collective wisdom cannot be frustrated by dissenting note recorded by the nominee of the Director.
Dissent is appreciable view but where upon deliberation unanimity of the selection committee by majority must take precedence over such a dissent note unless facts averred or apparent from the record were so startling and were based on bias or mala fide of the nature which would prick the judicial conscious of the Court, the majority view should prevail.
7.
The above stated facts which are to be taken into consideration by the Selection Committee do not permit the selection committee to make the selection only on academic qualification.
It has to take into consideration aptitude in teaching ability, to communicate ability, to analysis and discuss and other facts.
In other words, the academic record, service profile and performance of the candidates before the selection committee collectively would be lynchpin to the process of selection culminating into final selection.
8.
To set aside such a selection merely on the ground recorded in the dissenting note would be unfair and unjust.
It will amount to eroding the basic principle of collective wisdom which is the essence and underlying theme of a fair and reasonable process of selection.
9.
Respondents have placed on record Annexure R-2, the academic qualifications of the candidates.
It is obvious that petitioner does not have best academic record but she is a person with maximum experience of 22 years and had done her Ph.D in the year 1992.
The annexed chart alone cannot be the basis for the selection of a candidate.
This chart must be read in conjunction with service profile and performance of the candidates in the interview which can be expressed alone by the opinion of the selection committee.
If all the seven members other than a member recording a dissenting note found the petitioner as best available candidate such a process would hardly be open to judicial review.
10.
In the case of Bihar Public Service Commission and another v. Dr. Shiv Jatan Thakur and others, 1994(4) SCT 416 (SC) : A.I.R. 1994 Supreme Court 2466, the Hon'ble Apex Court while commenting upon functioning of multi-member selection committee held as under :-  "No member of a Public Service Commission can be allowed to question the validity or correctness of the functions performed or duties discharged by the Public Service Commission as a body, while he was its member.
It ought to be so for the simple reason that, such member must be regarded to be a party to the functions required to be performed or the duty required to be discharged by the Public Service Commission as a body or institution, even though he might have been a dissenting member or a member in a minority or a member who had abstained from taking part in such function performed or duty discharged."
It is clear from the above enunciated principle that functioning of a Commission has to be more in representative capacity of a unit as a whole rather than its decision being dependent on assent or dissent of an individual member.
Collective decision being the foundation of such functioning, individual views must give way and be taken in committee to the decision of the majority.
Every rule of fairness as an exception to which is basis on the ground of mala fide or unfairness or patently an reasonable decision which would be opposed to the basic rule of law.
We have already noticed that is not the case either pleaded or any document shown to that effect.
In the case of Ashok Kumar v. Maharishi Daya Nand College, Rohtak and others, 1994(3) SCT 447 (P&H) : 1994(3) Recent Service Judgments 40, somewhat similar view was taken in regard to the selection of a lecturer.
The Court held as under :-  "It is also apparent from the record that the decision taken by the majority of members of the Committee to give maximum marks to the candidates did not find favour with the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor.
The nominee of the Vice-Chancellor had given adverse remarks not only against the petitioner but also against the Selection Committee.
If only the view of the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor were to be weighed then the constitution of the committee would have become redundant.
The approval of the Vice-Chancellor to the recommendations of the Selection Committee was formal and technical in nature.
There could be no escape from the conclusion that it was incumbent upon the Vice-Chancellor to have approved the recommendation of the Selection Committee.
The Vice-Chancellor could decline the approval only if the constitution of the Selection Committee was against any rules and regulations."
11.
A similar situation alike the present case has also arisen before a Division Bench of this Court in case Mrs. Sunita Aggarwal v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 448 of 1997, decided on 3131997.
The Court held as under :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that non-grant of approval to the selection of petitioner Sunita Aggarwal was for no valid reason.
Simply because the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor and the nominee of the Director, Higher Education had placed petitioner Sunita Aggarwal at No. 2 and another candidate at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list was no ground to decline approval.
This was the view taken in the aforesaid judgment also.
To avoid any such situation, we may suggest that if each member of the Selection Committee awards certain marks in the interview and certain marks were reserved for the academic qualifications, this situation may never arise as the person getting maximum average marks would be placed at Sr. No.
1."
12.
The only reason given in the dissenting note is that petitioner did not possesses the higher academic record than other candidates.
This contention in somewhat similar circumstances was rejected by another Division Bench of this Court in case of Dr. SK Bishnoi v. State of Haryana etc., 1993(4) SCT 127 (P&H) (DB) : Civil Writ Petition No. 13767 of 1993, decided on 16121993 where the Court held as under :-  "Undoubtedly, Annexure P-14 does show the academic attainments of some of the other candidates were far superior to those of respondent No. 5 but in the absence of any allegations of mala fides or nepotism, cannot be presumed that the Selection Committee was swayed by considerations other than merit.
It need hardly be emphasised that the post of Principal carried with it not only academic but administrative responsibilities as well and a person may have been a brilliant student yet he may not necessarily make a sound Principal.
The assessment obviously has to be left to the subjective satisfaction of the Selecting Body.
xx xx xx xxx It is to be noted that no argument was addressed challenging the bona fides of any member of the Selection committee.
In this situation, it would be difficult for us to hold that merely because the petitioner had a better academic record he was the best candidate for the post in question.
The other points referred to by Mr. Arora and enumerated in the earlier part of the judgment also have no merit."
13.
We must note at this stage that in the writ petition itself petitioner has made a reference to the plea of discrimination while assuming that the Director, Higher Education could exercise such a power.
It is stated that Director, Higher Education in the case of appointment to the post of Principal of Chhotu Ram Kisasn College, Jind (Dr. Lamba), there was a dissent recorded by the nominee of the Director to the effect that selected candidate does not possess 55% marks, the requisite qualification.
However, despite such a note the approval was granted and Dr. MD Lamba was appointed as the Principal.
We do not wish to comment upon the merits of this contention because even if an illegality is committed, the Court cannot be a part to endorsement to such irregularity or illegality.
That is not the subject matter of controversy before us, thus, we declined to comment upon this.
However, we hold that respondent No. has been acting arbitrarily as this fact is not disputed in the written statement filed before us.
Having discussed the merit of the case, now we are referred to the note recorded in the instructions issued (Annexure R-1 filed by the respondents).
In the note it has been specifically stated that recommendations of the Selection Committee in respect of private college be got approved from Vice-Chancellor and Director, Higher Education Haryana.
This note does not stipulate or specifically provide as to consequence thereof.
It will be very difficult for the Court to read that non-grant of the approval would essentially result in vitiation or frustration of the selection process.
If such a serious consequence have to flow one would expect the language to be more specific and definite in its term.
Absence of such language is certainly not suggestive of the dire consequences.
Director, Higher Education is represented in the Selection Committee by his nominee.
There might be cases where the nominee of the Director does not record a dissent note.
Participation by nominee is participation by the authority itself.
Except that it would create anomalous situation.
We see no fruitful purpose being served by dual application of mind.
Approval of the Vice-Chancellor and Director, Higher Education Haryana is required and it can be declined only for good, valid and very strong reasons.
Nominees of the Vice-Chancellor as well as Director, Higher Education are members of the selection committee.
The view of the department is expressed by them.
Grant of approval is an act of confirmation.
Majority view normally should not be permitted to be brushed aside except for the exception carved out and reference supra.
Learned counsel for the respondents during the course of hearing placed on record a letter dated 6.9.2002 written by Director, Higher Education, Haryana to the Advocate General, Haryana referring to the amendment of the relevant provisions of the notification by the Kurukshetra University vide its resolution No. 3.
The said resolution reads as under :-  "Considered that the presence of the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor and Higher Education Commissioner, Haryana is necessary in the meeting of the Selection Committee for the selection of Lecturers, Librarians and Principals and also if any one of the nominee gives dissenting note, the proceedings of the Selection Committee be not approved by the University and the post should be re-advertised."
14.
This resolution was allegedly passed in the Executive Council which still has to be placed before the Senate on 7112001.
Resolution would obviously be effective prospectively and cannot be enforced retrospectively in relation to the selection already held.
The interview in the present case were held on 2622001 and on that very day result was declared, however, kept in sealed cover.
We are not commenting upon the validity and constitutionality of the above resolution as we are of the firm view that such amended even if otherwise permissible in law would operate only with prospectively.
Now the language of the amended rule itself suggests that language of the earlier notification and the note afore-referred lack requisite essential for enforcing such decision.
In view of the above discussion, we allow the writ petition, quash the order dated 7122001 with a direction to the respondent-College to proceed in accordance with law.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.