SS Saron, J - The Sanatam Dharam Sanskrit English (S.D.S.E.
for short) Secondary School, Patiala, got published an advertisement in the Sunday Tribune dated 412001 (Annexure P-1) inviting applications for regular vacancy of Principal.
It was indicated therein that :- "Grades and qualifications as per Government".
The candidates were to apply to the Manager in the prescribed form available from the School Office.
The applications were to be given in a sealed cover to reach to the Manager Shri ML Syal, Advocate, in his Cabin, Opposite Deputy Commissioner's Office.
The petitioner as well as one Shri Raj Kumar Vashisht respondent No. 13 applied for the said post.
The interviews were held on 2812001 and candidature of Shri RK Vashisht was not accepted.
In an earlier interview held on 29.10.2000 also his candidature for the same post of Principal was not accepted.
Thereafter another advertisement dated 1762001 (Annexure P-2) was published by the respondent-School which as per the contention of the petitioner was made with changed qualifications to suit Shri RK Vashisht and he was lower in the merit than the petitioner.
However, Shri RK Vashisht respondent No. 13 was appointed as principal.
His selection as principal has been assailed in the present writ petition on several grounds.
The main ground of challenge which has been contended during the course of arguments is that respondent No. 13 does not have the qualifications which are indicated in Advertisement No. 5 appended as Annexure P-3 to the petition.
The other grounds that have been urged are that the petitioners have more meritorious service record than the selected candidate, the candidature of Shri RK Vashisht has been rejected twice earlier and thereafter he had not attained or added any qualification to the qualifications already possessed by him, the Manager Sh. MM Syal on his own invited applications, proper procedure and criteria for selection was not followed etc.  2.
Notice was issued to the respondents, one written statement has been filed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 7 which includes of the SDSE School, its Managing Committee and members.
The other written statement is filed by respondent Nos. 10 and 11 State of Punjab and Director Public Instructions (Secondary) Punjab.
3.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 10 and 11, it has been averred therein that no relief of any kind has been sought by the petitioner from the State of Punjab or the Director, Private Aided Schools, Punjab.
However, issuance of advertisement No. 5 by the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, has been admitted.
It is, however, submitted that the qualifications MA/MSc/MCom.
IInd Division with BT/B.Ed.
or equivalent qualifications as indicated in Annexure P-3 i.e. the advertisement No. 05 relate to Government masters and are not applicable in the case of masters working in aided schools.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 7, it has been averred that the petitioners participated in the selection process and, therefore, are estopped from disputing the correctness of things at this juncture.
It is also stated that the present petition was not maintainable in view of the bar created by the Government rules.
It has been stated that the petitioner has no legitimate grievance.
It has also been denied that the Manager Shri MM Syal had invited application himself, rather chance was given to enable the eligible candidates to apply within the prescribed period.
The fact that Shri Raj Kumar Vashisht respondent No. 13 was rejected for the post of principal has been denied.
It has been submitted that respondent No. 13 Raj Kumar Vashisht was having the necessary qualifications.
Besides, in the advertisement dated 1762001 (Annexure P-2) only the qualifications were depicted so that the candidate who fulfilled the qualifications under the rules for aided schools could be appointed.
It has also been submitted that post of Principal was also advertised by the Punjab Government as depicted in the advertisement Annexure P-3.
The qualifications of MA/MSc/MCom with second division was prescribed.
Besides, it has been submitted that the selection process was carried out in accordance with the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1961 and the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974.
5.
It has been submitted that due process was followed and each and every candidate was aware about the selection process and even the criteria and also the constitution of the selection committee and that nothing was kept secret.
The petitioner along with one Sohan Lal also participated in the selection process.
However, he has not been selected.
As such he has started creating hue and cry without any basis.
It is also stated that there was no question of appointment being made at anybody's instance.
Rather the appointment has been made strictly after considering the candidature of the persons for interview and the due process was followed.
6.
The petitioner has filed his replications to the written statement filed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 7 as also to the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 10 and 11.
In his replications, the petitioner has reiterated the averments made in the writ petition.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have perused the records.
8.
The primary contention of the petitioner is that respondent No. 13-Raj Kumar was not eligible for consideration for the post of Principal of the SDSE College inasmuch as he did not have the necessary qualifications.
The petitioner has contended that the qualification for the post of Principal of Senior Secondary School is MA/MSc/MCom.
IInd Class with BT/B.Ed.
and the grade of the Principal with these qualifications is Rs. 10025-15100.
Besides, it has been contended that Raj Kumar respondent No. 13 was rejected in the interview twice by the same selection committee on 29.10.2000 and 2812001.
He has not improved his qualification till his selection was made in pursuance of the impugned order dated 2762001.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that as per the advertisement (Annexure P-1), it has been provided as follows :-  "Wanted one Principal, Regular vacancy.
Grade & qualification as per Government.
Applying Manager in the prescribed form available from school office.
Applications in sealed covers should reach Manager Sh. MM Sayal, Advocate in his cabin Opp.
DC's Office, Civil Courts, Patiala upto 300 pm on 1512001 during office hours."
(Emphasis added).
On the basis of the portion that has been underlined, it is contended by the petitioner that the grades and qualifications as per Government is to mean the qualifications of MA/MSc/MCom.
IInd class with BT/B.Ed.
or equivalent qualifications as provided under the Punjab Educational Service (Schools and Inspection) (Class-II) Rules 1976 (hereinafter referred to as `1976 Rules').
The learned counsel for the respondents however contends that the 1976 Rules relate to government teachers and are inapplicable in the case of masters working in aided schools.
9.
In order to appreciate the respective stand of the parties a reference may be made to Rule 9 of the 1976 Rules, which reads as under :-  "9(1) No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service by direct recruitment unless he possesses the educational qualifications, professional training and other qualifications specified in Appendix "B" for such post.
(2) A person appointed to a post in the Service by direct recruitment shall possess the language knowledge of Punjabi of Matriculation standard or its equivalent."
"Service" has been defined in Rule 2(e) of the 1976 Rules which reads as follows :- "Service" means the Punjab Educational Service (School and Inspection) (Class-II)."
10.
The necessary qualifications for appointment to the post in the service i.e. Punjab Educational Service (School and Inspection) (Class-II) is provided for in Appendix "B" to the 1976 Rules.
The necessary qualifications in Appendix "B" are as follows :-  "Appendix "B" (Rule 9) Qualifications for recruitment to Punjab Educational Service (School and Inspection) (Class-II) Cadre.
1.
Academic - MA/MSc/MCom.
IInd Division.
2.
Professional - BA/B.Ed.
or equivalent qualification.
3.
Experience - Eight years' teaching or Inspection experience out of which at least 3 years' administrative experience should be in the capacity of head of High /Higher Secondary School or any other equivalent post."
11.
It is to be noticed that these qualifications as provided in Appendix-B of 1976 Rules are required for those who are seeking recruitment to Punjab Educational Service (School and Inspection) (Class-II) service.
it is not in dispute that the S.D.S.E.
Senior Secondary School, is a Government aided school and the post of Principal is an aided post.
In respect of the said post the Rules that are applicable are the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as `1981 Rules').
The qualification provided for the various posts are to be determined in accordance with Rule 6 read with the Appendix to the 1981 Rules.
Besides, appointing authority and method for appointment has been indicated in Rules 6 and 7 the 1981 Rules.
Rules 6 and 7 of the 1981 Rules, read as under:-  "6.
Qualifications : - (1) No person shall be appointed to an aided post, unless he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in the Appendix to these rules.
(2) Unless otherwise specified in the Appendix to these rules, an employee who has not attained the knowledge of Hindi and Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent, shall have to acquire the same within a period of two years from the date of his appointment or the commencement of these rules, whichever is earlier, failing which he shall not earn his future grade increments till he acquires such knowledge when the increments shall be released retrospectively : Provided that he shall not be entitled to get arrears of the released grade increments for the period during which he could not acquire the aforesaid knowledge.
7.
Appointing Authority And Method of Appointment :- (1) All appointments to the aided posts shall be made by the managing committee in the following manner :-  (i) Appointing authority shall advertise in both English and vernacular daily news papers in the State, vacancy or vacancies to be filled in by giving full particulars thereof including the requisite qualifications, number of vacancies to be filled in and the last date by which the applications may be submitted.
(ii) The recommendations for appointment of the candidates shall be made by a sub-committee consisting of five members of the managing committee.
(2) The members of the sub-committee shall be appointed by the managing committee :" The Appendix to the 1981 Rules prescribes the qualification and experience for the post of Principal as follows :-  "Degree of a recognised university with BT Principal B.Ed.
or Senior Basic Training with the following minimum teaching experience :- (i) in the case of MA or MSc.
with M.Ed.
six years; (ii) in the case of MA or MSc.
with BT or B.Ed.
seven years; (iii) in the case of BA or B.Sc.
with BT or B.Ed.
eight years; (iv) in the case of the DPEd.
eight years from the date Physical Education was introduced compulsorily in the schools; and  (v) in the case of BA or B.Sc.
with M.Ed.
seven years."
12.
The petitioner does not dispute that respondent No. 13 does possess the qualifications and experience as required under the 1981 Rules.
In our view the expression "grades and qualifications as per government" in the advertisement Annexure P-1 would not make the 1976 Rules applicable to an aided post of the Principal of SDSE Senior Secondary School, merely because the advertisement so states.
In fact the real intent of the advertisement is that grades and qualifications are to be as provided by the Government Rules and Regulations whichever are applicable.
Admittedly, the respondent No. 1-School is an aided recognised school and 1981 Rules are applicable.
For the post of Principal, the qualifications and experience are indicated in the Appendix to the 1981 Rules.
For the post of Principal what is required is degree of a recognised University with BT B.Ed.
or Senior Basic Training with the teaching experience as indicated therein.
The petitioner has not been able to show or dispute that respondent No. 13 does not possess the said qualifications as provided under the 1981 Rules, which are applicable for the post of Principal of an Aided School.
13.
The other contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Raj Kumar Vashisht respondent No. 13 was earlier rejected twice by the same selection committee on 29.10.2000 and 2812001 and that even though he had not improved his qualification, he has been illegally selected on 2762001.
This contention of the petitioner is also based on the fact that the qualifications for the post of Principal of S.D.S.E.
Senior Secondary School are MA/MSc/MCom.
IInd Class with BT or B.Ed.
As already noticed above, in terms of the Appendix to the 1981 Rules, the qualifications for the post of Principal in an aided Institution is that of degree of a recognised University with BT or B.Ed.
or Senior Basic Training with the minimum teaching experience as indicated therein.
Even otherwise, the respondent Nos. 1 to 7 in the written statement have taken a categoric stand that it is totally incorrect that Raj Kumar Vashisht was ever rejected as Principal.
It has been stated the fact that Raj Kumar Vashisht was rejected is totally belied and is without any base.
In fact there is no material even to suggest that Raj Kumar Vashisht was ever rejected.
Therefore, we find no merit in this contention.
14.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that previously the respondent school was Higher Secondary School and qualification for the post of Principal was MA MSc.
MCom.
with BT or B.Ed.
and that now these qualifications have been enhanced and after the school has been upgraded and a candidate for the post of Principal was required to have MA, MSc., MCom.
II Class with B.Ed./BT or its equivalent.
He further contends that according to the first amendment made to the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules 1988, as per Schedule II, there are two types of teachers.
One are J.BT Teachers/Masters etc. and they are granted pay scales according to qualification of identical level in the Department of Education provided the qualifications are similar.
In other words, the petitioner contended that as per Sr. No. 4 of the Schedule-II, the post of J.BT Teachers and Masters etc. in various departments of the State Government are to be granted the same pay scales as have been granted for the identical levels in the Department of Education provided the qualifications are similar.
Otherwise the revised equivalents of the existing scales are to be allowed.
15.
The Department of Finance (Finance Personnel Branch) issued Notification dated 1951998, which notified the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) (First Amendment) Rules 1998.
With respect to teachers, it has been stated therein as follows :-  "Teachers - The post of J.BT/teachers and Master etc. in various departments of the State Government shall be granted the same pay scales as have been granted for the identical levels in the Department of Education provided the qualifications are similar otherwise the revised equivalents of the existing scales would be allowed.
The qualifications for recruitment to those categories shall be brought at par with those prescribed for corresponding levels in the Department of Education."
On the strength of the above, it is contended that the qualifications of recruitment of those categories will be at par if same grades are to be granted.
The position, however, is that in fact the said Revised pay Rules are inapplicable and the pay is to be fixed in respect of aided post by the Government.
The pay scales indicated in the Revised Pay Rules 1998, do not provide for fixation of pay scale with respect to aided post under the State Government.
The same are applicable to the government employees.
16.
The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is this that the selection committee has associated outsiders with the process of selection which vitiates the selection of respondent No. 13.
The petitioner though has stated in his petition that the selection committee allowed outsiders to participate actively in the selection committee.
He has also mentioned the names of two outsiders who took part in the selection committee.
However, this averment of the petitioner has been denied.
The averment of the petitioner except for the names of the outsiders who allegedly took part is bereft of any material particulars with regard to their actual participation.
There is nothing to show that the fairness in the selection was infringed.
In this view of the matter, the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Gurpal Singh v. Raj Kumar Singla and others, 1990(1) R.S.J.
586, relied upon by the petitioner is inapplicable.
In Gurpal Singh's case, this Court held that the participation of an outsider in the process of selection would make the selection invalid.
In the case in hand the participation of the outsiders has been denied.
There is no material to show that they actually participated.
Therefore, the ratio of the said judgment is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
17.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has then placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of Harinder Sharma and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) SCT 399 (P&H) (DB) : 1997(4) R.S.J.
370 (D.B.
), to contend that the selected candidate was related to member of the selection committee and that, therefore, there was a conflict between interest and duty which resulted in bias.
The petitioner however has failed to point out as to which member of the selection committee was related to the selected candidate.
There is nothing on record to show the relationship of any member of the selection committee with that of the selected candidates.
Therefore, this averment of the petitioner is unsubstantiated and is devoid of any merit.
As such the ratio of the judgment of Harinder Sharma's case (supra) is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
18.
The learned counsel for the petitioner then relied upon the judgment of this Court in Roshan Lal v. State of Haryana and others, 2001(2) SCT 495 (P&H) (DB) : 2001(2) R.S.J.
184.
In the said case the selection of the respondent was challenged on the ground that they did not possess the requisite qualifications as per the advertisement and they simply supplied the experience certificate and interview was farce.
It was admitted in the said case by the official respondents that 323 candidates appeared for interview/practical test on two dates and selection process continued for 6/7 hours each day.
The process of selection was held to be farce and the fair chance was never given to the candidates to show their worth in the selection process.
Accordingly the selection was quashed.
19.
As already noticed above, the contention of the petitioner that the selected candidates did not have the necessary qualification has been negatived.
Besides, there is no material to show that the interview was a mere force.
20.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case of Shiv Kumar v. The State of Punjab and others, 1994(4) SCT 205 (P&H) (DB) : 1994(4) R.S.J.
157 (D.B.
), to contend that of late public appointments were being made on extraneous considerations throwing all norms of recognising merit to winds and that if this trend continues unabated, it would cause untold misery and hardship to those who burn mid-night oil to secure job to provide them means of livelihood.
It was held in the facts of the said case that the entire examination and interview had turned out to be farcical exhibiting base character of those who have been responsible for the sordid episode in the said case.
The petitioner, however, in the facts and circumstances of the present case has made mere allegation of fraud and extraneous consideration in respect of the selection of the selected candidate respondent No. 13.
However, he has not placed any material or document on record which would in any manner show that the selection of respondent No. 13 in the facts and circumstances of the case was in any manner bad.
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment in Shiv Kumar's case (supra) is also inapplicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
21.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has further relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Parveen Singh v. State of Punjab, 2001(1) Service Cases Today 284.
The said case related to the recruitment for 26 vacancies of Block Development and Panchayat Officers by the Punjab Public Service Commission for which an advertisement had been issued on June 1993.
However, before the process of selection could be finalised, the Government of Punjab filled up the vacancy through adhoc appointments by reason wherefor, the Service Commission considered it fit not to proceed with the selection any further.
These adhoc appointments were assailed in this Court in a petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court set aside the appointments and directed the Punjab Public Service Commission to complete the process of selection by 971995.
The Punjab Public Service Commission issued an advertisement but the vacancies were enhanced from 24 to 44 for reasons of exigencies of the situation.
For the said vacancies about 4500 people appeared in the written test and subsequently roll numbers of 130 candidates were published, being eligible to appear in the viva voce test.
The bone of the contention in the said case was non-consideration of the marks secured by the candidates in the written examination while determining the overall merit of the candidates and that the real merit has been ignored at the time of preparation of select list by the Public Service Commission.
Reliance was placed on the information sheet of the Public Service Commission, which gave the scheme of the examination and provided for the various marks to be assigned for different subjects and also that no candidate could be eligible to appear in the viva voce test unless he obtained 33 marks in each paper and 45 per cent marks in aggregate.
It was in this context that the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the selection was by way of interview and there was always room for suspicion for the common appointments if the oral interview is taken up as the only criteria and that the vice of manipulation cannot be ruled out.
This was in the context that the selection was based exclusively on interview whereby (chance) of manipulation could not be ruled out.
The ratio of the said judgment in Parveen Singh's case is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
22.
The present case relates to the selection of Principal of an aided institution, which as already noticed above, is to be conducted in accordance with the method of appointment provided in Rule 7 of the 1981 Rules.
The recommendations for appointment of candidates as per Rule 7(1)(ii) is to be made by sub-committee consisting of five members of the Managing Committee.
Therefore, Parveen Kumar's case (supra) is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
23.
The next case relied upon by the petitioner is that of Dr. AK Bakshi v. Panjab University, 2000(1) S.C.T.
1038.
In the said case, it was held that bias cannot be proved like a chemical reaction and it was a state of mind which can be inferred from the circumstances of a given case.
Besides a candidate having participated in the interview is estopped from challenging the selection.
However, the rule is not absolute.
It was held that no doubt one cannot be allowed to sit on the fence, but, it must be proved that the candidates had the knowledge of the facts before appearing before the selection Committee as to who were the members of the committee and their inter se connection with the selected candidates.
As already noticed above, the petitioner has not placed on record as to who were the members of the committee and what was the relationship of the selected candidate.
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment in Dr. AK Bakshi's case (supra) is also inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
24.
The learned counsel for the petitioners then contended that on the basis of the bio-data with regard to their own merit and that of the selected candidate, their merit is better.
Besides, he has contended that the selected candidate is President of the Itihas Sanklan Samiti organised by RSS and Shri Raj Kumar Vashisht, and has got inclination towards the same through RSS and being less meritorious, he has been selected ignoring the higher merit of the petitioners.
The said averment has been denied by the respondents.
It is to be noticed that assessment of relevant merit of the candidates appearing for the interview is not the domain of this Court and that is the function of the selection bodies.
This Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, does not sit in appeal over the proceedings of the selection bodies.
The jurisdiction of this Court is a supervisory jurisdiction and the Court exercising it is not entitled to act as an Appellate Court.
This limitation unnecessarily entails that the determination by the selection bodies cannot be reappreciated or reopened.
The inter se assessment of the respective bio-data of the candidates appearing for the interview is the domain of the selection committee and in the absence of any material to show that the selection committee acted in an arbitrary manner or with bias the same cannot be interfered with.
25.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
At the time of preliminary motion hearing, this Court in terms of order dated 8102001 issued notice of motion subject to the condition that the petitioners deposited a sum of Rs. 11,000/- with the Registry of this Court and if such a deposit was made notice was to be issued.
The petitioner has deposited the same Rs. 11,000/-.
In the circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the sum of Rs. 11,000/- be refunded to the petitioners.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.