VM Jain, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the plaintiff, against the judgment and decree, passed by the District Judge, accepting the appeal of the defendants, setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and dismissing the suit of the plaintiff, in toto.
2.
Sardari Lal, plaintiff, had filed a suit for declaration, challenging his dismissal order dated 2631980 from the post of Patwari.
It was alleged that the plaintiff was arrested under the provisions of Prevention of Corruption Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) for having accepted illegal gratification of Rs. 80/- and FIR dated 18.4.1979 was registered against him.
The plaintiff was placed under suspension during trial and he was convicted by the Special Judge, Jalandhar.
The Appeal of the plaintiff was also dismissed by this Court, vide order dated 4.6.1982 and the Appeal, filed by the plaintiff, was also dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
During the intervening period, the plaintiff was dismissed from service w.e.f.
2631980 and this dismissal of the plaintiff was challenged by him by filing the suit for declaration, alleging therein that the order of dismissal was illegal and void and no inquiry was held and no show-cause notice was issued to him and that he was dismissed from service during the pendency of the Appeal against conviction.
The suit was contested by the defendants, by filing written statement, alleging therein that in view of the conviction of the plaintiff, in a case under the Act, no inquiry was required to be held and that the plaintiff was rightly dismissed from service.
3.
After hearing both the sides, the learned trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff for declaration, as prayed for.
With regard to the entitlement of the plaintiff to all the benefits of service, it was ordered that the plaintiff shall be entitled to the benefits of service from the date of his joining the service in consequence of the judgment and decree, passed by the trial court.
It was further directed that the defendants would be at liberty to proceed against the plaintiff, in accordance with law.
Aggrieved against the said judgment and decree of the trial Court, two Appeals were filed.
One Appeal was filed by the defendants, challenging the judgment and decree of the trial Court, whereby the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
The other Appeal was filed by Sardari Lal, plaintiff, claiming the arrears and other service benefits.
After hearing both the sides, the learned District Judge dismissed the appeal of the plaintiff and accepted the appeal of the defendants and as a result thereof, he set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff, in toto.
Aggrieved against this judgment and decree of the learned District Judge, the plaintiff has now filed the present Regular Second Appeal in this Court.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant and have gone through the record carefully.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that holding of inquiry and issuing show-cause notice was required before the ordering dismissal of the plaintiff from service.
Reliance has been placed on the law laid down by this Court in State of Punjab v. Karnail Singh, 1994(4) SCT 153 (P&H) : 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 561, and the law laid down by the Kerala High Court, in the case reported as State of Kerala v. Mohanan, 2000(1) SCT 963 (Kerala) (DB) : 2000(3) Recent Services Judgments 540.
However, I find no force in this submission of the learned counsel for th appellant.
Admittedly, the appellant was convicted in a case under the Act and his conviction was upheld upto the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In Union of India and ors. v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that where the respondent was convicted under Section 332, IPC, his retention in public service would be undesirable.
Infact, the conduct of the respondent was such that he merited the penalty of dismissal from government service.
In the said authority as well, the punishment was awarded to the respondent without holding any inquiry.
In Trikha Ram v. VK Seth and anr., AIR 1988 SC 285, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that where the appellant was convicted for a criminal offence, no opportunity of hearing by the disciplinary authority, before imposing punishment, was required.
Reliance was placed on the law laid down in Tulsi Ram Patel's case (supra).
6.
In the authority 1995(1) RSJ 560 (supra), relied upon by learned counsel for the appellant, the respondent was convicted in a murder case.
It was held by this Court that the order of dismissal could not be passed without notice or opportunity of hearing.
However, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the above mentioned authorities, in my opinion, no reliance could be placed on the law laid down by this Court, in Karnail Singh's case (supra).
Similar is the position in respect of State of Kerala v. Mohanan's case (supra), relied upon by learned counsel for the appellant.
No other point has been urged before me by learned counsel for the appellant.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in the present Second Appeal, the same is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.