Swatanter Kumar, J - Vide this judgment, the above mentioned writ petitions are being disposed of.
However, the facts have been taken from CWP No. 17988 of 1999, titled as Prem Singh & others v. Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited and others.
2.
The three petitioners in this writ petition had earlier filed a writ petition being CWP No. 14174 of 1998 in the High Court praying for regularisation of their services as part-time Sweepers and Malis with the Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam, hereinafter referred to as the Nigam.
That writ petition was disposed of by an order of Division bench dated 1721999 while passing the following directions :-  "It is the conceded position that the State Government has framed a policy for regularisation of part time Class IV (Group-D) employees working in the Government Departments except the Education Department.
In view of the fact that the State Government has already framed a policy, the Haryana State Electricity Board may now consider that policy and it may either adopt or frame a policy of its own within a period of six months from today.
After the adoption/framing of the policy, the case of the petitioners shall be considered in terms of that policy within a period of four months thereafter.
The writ petition is disposed of with these directions."
3.
The representation preferred by the petitioners in furtherance to the judgment of the Court was considered by the respondent-Nigam.
The Board of Directors of the Nigam in their meeting dated 771999 framed a policy of regularisation of services of part-time Class-IV employees.
The petitioners had moved a representation to the Nigam which was considered in the light of the policy of the Government dated 771999, but their request for regularisation was declined.
Copy of the order dated 4.11.1999 rejecting the request for regularisation by the petitioners is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/4.
It is this order which has been challenged by the petitioners in this petition.
4.
Petitioner No. 1 was appointed as part-time sweeper on 141987.
Petitioner No. 2 was appointed as part-time Mali on 1121997.
The petitioners are working in the department of the Nigam without any break since the date of their appointment.
According to the petitioners they were entitled to regularisation of their services in view of the policy of the Nigam.
According to the policy a part time employee, who was working and had completed at least five years continuous service on the date of commencement of the policy, was required to be given preference for being considered for regular appointment against the post when-ever the competent authority decided to fill up such Class-IV posts on regular basis.
The grievance of the petitioners is that they ought to be regularised straight-way in view of the fact that they satisfy the conditions prescribed in the policy.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it is stated that the petitioners are not entitled to regularisation of their service and the orders have been correctly passed by the department.
The petitioners were stated to be employees of erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board and were appointed by respondent No. 3 in the year 1987 as pleaded.
Under the transfer scheme the employees were transferred to other Nigams including the respondent No. 1-Nigam and under Rule 6(12) of the Haryana Electricity Reforms Act, 1997, the Board is entitled to frame its own rules and regulations even in relation to the employees who were employees of erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board.
Thus, according to the respondents they have considered the case of the petitioners and found them not eligible for regularisation at this stage.
It is also alleged that services of no person junior to the petitioners have been regularised.
6.
It is not in dispute that the petitioners were appointed in the year 1987 and since then they have been continuously working with the respondent-Nigam.
The Board has approved policy of the Nigam for regularising the services of Class-IV part-time employees.
The main three conditions stated in the policy are : (1) The employee should have been recruited through employment exchange or directly appointed by the competent authority; (2) He should possess the requisite qualifications; and (3) The work and conduct of such employee should have been satisfactory.
Placing the petitioners on a different position than the work-charged or daily rated employees, the Nigam has rejected their claim.
We may notice at this stage that no reason has been stated in the impugned orders which even suggest that the petitioners do not satisfy the above conditions.
7.
An attempt was made to argue that services of the part-time workers are not required as there is no work and further that there are no posts available.
There are different districts under the same Nigam or under different Nigams of the State of Haryana.
In relation to Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam, its whole time Directors as late as on 1562001 passed a resolution for further engagement of such employees in District Gurgaon and similar resolutions were passed in relation to other districts.
The availability of the work and likelihood of the work continuing for indefinite period or future is not even seriously disputed before us.
If that be the circumstances, we are unable to see any plausible explanation in the reasons given by the Nigam for declining regularisation of services of these petitioners.
The part-time employees who claim to be working for a long period have admittedly been working since 1987 without a break.
The rationale behind passing of impugned orders rejecting the requests of the petitioners for regularisation of their services is not clear.
The persons who have been working continuously for so many years and have been discharging functions and duties similar to the regular incumbents of the posts in the regular cadre can hardly be denied such prayer.
8.
The action of the respondents does not reflect fairness in State action, of course, there is not much material before us to come to the conclusion whether the petitioners were actually working part-time or whole-time and what were their working hours.
It was contended before us that there is need for whole-time workers in the Nigam, particularly keeping in mind the nature of duties and functions which they are performing.
Admittedly, the respondents have passed orders from the time to time continuing the services of the petitioners and other persons similarly situated.
Continuous service rendered for such long period, seen in the light of the fact that the petitioners satisfied the prescribed conditions, would justify their consideration for regularisation of their services in terms of the policy of the State.
In the case of Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(3) SCT 644 (P&H) (DB) : Civil Writ Petition No. 193 of 2001, decided on 2132002., before a Division Bench of this Court, the Advocate General, Haryana had made a statement that such part-time employees would be considered for regularisation depending upon the availability of the work, post etc.
It was specifically conceded on behalf of the State that even qualifications conditions prescribed in the police would not be strictly enforced against the petitioners in those cases persons were serving for years together.
In these circumstances, we find it reasonable to direct the State to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation and not to expose them to an open competition against the new direct entrants.
This cannot be in consonance with the principles of fairness as the petitioners have served the respondents for years together and now most of them must have been rendered over-age or otherwise ineligible for recruitment to the government or Nigam's service.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners placed heavy reliance upon the Division Bench of this Court in case of Satyadev v. Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd and others, 2001(1) SCT 883 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 13529 of 1999, decided on 8122000.
The facts of this case were similar to the present case and the Court keeping in view the length of service rendered by the petitioners in that case, granted the requisite relief and set aside the policy to give only preferential treatment to the petitioner as being only eye wash.
The Court held as under :-  "If the post of water carrier cum mali on whole time basis is thrown open for recruitment, everybody eligible will apply for that post and in competition the petitioner might not be able to make the required grade.
A part timer is required to be regularised and made whole timer if the volume of work justifies that this should be a whole time job.
It was held in CWP No. 10774 of 1999 decided on 422000 by a Division Bench of this Court that those of the petitioners who have rendered sufficient service with the respondents deserve to be regularised on this respective posts.
At the time they claim to be regularised, it cannot be seen whether he was recruited through employment exchange or he was fulfilling the age criteria."
10.
The judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Satyadev's case (supra) was assailed in appeal by the Nigam before the Hon'ble Apex Court, which was dismissed vide order dated 12.5.2001 in Special Leave petition.
In other words, the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Satyadev's case (supra) has attained finality.
It is binding on the parties and the present petitioners are identically situated like the petitioners in Satyadev's case.
The Nigam is under obligation to frame a policy of regularisation which in essence should provide for the object to be achieved rather than a policy which would defeat the very object sought to be achieved by formulation of such policy.
11.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition in terms of the relief granted in Satyadev's case and for the reasons given there, in addition to the above, and direct the respondents to formulate a proper policy of regularisation and consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services in their respective cadre.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.