Swatanter Kumar, J - The controversy in these two writ petitions revolves around the scope and interpretation of Clause 8(a) of the Prospectus issued for Punjab Medical Entrance Test-2001 (hereinafter referred to as "PMET-2001), held by Baba Farid University of Health Sciences.
Faridkot (hereinafter referred to as "the University").
Clause 8(a) of the Prospectus reads as under :-  8(a) for admission to MBBS/BDS Candidate must have come in the merit list prepared as a result of the entrance examination by securing not less than 50% marks in Physics, Chemistry and Biology taken together in the competitive examination, in respect of candidates belonging to scheduled castes, scheduled tribes or other backward classes the marks obtained in Physics, Chemistry and Biology taken together in competitive entrance examination be 40% instead of 50% as stated above."
2.
It is contended by learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 10575 of 2001 that the clause providing the eligibility condition of obtaining minimum marks in the competitive examination does not take in its ambit the candidates of sports category.
As such, they are not required to secure 50% marks in the competitive test.
It is further contended that admission to sports category is controlled by Clause 3(iv) under the head ADMISSION/COUNSELLING PROCEDURE and in terms of the Government Policy, instructions of the Department of Sports, Punjab Government.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgment of a Full bench of this Court in the case of Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H) (DB) : 1993(4) SLR 673 to contend that the condition of the previous year ie 35% qualifying marks for sports category in the competitive examination is applicable.
In the alternative it is contended that the Government had already accepted the claim of the petitioners during the pendency of the petition by issuance of the notification dated 2182001 vide which the eligibility condition of minimum qualifying marks in the competitive examination has been completely done away with.
On these grounds the petitioners pray for admission on the strength of higher sports grading in preference to the candidates who have secured more than 50% marks in the competitive examination.
3.
Before we proceed to examine the merits of the above submission, reference to the facts (of CWP No. 10575 of 2001) ostracize of un-necessary details, may be noticed.
The petitioner, Ms. Sarveet Chhabra, is a sports person and with the desire of pursuing graduate course in medicines, appeared in the PMET-2001 under sports category, which was held on 772001.
The test was conducted by the University, which was duly empowered to hold, vide notification of the Department of Research and Medical Education, Government of Punjab, dated 25.5.2001.
The result of the test was declared on 772001 itself and applications for admission to medical course, after clearing the entrance test, were required to be submitted by the candidates by 3172001.
The counselling was to be held for different categories from 1782001, while for the sports category, the counselling was fixed for 2382001.
4.
According to the petitioner, she secured 310 marks out of 800 marks, i.e. 3875%, in the competitive examination.
However, the petitioner has not been granted admission to the MBBS/BDS course on the ground that she was required to secure at least 50% marks in the competitive examination to satisfy the eligibility condition for admission to the medical curse.
The petitioner, thus, challenged the action of the respondents on the above grounds in this writ petition.
5.
As we have already mentioned that the Government of Punjab on 2282001 issued a notification completely doing away with the eligibility condition of minimum qualifying marks for admission to such courses.
After issuance of the notification the petitioner did not amend the petition.
However, the petitioner was permitted to argue the matter even on the strength of the said notification.
It became necessary for the Court to give a fair opportunity of hearing to the petitioner even in that regard because four writ petitions i.e. CWP No. 13722 of 2001, CWP No. 13003 of 2001, CWP No. 12200 of 2001 and CWP No. 12346, had been filed by different petitioners challenging the validity, legality and competency of the Government to issue the said notification dated 2182001.
Arguments on these matters were heard together with the petitions though judgments were reserved on different dates.
6.
Another writ petition being CWP No. 12865 of 2001 has been filed by Amandeep Singh and two others, who belong to the sports category, challenging the notification dated 2182001 on the ground that the Government of Punjab has no jurisdiction to waive the eligibility condition of minimum qualifying marks in the competitive examination as fixed by the Medical Council of India.
The Government is estopped from changing the said admission criteria in the middest (midst?
)of the counselling.
It cannot give retrospective effect to the notification in question.
It is further contended that criteria of merit cannot be completely wiped out by the State Government in the garb of reservation.
The decision of the Government is contrary to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Preeti Srivastava and another v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and others, 1999(4) SCT 133 (SC) : JT 1999(5) SC 498 and State of Punjab v. Dayanand Medicl College and Hospital and others, 2001(4) SCT 993 (SC) : JT 2001(8) SC 529, which squarely apply to the facts of the present cases.
The reliance upon the judgment of Full Bench in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra) by petitioner Savreet Chhabra is misconceived.
The petitioners would suffer serious prejudice if the Government is permitted to completely alter the admission criteria and destroy the rule of merit.
7.
These petitioners further claim that they had taken the PMET-2001 and are sports persons, who have performed extremely well in their respective academic courses.
The petitioners claim to have attained more than 82% marks in their qualifying examination and more than 50% marks in the competitive examination, securing the ranks 370, 689 and 307 respectively.
All the petitioners claim that they were offered BDS seats in the general category because of their high ranks, but they declined the seats, as in terms of the prospectus and notification of the Government dated 25.5.2001, they were sure to get seats in the MBBS course under sports category.
They have also made averments in the writ petition to show the extent of prejudice they are likely to suffer vis-a-vis other candidates, if the notification dated 2182001 was given effect to.
These averments, of course, have been denied by the private respondents.
8.
Petitioner in CWP No. 10575 of 2001 had filed a caveat in this writ petition (CWP No. 12865 of 2001) and vide order dated 2882001 the said caveater was permitted to be impleaded as respondent No. 3 in the writ petition.
9.
At this stage we may notice that arguments were heard on all these afore- noticed writ petitions day-to-day together.
The judgment, in the five writ petitions being CWP Nos. 13722, 13003, 12200, 12346 and 12156, all of 2001 was reserved on 8112001, while the judgment in these two writ petitions was reserved on 29112001.
The judgment in the above mentioned five writ petitions, which were only confined to the legality and validity of the notification, was pronounced on 29112001.
The present writ petitions raise additional pleas with regard to interpretation to Clause 8 and applicability of judgment of Full Bench of this Court rendered in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra), in reference to the facts of the present case.
We considered it appropriate to dispose of these two writ petitions by a separate common judgment.
10.
The main contention raised on behalf of the petitioner (in CWP No. 10575 of 2001) is that in view of the notification dated 2182001 the petitioner per se is entitled to admission in the medical courses.
However, the counter claim on behalf of the petitioners in the other writ petition (CWP No. 12865 of 2001) is that the issuance of the impugned notification by the Government was illegal and offended the standards prescribed by the Medical Council of India by way of completely altering the admission criteria and such effect is arbitrary, prejudicial and destructive of rule of merit.
11.
These contentions need not detain us any further in view of our judgment rendered in the case of Mamta Bansal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 1030 (P&H) CWP No. 13722 of 2001, decided on 29112001, wherein while quashing the impugned notification dated 2182001, the Court has held as under :-  "It is true that there is no indefeasible vested right in the petitioners in the present cases, but the declaration of result, obviously, is a settlement of a right for admission to MBBS/BDS courses.
This settled position cannot be permitted to be unsettled by an abrupt and arbitrary decision of the Government to do away with the condition of minimum qualifying marks prescribed for such courses.
Principle of equity and fairness would demand that the candidates in whose favour a right has accrued and they have exercised their permissible options based on the terms and conditions of the brochure existing at the relevant time, should not be exposed to avoidable prejudice."
"We may also notice that a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(3) SCT 745 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 698 of 2001, decided on 1862001 had taken the same view in regard to post graduate matter in medical courses.
The judgment of the Division Bench on the issue in question has already been approved by the Hon'ble Apex Court as afore-noticed."
"It appears that from some news items and on request from the Welfare Department of the Punjab Government, the matter was taken up for consideration in the Department of Medical Education of the Government.
Vide note dated 982001, the matter was placed before the Principal Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Government of Punjab, who, vide his note dated 1082001, cautioned the Government not to take a decision contrary to the terms and conditions of the brochure, not to offend the qualifications prescribed for competitive test by the Medical Council of India and also made reference to various judgments of the Court including the case of Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana v. State of Punjab and others.
This note of the Principal Secretary was approved by the Medical Education and Research Department, who commented that terms and conditions specified in the brochure and the earlier notification should be adhered to.
The Minister of the concerned department while concurring with the note observed that the Government should avoid litigation.
However, the Chief Minister, vide his order dated August 18, 2001, not only directed withdrawal of the minimum qualifying marks for the category, for which the note was initiated, but also directed that such a condition would not apply even to the other categories like sports and handicapped persons.
The note initiated did not relate to grant of exemption from the rigours of the condition to the categories other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes category.
The note for grant of exemption to this reserved category from the rigours of condition of minimum marks was initiated on 1162001, but was declined by the competent authority on 1262001.
Obviously, thereafter, Notification was issued on 2562001 and prospectus was published and circulated to the students.
In other words the Government had taken a cautious decision, as already noticed, for implementing the said condition, for the current academic year 2000-2001."
"In view of our detailed discussion above on various facets of this case we are of the considered view that action of the Government in issuing the impugned notification is patently transgression of this prescribed limitations.
The Government's decision is nothing but an exhortation of errors in law on incorrect factual premises.
The State, in exercise of its executive powers could not dilute, much less completely do away with, the minimum education standards prescribed (condition of obtaining minimum marks in the competitive examination) by the Medical Council or India in discharge of its statutory functions.
In view of the regulations afore-noticed prescription of minimum marks in the competitive examination apparently is the lodestar for admission to the graduate medical courses.
The stand of the State and the private respondents is nothing but a sophistry founded on imagination rather than the facts on record.
In any case, State has no competence to give effect to the impugned notification either retrospectively or retro-actively to the disadvantage of the students more particularly when it is destructive of the original notification issued by the Government, upon due deliberation and after taking a conscious decision on May 25, 2001.
There is apparently no reasonable nexus between the impugned notification and the object sought to be achieved by issuance thereof keeping in mind the State policy and eligibility qualifications prescribed by Medical Council of India.
The notification cannot be termed as explanatory or elucidatory to the original notification.
In fact it is destructive of the very underlying theme promulgated under first notification and the prospectus.
Besides all this, decision of the Government suffers from infirmity of patent arbitrariness as it offends the principles of fairness, rectitude and stability in administrative or executive action."
12.
As the impugned notification dated 2182001 has been quashed vide our judgment dated 29112001, obvious result thereof is that the petitioner in CWP No. 10575 of 2001 cannot claim any advantage arising therefrom, while the contention of the petitioners in CWP No. 12865 of 2001 has to be accepted.
13.
A bare reading of Clause 8(a) of the prospectus shows that the Government/competent authority provided the relaxation or exclusion specifically in the rule itself, where it intended to provide.
The expression, "candidate must have come in the merit list prepared as a result of the entrance examination by securing not less than 50% marks.........." clearly shows the intention of the rule making authority to include all candidates, irrespective of the category they belong to, and/or for whom no specific relaxation was stipulated in the rules itself.
The condition is applicable for admission to the MBBS/BDS courses.
To interpret the clause so as to exclude sports category candidates from this specific condition, would certainly be an irrational approach.
The rule making authority specifically excluded the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes from the rigours of this condition.
It was stipulated that they were required to take 40% marks instead of 50% marks as in the case of other candidates.
If such a care was taken by the rule making authority to exclude the persons that it intended to exclude or in whose favour it intended to relax the eligibility criteria, which was in consonance with the standards prescribed by the Medical Council of India, in that event, there will be no prudent justification for not making identical provision for sports or handicapped category.
The expression "candidate" is wide enough and would obviously take in its ambit all candidates except the ones specifically excluded.
Once the clause itself provides for specific exclusion, the known canons of interpretation would not permit to read any exclusion by implication in favour of the other categories, which are not so specifically mentioned.
14.
Meaning of the expression "candidate" has to be given in light of the scheme of the prospectus particularly with reference to the fact that the condition under interpretation is an eligibility condition for admission to the course.
Thus, it must essentially apply to all candidates without exception.
The only permissible exception would be what the rule making authority itself has provided for.
To give the expression such a meaning, that too by implicit interpretation, would defeat the very spirit of the rule, which intends to provide a bar in the form of an eligibility criteria for admission to MBBS/BDS courses.
An eligibility clause must be construed strictly and not generally.
Taking an approach, which would frustrate the very purpose of the clause, would be impermissible.
15.
The contention of Mr. Rajiv Atama Ram that on the principle of necessary implication particularly keeping in mind the fact that sports category is controlled by Clause 3(vi) of the brochure, the sports category would be deemed to have been excluded from the operation of Clause 8(a) of the prospectus, is hardly tenable.
We have already noticed that rule of exclusion hardly operates in the field of interpretation by implication.
Exclusion or relaxation must be specifically provided in the provision itself normally.
Neither the rule is indicative nor any material is before the Court so as to necessitate adoption of such approach.
There is one provision in the brochure in regard to eligibility, which is applicable to all categories in its terms.
Clause 3(vi) merely indicates the manner and methodology, which shall be adopted by the competent authority for issuance of gradation certificate and admission under the sports category.
They are two distinct and different provisions which operate at different stages and in different fields.
16.
The rule making authority has expressed itself by using unambiguous and definite language in the rule that the rule operates to all categories except to the few exceptions provided there-under.
For giving it any wider explanatory connotations, no material, exists, even remotely.
However, the language is suggestive of exclusion of other clauses, instead of user of comprehensive language in that regard.
The extent of exclusion is really a question of construction of a particular provision.
The general principles applicable are subordinate to the actual words used by the Legislature, but the usage of ideostar thereto, would frustrate the purpose of the rule, which should be avoided.
At this stage, it may be relevant to refer to the following observations of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Jang Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) SCT 313 (P&H) (DB) : 1997(3) All Instant Cases 359, where the Court held as under :-  "The concept of progressive law is one of the accepted canons of such interpretation of rules primarily for the reason that the law is mutable.
Its understanding, while in consonance with the spirit of the language, must adhere to and follow the line that would help and lead us to achieve the object.
To improvise for such an exclusion is not indicated in the rules which must operate in its wider sphere without any inure to the persons who served the country with great zeal and responsibility during the period of declaration of emergency.
To circumvent a perversive impact of the rules, would amount to depriving the persons, who may be entitled to such benefits in the real legislative intent of rules."
17.
In order to accept the contention of the petitioner, the Court would have to read and construe the word "candidate" as "all candidates except sports category" which again is not permissible.
Even the candidates belonging to sports category are entitled to get the seats under the general category if they are entitled to in order of their merit.
In other words, a candidate of sports category is a candidate for general category for all purposes and intents, except when it comes to grant of admission in the sports category.
To add words to the language of the provision, to support an interpretation, would offend the basic rule of interpretation and, thus not permissible.
Reference in this regard can be made to State of Maharashtra and others v. Nanded-Parbhani ZLBMV Operator Sangh, 2000(2) RCR(Civil) 153 (SC) : 2000(2) SCC 69.
18.
The legislative intent of the rule making authority is a clear precept to the spirit of the rule and for that reason alone, we have no hesitation in rejecting this contention of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.
(C.W.P.
No. 10575 of 2001).
19.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners then contended that there is an inbuilt contradiction between Clause 8(a) of the prospectus, the regulation framed by the Medical Council of India, which is silent in regard to sports category and the policy of the Government as stated under Clause 3(iv) of the brochure.
This contention has no merit.
Medical Council of India has framed a regulation prescribing the minimum marks which every candidate must achieve in the entrance examination.
Thereafter the admission under the sports category has to be made on the basis of the supremacy in sports.
Clause 8(a) prescribes condition of minimum qualifying marks whereas Clause 3(vi) provides how the admission under the sports category is to be made in accordance with the Government policy.
In other words after a sports person has satisfied the condition of minimum qualifying marks, then alone his/her supremacy in sports would be of avail, for the purposes of admission to the medical course.
These are the conditions which operate in different fields and we see no conflict in either of them.
In fact Clause 3(vi) is complimentary to Clause 8(a) of the Prospectus.
In Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra) the Full Bench of this Court had taken the same view that supremacy in sports is relevant only upon satisfaction of the qualifying condition.
20.
The next contention raised on behalf of these petitioners is that it is the supremacy in sports, which should prevail, and not the supremacy in the competitive examination, which would take precedence.
Once the petitioner does not satisfy the eligibility condition, the question of supremacy in either field is bound to lose its significance.
Admittedly, the petitioners have not secured 50% or more marks in the competitive examination, which is the prescribed eligibility condition in terms of the regulations framed by Medical Council of India.
This contention of the learned counsel need not detain us any further as this was the precise question answered by the Full Bench of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra), which has been relied upon by the petitioners on both the sides.
Their Lordships held as under :-  "It is, therefore, clear from the policy of the Government that insofar as admission to reserve category of sports is concerned, the gradation was to be made on the basis of instructions dated 7/12 June, 1991 but the candidates would be required to obtain minimum marks for becoming eligible for admission.
Students pursuing courses in Medical or Engineering colleges, which are technical subjects, require an academic mind, as ultimately after obtaining degrees from these professional colleges, they serve humanity.
Policy of the Government laying down the sole criterion for admission as sports cannot be countenanced.
It would be against public interest and wholly arbitrary.
Excellence in sports may be a very important consideration for admission in the sports quota but a certain - minimum academic standard - is also required to enable the students to obtain degrees.
In the case of Maninder Kaur (supra), it was held that excellence in sports should be the sole criterion for admission but this view was not accepted in the subsequent cases cited above by the Division Benches of this Court.
We also agree that besides excellence in sports, there should also be requirement of minimum academic qualification before a student could be made eligible for admission in a professional college.
We agree with the view taken in the cases of Ranbir Singh (supra), Miss Chetna Sharma (supra) and Miss Daljeet Kaur (supra).
In the circumstances, we do not find any fault with the policy of the State Government when it lays down that excellence in sports as well as minimum academic qualification is required before a student is admitted to a medical college."
"There is another aspect of the matter if condition of acquiring minimum qualifying marks in an admission examination is waived then the examination itself would become a farce.
A sportsman may just enter the hall not answer any question and come back get zero and yet because of his sports category he would get admission in a medical college.
In this way, the very purpose and spirit of the competitive examination will be given a go by.
If an examination is held, it must be given its due importance."
21.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dr. Preeti Srivastava (supra) and Dayanand Medical College has specifically held that the State Government has no jurisdiction to dilute the prescribed minimum marks eligibility condition by the Medical Council of India, under its regulations and in discharge of its statutory duties.
Furthermore, any instructions of the State contrary to Central legislation or the rules framed under a delegated legislation would take precedence over such instructions as it will be an occupied field.
The State has no competence to dilute or do away with the prescribed eligibility of obtaining minimum marks at its own and particularly without prior approval of the Medical Council of India.
The State was obliged to and in its wisdom, upon taking into consideration the prevailing conditions of the past year, had imposed this condition.
The State could not have waived this condition without any reasonable cause and that too arbitrarily and in the middest (midst?)
of the counselling, for allocation of seats.
22.
As we have already held that the petitioners are covered under Clause 8(a) of the brochure and were required to satisfy prescribed eligibility condition, the contention that the previous year's condition applicable to sports category (i.e. 35% marks in the competitive examination) would automatically be applicable to this year, as per observation of the Full Bench in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra), is liable to be rejected.
This contention is misconceived.
The Full Bench in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra) has categorically held that as no condition for obtaining minimum marks had been provided in the brochure, therefore, their Lordships felt that qualifying marks for the year in question would be 35% provided under the prospectus for the previous year would be reasonable and fair.
23.
In the present case as Clause 8(a) specifically enforces the eligibility condition against candidates of all the categories without exception.
This view is further fortified by the fact that it is so understood by all concerned authorities.
The impugned notification dated 2182001 issued by the Government waives the condition of obtaining minimum qualifying marks (Clause 8(a)) not only in regard to reserved categories i.e. SC/ST, OBC, but also Sports and Handicapped category etc.
Such notification could be required to be issued only if the original notification dated 2562001 was applicable to such categories.
A condition can alone be withdrawn when it is in force.
In other words, the eligibility condition provided under Clause 8(a) was applicable to all the categories.
Even on this ground, the contention of the petitioner in CWP No. 10575 of 2001 must fail.
24.
At this stage, we may also refer to Clause 8(1) of the brochure, which specifically provides that any instructions issued for the previous year shall not be applicable to the PMET-2001.
This particular clause, thus, put all the applicants at notice that previous year criteria would not be applicable and admission will be granted in terms of the brochure in question.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be permitted to contend that Clause 8(a) should be read so as to give effect to the instructions for the previous years to be applicable for the present year as far as the sports category is concerned.
These two clauses must be read together to give them complete meaning and effect, which would help to further the cause sought to be achieved in terms of the brochure.
The petitioner and all applicants for that matter, are expected to be fully aware of the condition of the brochure and cannot be permitted to argue contrary to the terms thereof.
25 For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the considered view that CWP No. 10575 of 2001 is liable to be dismissed, while the petitioners in CWP No. 12865 of 2001 are entitled to the limited relief.
Thus, we dismiss CWP No. 10575 of 2001, while CWP No. 12865 of 2001 is allowed in terms of the relief granted in CWP 13722 of 2001, decided on 29112001.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.