Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10236 of 2000 (Bhup Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others), 9131 of 2001 (Sunder Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others) and 18238 of 1999 (Satya Pal v. State of Haryana and others) as the common question of facts and law are involved in these petitions.
2.
Certain facts which are relevant for the adjudication of the controversy in question in all the three petitions may be noticed as follow :  3.
Originally one Satya Pal who is now the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 18238 of 1999 had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 487 of 1997 in this Court questioning the promotion to the post of Apprentice Signallers primarily on the ground that as per the provisions of Rule 9(c) of the Haryana Irrigation Department Signallers (Group-C) Rules, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules of 1985"), the recruitment to the post of Apprentice Signallers could only be made by direct recruitment and not by promoting the existing employees.
Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 reads as under :  "9.
Recruitment to the service shall be made in the following manner :- (a) xxxx  (b) xxxxx  (c) In the cases of Apprentice Signallers by direct recruitment....." 4.
The aforesaid writ petition was heard and decided by a Division Bench of this Court vide orders dated March 10, 1997.
The aforesaid order has been attached as Annexure P/12 to C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000.
The relevant directions issued by the Division Bench while deciding the aforesaid writ petition are reproduced below :  "Keeping in view the fact that the only source of recruitment prescribed in the Rules 1985 is by direct recruitment, we are unable to appreciate the action taken by the departmental authorities to make adhoc arrangement by promoting the existing employees.
However we can not ignore the fact that the process of regular recruitment has been initiated by the departmental authorities.
In our opinion, it will not be in public interest to quash the adhoc arrangements made by the department.
Instead it would be in larger public interest to direct the Subordinate Services Selection Board to make regular recuritment against all the existing regular posts of Apprentice Signallers with a further direction to the competent authority to make regular appointments on the recommendations of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of with the following directions : (1) the Irrigation Department should send a requisition within one month from today to the Subordinate Services Selection Board indicating the availability of the exact number of the posts of Apprentice Signallers which are required to be filled by the regular selection.
(2) within one month of the receipt of the requisition, the Subordinate Service Selection Board should advertise/publish all the posts.
(3) within three months of the receipt of the applications, the Board shall select suitable candidates and forward the list of selected candidates to the competent authority.
(4) within one month of the receipt of the select list, the competent authority shall, after character verification etc. appoint the suitable candidates.
(5) All those who were given adhoc appointments prior to the filing of the writ petition and who may have continued in service in that capacity till the availability of regularly selected persons must necessarily be replaced by regularly selected persons.
Such adhoc appointees shall not be entitled to be heard and they shall have no right to continue in service in preference to regularly selected persons.
(6) The official respondents are restrained from making any other adhoc appointment till the subordinate services selection board sends the list of selected candidates.
If due to any emergent requirement it becomes necessary for the department to make adhoc/stop-gap arrangement by appointing Apprentice Signallers, then the official respondents shall be free to make appropriate application in this petition."
5.
Subsequently in view of the aforesaid directions dated March 10, 1997 issued by the Division Bench of this court, the State of Haryana proceeded to revert the petitioners who were working on the post of Apprentice Signallers and who were stated to be recruited in violation of the rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
The aforesaid affected persons who were sought to be reverted by the State Government approached this court vide Civil Writ Petition No. 18762 of 1997 (Banarsi Dass and others v. State of Haryana and others) which was heard and decided by a Division Bench of this Court vide a judgment dated December 19, 1997.
The aforesaid decision of the Division Bench dated December 19, 1997 has been attached as annexure P/13 in C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000.
The operative portion of the aforesaid decision reads as follows :  "We also find considerable merit in the submission of Shri Arun Jain and Shri PS Patwalia that direction for termination of the services of the petitioners, who are holding the posts of Signallers, could not have been issued on the basis of the order dated 10.3.1997 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 487 of 1997.
A bare reading of the order passed in the writ petition filed by Satya Pal and others shows that the court had directed the respondents to make regular appointments on the posts of Apprentice Signallers on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
However, no direction was given to terminate the services of the existing Signallers who are appointed through Employment Exchange after due consideration of the candidature of other persons or who were promoted as Signallers on regular basis.
It appears that the departmental authorities have acted under a mistaken impression about the import of the order passed by the High Court and this has led to the passing of the impugned orders resulting in the termination of the services of the petitioners."
6.
Thereafter petitioner Satya Pal in C.W.P.
No. 487 of 1997 again filed a writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 18238 of 1999 (Satya Pal v. State of Haryana and others) in this court seeking the compliance of the directions contained in the aforesaid judgment dated March 10,1997 (copy attached as Annexure P/12 to C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000) passed by a Division Bench of this Court.
Notice of motion was issued in the aforesaid writ petition No. 18238 of 1999 on January 10, 2000.
7.
During the pendency of the aforesaid Civil Writ Petition No. 18238 of 1999 filed by aforesaid Satya Pal seeking implementation of the judgment dated March 10, 1997, the State Government resorted to the issuing of show cause notices to the incumbents who had been earlier promoted/appointed as Apprentice Signallers and were stated to have been appointed in violation of the rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
8.
It is at this stage that the aforesaid effected persons approached this court by filing the present writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 10238 of 2000 (Bhup Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others) and another writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 9131 of 2001 (Sunder Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others) challenging the vires of Rule 9(c) of Rules of 1985 on the ground that the aforesaid rule was unworkable and was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
A further direction was also sought for declaring the action of the respondent-authorities in proceeding to revert the aforesaid petitioners by applying Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 as illegal and unconstitutional.
The main challenge of the petitioners in the aforesaid two writ petitioner namely C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
9131 of 2001 is that in fact the authorities had promoted the aforesaid petitioners as Apprentice Signallers through various orders against the vacant posts and further the petitioners had been promoted from the posts of Apprentice Signallers to Signallers and these promotions of the petitioners could not be treated to be or said to be adhoc or a stop gap arrangement since they were to be regularly promoted.
It was also stated that the judgment Annexure P/12 dated March 10, 1997 did not apply to them and, therefore, they could not be reverted.
A further grievance was made by the aforesaid writ petitioners that Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 was unworkable and there was an apparent anomaly in Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 in as much as it provided recruitment only.
The writ petitioners maintained that in the earlier Rules of 1955, there was corresponding Rule 9(iii) which provided for recruitment by promotion.
The aforesaid rule 9(iii) of Rules of 1955 reads as follows :  "If no apprentice Signaller is available by promotion from amongst the persons already in the service of the Government who desire to be transferred to the service; 9.
A further challenge was made to the action of the respondents authorities on the ground that the State Government had promoted the aforesaid petitioners as Apprentice Signallers on regular basis and they had been further promoted as Signallers, therefore, now at this stage, the writ petitioners could not be reverted to their substantive posts on the ground that their appointment was not in accordance with Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
10.
Upon a notice having been issued to the respondents, the respondent (the State Government) filed the written statement.
In the written statement it was averred by the respondents that the Division Bench of this court vide order dated March 10, 1997 (attached as Annexure P/12) clearly held that as per the existing rule i.e. Rule 9(c) of Rules of 1985, the recruitments cannot be made to the post of Apprentice Signallers by way of promotion as the same were in violation of the Rules of 1985 which provided for recruitment to the post of Apprentice Signallers only by direct recruitment and not by way of promotion.
It was further averred that the Division Bench at that stage had also noticed the stand of the State Government that the ad hoc appointment already made by the State Government by promoting the existing employees might be allowed to continue till regular selections are made and since the Division Bench had directed the State Government to make regular appointment against all the existing posts of Apprentice Signallers in the light of Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985, therefore, the action of the State Government in reverting the writ petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
No. 9131 of 2001 was in consonance of the aforesaid directions.
It was also further maintained by the respondents that even subsequently a writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 18762 of 1997 was filed by Banarsi Dass and others who was sought to be reverted wherein a Division Bench of this court vide order dated December 19, 1997 had directed the State Government to pass appropriate orders after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the effected persons and after following procedure prescribed by law for the reversion of the aforesaid incumbents.
It was in this view of the matter that the petitioners in the aforesaid two writ petitions are being proceeded in accordance with law and, therefore, there being no merit in the writ petition it was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 was also sought to be defended by the State since it was pointed out that neither there was any anomaly nor the same was unworkable and it was also maintained that the aforesaid rule did not permit any promotion from the existing employees and the only mode of appointment was by direct recruitment.
It was stated that it was in these circumstances that the promotion of the writ petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
No. 9131 of 2001 being in violation of Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 and was merely a stop gap arrangement, therefore, the aforesaid persons could not be allowed to be continued on the promoted posts since the appointments were now sought to be made in accordance with the rules.
11.
Shri Arun Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 has submitted that since the writ petitioners were promoted as Apprentice Signallers vide various orders which have been attached as Annexures P/5 to P/7 to the aforesaid writ petition against the vacant posts and further since the petitioners had been promoted from the posts of Apprentice Signallers to Signallers and these promotions of the petitioners could not be treated to be ad hoc or stop gap arrangement and they would be deemed to have been promoted on regular basis, therefore, the judgment Annexure P/12 dated March 10, 1997 did not apply to them and they could not be reverted.
However, it has further been submitted by Shri Arun Jain that the Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 was unworkable and there was apparent anomaly in Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
12.
On the other hand Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State Government of Haryana has submitted that in fact it is apparent from the perusal of the order dated March 10, 1997 passed by a Division Bench of this court wherein it was held that the Apprentice Signallers could not be appointed by way of promotion but were required to be recruited by way of direct recruitment as per rule 9(c) of Rules of 1985.
He has further submitted that the Division Bench of this Court vide aforesaid judgment had also noticed the stand of the State Government that the appointment which was made by promoting the existing employees be allowed to continue till regular appointments are made.
On the basis of the aforesaid observations made by the Division Bench in the judgment dated March 10, 1997, it has been submitted by Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General that since it has been directed in the aforesaid judgment that the State Government has to make aforesaid recruitment against all the existing posts of Apprentice Signallers in the light of the Rule 9(c) of the rules of 1985, therefore, the action of the State Government in proceeding to revert the writ petitioners in the two writ petitions namely C.W.P.
10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
9131 of 2001 was thus in consonance with the direction dated March 10, 1997.
It has further been submitted by Shri Amol Rattan that even subsequently because of the direction issued by the Division Bench of this court vide judgment December 17, 1997 passed C.W.P.
No. 18762 of 1997 (attached as annexure P/13) this court had directed the State Government to pass appropriate orders after giving the notice and opportunity of hearing to the effected persons and after following the procedure prescribed under the law.
It was because of the direction issued by this court in the aforesaid two writ petitions that the State Government was now proceeding against the writ petitioners in accordance with law and, therefore, it was submitted by Shri Amol Rattan that there was no merit in the writ petitions and the same deserves to be dismissed.
It has also been maintained by Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana that there was no anomaly in Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 nor the same was unworkable in any manner.
Therefore, it has been submitted that the question of the said rule being ultra vires did not arise at all.
13.
Shri RK Malik appearing on behalf of writ petitioner Satya Pal in C.W.P.
No. 18238 of 1999 has submitted that since promotions of the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
9131 of 2001 were in violation of Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 and was in fact only by way of stop gap arrangement, therefore, no right had come to be vested in the aforesaid writ petitioners and they have no right to be appointed since their promotion itself was in violation of Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
He further submitted that even if the aforesaid writ petitioners had been further promoted as Signallers from the posts of Apprentice Signallers that did not give them any right once their initial promotion as Apprentice Signallers was in violation of the Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 and was held to be only as stop gap arrangement.
14.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and are of the considered opinion that the writ petitions No. C.W.P.
10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
No. 9131 of 2001 must fail since they have no merit.
A perusal of the directions issued by the Division Bench in the two earlier writ petitions which have already been reproduced above, clearly show that vide order dated March 10, 1997 elaborate directions had been issued to the respondent- authorities to fill up the posts of Apprentice Signallers in accordance with Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985 and especially vide direction No. 5 it had been specifically directed that all those who were given ad hoc appointments prior to the filing of the writ petition and who may have continued in service in that capacity till the availability of regularly selected persons must necessarily be replaced by regularly select persons.
Although it was further held that such adhoc appointees shall not be entitled to be heard and they shall have no right to continue in service in preference to regularly selected persons but subsequently vide judgment dated December 19, 1999 (also reproduced above) it was directed by a Division Bench that since the departmental authorities had directed the reversion of the person to the posts of Apprentice Signallers without determining as to whether their promotion as Signallers is consistent with the relevant rules or not and since the aforesaid matter could have been decided by the departmental authorities only after giving action oriented notice and opportunity of hearing to the effected persons, therefore, the departmental authorities have now rightly sought to issue notices to the petitioners in C.W.P.
10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
9131 of 2001.
In fact the action of the department authorities/respondents in issuing the aforesaid notices to the present petitioners is specifically in compliance with the direction issued by this court in the aforesaid two judgments.
15.
The matter may be considered from another angle.
The petitioners are merely aggrieved against the issuance of show cause notice vide which it is proposed to revert/terminate the service of the petitioners by applying rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
The petitioners are always at liberty to file a reply to the aforesaid notices and show that their appointments were in accordance with Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
It is only thereafter that the State Government would be ordering their reversion in accordance with the directions issued in the earlier judgements by the two Division Benches of this Court.
Thus it can also be said that in fact no cause of action has arisen to the present petitioners at this stage and they have approached this court pre-maturely.
16.
In this view of the matter both the above said writ petitions being C.W.P.
No. 10236 of 2000 and C.W.P.
9131 of 2001 are without merit and are hereby dismissed.
17.
As far as C.W.P.
No. 18238 of 1999 is concerned, it is apparent that the State Government has already initiated the process for reversion/termination of the persons who were appointed as Apprentice Signallers in violation of Rule 9(c) of the Rules of 1985.
This action of the respondents is apparently in compliance with the direction issued by this court vide orders dated March 10, 1997 and December 19, 1997.
Thus, since the aforesaid directions of this Court already sought to be implemented, therefore, the prayer made in the aforesaid writ petition No. C.W.P.
18238 of 1999 has been rendered infructuous and the writ petition is disposed of as such.
Before parting with the judgment, it is further observed that the process of implementation of the directions issued in the judgments dated March 10, 1997 and December 19, 1997 shall be carried out in letter and spirit by the respondents as expeditiously as possible and not later than a period of six months from the date a certified copy of this order is made available to the respondents.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.