Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioner has approached the Court with a prayer that charge sheet dated 2562002 and the proceedings taken thereupon be quashed mainly on the ground of inordinate unexplained delay in initiation of disciplinary proceedings resulting in serious prejudice to the right of defence of the petitioner in those proceedings.
2.
The petitioner is working as Technical Assistant Grade-I in the Food Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation').
On 22/25.9.90 it is alleged that petitioner had got loaded a rice special train ex-Ajitwal to Datia (Madhya Pradesh).
According to the petitioner after about 12 years delay, a charge sheet was served upon the petitioner on 2562002 under Regulation 60 of the F.C.I.
Staff Regulations, 1971 initiating disciplinary proceedings for imposition a major penalty.
In charge sheet it was stated that a complaint was received with regard to quality of the rice and it being below the prescribed specified standard.
It was stated that petitioner did not discharge his assigned duties with absolute integrity and due devotion but instead indulged into acts of malpractice and financial impropriety.
According to the Corporation petitioner caused a loss of Rs. 17,66,84684.
3.
In view of the above, petitioner contends that unreasonable delay of about 12 years has rendered the petitioner defenceless in the departmental proceedings.
He has been deprived of the facility of joint inspection, necessary documents are not available and as such petitioner is bound to suffer prejudice in his defence.
4.
We are of the considered view that delay per se cannot be a ground for the Court to quash the charge sheet.
The prejudice to the delinquent is of paramount consideration.
Furthermore, prejudice which the delinquent is liable to suffer should be of the kind which the disciplinary authority is incapable or incapacitated to look into and pass the appropriate order.
The charge sheet was served upon the petitioner on 2562002 to which the petitioner submitted a reply after four months on 16.9.2002.
The Disciplinary Authority has to look into the matter and it has not appointed the Enquiry Officer as yet.
Petitioner has raised issues in reply to the charge sheet which we have no doubt the disciplinary authority will look into with due consideration and in accordance with law.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that writ petitions raising the same question have been admitted and are pending.
He also contended while relying upon a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in 1995(4) SCT 309 (P&H) (DB) : Civil Writ Petition No 13008 of 1993 Dalip Singh v. The Food Corporation of India and another decided on 651994 against which SLP was dismissed by the Supreme Court in limine on 13.1.1995, to contend that delay must prove fatal and charge sheet as a result thereof is liable to be quashed.
6.
At the very outset, we may notice that the judgment of the Division Bench in Dalip Singh's case lays down no absolute proposition of law.
That was an order passed in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is also clear that their Lordships did not intend to lay down such a proposition as propounded by the petitioner.
Furthermore, subsequently thereto large number of judgments have been pronounced by the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as by this Court on the matter is issue in the present case.
The legal proposition in regard to delay was considered at great length by a Division Bench of this Court while relying upon more recent judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, in the case of Bal Kishan v. Food Corporation of India and others, Civil Writ Petition No 4714 of 2002 decided on 1392002.
The Bench held as under :-  "A Division Bench of this Court in the case of SC Bhateja and others v. The Food Corporation of India, Civil Writ Petition No 15943 of 1999 decided on 1332000, while dealing with the matter rejected the contentions that the charge sheets are liable to be quashed on the plea was inordinate delay in issuing the charge sheet.
Further, the Division Bench while relying upon the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case Union of India v. AN Saxena, 1992(2) S.C.T.
327 : 1992(4) S.L.R.
11, State of Punjab and others v. Chaman Lal Goyal, 1995(2) SCT 343 (SC) : 1995(1) SLR 700 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and anr., 1990 (Supp.)
S.C.C.
738, held as under :- "In State of AP v. N Radhakishan, 1998(4) S.C.C.
154, the Supreme Court, while dealing with a challenge to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal quashing the proceedings of enquiry on the ground of delay, laid down the following general proposition of law.
"It is not possible to lay down any predetermined principles applicable to all cases and in all situations where there is delay in concluding the disciplinary proceedings.
Whether on that ground the disciplinary proceedings are to be terminated each case has to be examined on the facts and circumstances in that case.
The essence of the matter is that the Court has to take into consideration all the relevant factors and to balance and weigh them to determine if it is in the interest of clean and honest administration that the disciplinary proceedings should be allowed to terminate after delay particularly when the delay is abnormal and there is no explanation for the delay.
The delinquent employee has a right that disciplinary proceedings against him are concluded expeditiously and he is not made to undergo mental agony and also monetary loss when these are unnecessarily prolonged without any fault on his part in delaying the proceedings.
In considering whether the delay has vitiated the disciplinary proceedings the Court has to consider the nature of charge, its complexity and on that account the delay has occurred.
If the delay is unexplained prejudice to the delinquent employee is writ large on the face of it.
It could also be seen as to how much the disciplinary authority is serious in pursuing the charges against its employee.
It is the basic principle of administrative justice that an officer entrusted with a particular job has to perform his duties honestly, efficiently and in accordance with the rules.
If he deviates from his path he is to suffer a penalty prescribed.
Normally, disciplinary proceedings should be allowed to take their course as per relevant rules but then delay defeats justice.
Delay causes prejudice to the charged officer unless it can be shown that he is to blame for the delay or when there is proper explanation for the delay in conducting the disciplinary proceedings.
Ultimately, the Court is to balance these two diverse considerations."
In 2000(2) SCT 726 (P&H) (DB) : C.W.P.
No. 344 of 2000 of OP Sachdeva & others v. Food Corporation of India and others decided on 1312000, this Court after making in-depth examination of the question as to whether the jurisdiction of the High Court should be exercised for quashing the proceedings of enquiry at the threshold held that the mere delay cannot be treated as sufficient for nullifying the proceedings initiated by the public employer.
The law laid down in Dr. Ishar Singh's case (supra) is against the petitioners, rather than supporting their case.
In that case, a Full Bench of this Court held that delay by itself cannot be a ground for quashing of the proceeding of enquiry."
7.
At the cost of the repetition, we may refer to the case of Abdul Rehman Antulay v. RS Naik, JT 1991(6) SC 431, which was followed with approval by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Chaman Lal Goyal, JT 1995(2) SC 18, applying those principles to departmental enquiry and holding that delay in departmental proceedings necessarily must not result in quashing of the charge sheet.
The Court held as under :-  "At the same time, it has been observed that that is not the only course open to the court and that in a given case, the nature of the offence and other circumstances may be such that quashing of the proceedings may not be in the interest of justice.
In such a case, it has been observed, it is open to court not make such other appropriate order as it finds just and equitable in the circumstances of the case."
8.
Delay is not always fatal and particularly at the stage of serving the charge sheet.
These factors can be taken into consideration even at the stage of final determination.
Reference can be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in case K Jayaraman v. Superintendent of Police, Erode and another, 1991(2) Labour Law Journal 5.
As huge public money in involved, it will be no way in the interest of justice or public interest to quash the charge sheet merely on the ground of delay alone, more so and as it appears from the record before us the case is based upon documents.
In reply to the charge sheet, petitioner has already raised the issue with regard to benefit that ought to accrue to the petitioner as a result of non-availability of some documents and denial of joint inspection which should have been available to him in the year 1990 as alleged.
The enquiring authority and as well as disciplinary authority are duty bound to consider such plea and its effect on the departmental proceedings.
Keeping in mind the entirely of the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the considered view that it is not an appropriate case where the Court should quash the charge sheet.
On the contrary, we will leave for the department/competent authority to consider all the pleas raised by the petitioner and even their effect.
9.
The delay in the present case, atleast at this stage has only resulted in an irregularity and not any patent illegality, which would warrant continuation of departmental proceedings.
It is for the concerned authorities to exercise their jurisdiction within the specified parameters and not for the Court to intervene at this juncture of the proceedings.
In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. N Radhakishan, AIR 1998 S.C. 1833, though on facts of the case, the Apex Court quashed the charge memo but in paragraph 17 of the judgment, their Lordships clearly indicated that the above principles of the delay per se be not fatal to the fate of departmental proceedings.
10.
Keeping in view the conduct of the petitioner and the fact that Article of charges are of grave in nature and involved huge public money, we are of the considered view while exercising equitable jurisdiction of writ that it will not be fair and in larger public interest to quash the charge sheet at this stage of proceedings.
Equity must tilt in favour of the larger public interest rather than interest of an individual whose claim is primarily of being harassed as a continuation of departmental proceedings.
11.
For the reasons aforestated, we dismiss this petition in limine.
Petitioner will be at liberty to raise all these matters before the concerned authorities and any observation made in this judgment would not to be the prejudice of the petitioner.
Petition dismissed.