SS Saron, J - The petitioner, who is a Senior Lecturer in Chemistry in Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology, Longowal (hereinafter to the referred as respondent-Institute), has filed the present writ petition seeking a mandamus to appoint her as Assistant Professor in Chemistry being at serial No. 2 in order of merit against two posts which are said to be available before the declaration of the selection result.
2.
The respondent-Institute advertised one post of Assistant Professor in Chemistry.
The last date for submission of application was 15121998 as per advertisement Annexure P-1.
The petitioner applied for the said post and interview for the same was held on 2211999.
However, before the result was declared, one Dr. Dhiraj Sud filed Civil Writ Petition No 1497 of 1999 in this Court and on 2421999, a Division Bench of this Court ordered that if any appointment till the said date to the post of Assistant Professor in Chemistry in the respondent-Institute had been made, the same be not given effect to till further order.
The stay granted on 2421999 was vacated on 22122000.
Thereafter, the result was declared in the following order of merit :-  (i) Dr. Harish Chopra (ii) Dr. Rita Goyal (petitioner) 3.
It is contended that another additional post of Assistant Professor fell vacant earlier to 2211999 i.e. the date when the interview for the said post was held.
This additional post was also advertised on 26102000 and the candidates were required to submit their applications by 20112000.
Be that as it may, the candidate who was at serial No. 1 in order of merit, was issued appointment letter as Assistant Professor (Chemistry) on 812001.
The petitioner filed representation dated 2412001 and made a request that according to rules, the panel was to be kept alive for one year.
Besides, before declaration of the results and even before interview, two posts of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) were lying vacant and now both the posts are liable to be filled up by the same selection.
The petitioner made another representation dated 532001 Annexure P-2.
No action was taken by the respondents.
The petitioner, therefore, has filed the present petition for her appointment as Assistant Professor being the next candidate in order of merit in the result declared in January 2001 after the stay was vacated on 22122000.
4.
Notice was issued to the respondents who filed written statement taking the stand that the petitioner has no locus standi to file the writ petition.
The Selection Committee had not recommended any panel of candidates suitable for filling up the future vacancies under Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of respondent-Institute.
It was stated that one post of Assistant Professor in Chemistry was advertised and after interview Dr. Harish Kumar secured 7687 marks.
Dr. Rita Goyal (petitioner) secured 7423 marks and Dr. Dhiraj Sud (i.e. petitioner in CWP No. 1497 of 1999) secured 6562 marks.
The other candidates interviewed for the post of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) secured less marks than the marks secured by Dr. Harish Kumar and others.
The Selection Committee sent the result of candidates as interviewed by them on 2211999 to the competent authority for approval and necessary action.
It is contended that the Selection Committee did not exercise its power under Rule 10 and did not recommend any panel of candidates suitable for filling of future vacancies.
The competent authority made a list of first three candidates in order of merit who were awarded maximum marks during interview by the Selection Committee.
Dr. Harish Kumar, who secured maximum marks, was selected and the other two were kept on the waiting list.
This was for the purpose that in case Dr. Harish Kumar did not join, then offer of appointment for the said post could be made to the next person i.e. the petitioner or Dr. Dhiraj Sud as the case may be.
It is also averred that appointment of Dr. Harish Kumar was not given effect to in view of the stay granted by this Court on 2421999 in CWP No. 1497 of 1999 filed by Dr. Dhiraj Sud.
After the stay was vacated, Dr. Harish Kumar was offered appointment and he joined against this post on 812001.
The moment he joined, the waiting list is stated to have become redundant.
It is further contended that even otherwise there was requirement of only one post of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) in November 1998 and, therefore, on 16.11.1998 only one post was advertised against which Dr. Harish Kumar has been appointed.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The contention of the petitioner is that on the strength of Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute, the interview for the post was held on 2211999.
However, the result was declared after the stay granted on 2421999 by this Court in CWP No. 1497 of 1999 was vacated on 22122000.
Therefore, the recommendations made by the Selection Committee in which the name of the petitioner finds mention at serial No. 2 in order of merit was to hold good for a period of one year after the stay was vacated on 22122000.
By this time, the second vacancy had been advertised on 26102000.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in case of Virender S Hooda v. State of Haryana, 1999(2) SCT 652 (SC) : 1999(4) RSJ 198 : (1999)3 SCC 696 and contended that as in the said case instead of filling up the nine additional vacancies from the selection list in accordance with the government instructions, the Commission issued fresh advertisement for these vacancies and the Supreme Court directed the Government of Haryana to consider the case of the appellants therein for the post which became available within a period of fix months and to fit them in appropriate posts.
Accordingly, the petitioner was also entitled to be appointed against the vacancy which had become available in subsequent advertisement in accordance with Regulation 10 of the respondent-Institute.
7.
As against this, the respondent-Institute contended that in October 2000 it felt the requirement of one more post of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) which was advertised on 26102000.
The petitioner applied for the said post and from this it was clear that the petitioner very well knew that the list prepared by the appointing authority on 1.3.1999 was not prepared under Rule 10.
It is further contended that under Rule 10 only the selection committee is competent to recommend a panel of candidates suitable for filling up of future vacancies which has not been done in the present case by the selection committee.
In short, the contention of the respondent-Institute is that the petitioner is not entitled for appointment against the post of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) which was advertised on 26102000 against which she has also applied.
8.
The learned counsel for the respondent-Institute has further contended that the advertisement was issued inviting applications for one post of Assistant Professor (Chemistry) and the first candidate in the select panel was offered appointment and on his acceptance of offer he came to be appointed.
With the appointment of the first candidate the only post in respect of which consideration came to be made, the select panel ceased to exist and had outlived its utility.
9.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of parties, we may refer to Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute which reads as under :-  "PERIOD OF VALIDITY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SELECTION COMMITTEE :- (a) Where a Selection Committee recommends a panel of candidates suitable for filling of future vacancies, its recommendations shall hold good normally for a period of one year from the date of its report or until the panel is exhausted, which ever is earlier.
The Board may, in special circumstances, extend the validity of the panel beyond one year on the merit of the case.
(b) Selection Committee, constituted for the purpose of making recommendations for appointment to a post, shall be eligible to exercise its functions in relation to that post until the time the appointment is made".
10.
A perusal of the above rule shows that where the Selection Committee recommends a panel of candidates suitable for filling of future vacancies, its recommendations shall hold good normally for a period of one year from the date of its report or until the panel is exhausted, whichever is earlier.
The Board may, in special circumstances, extend the validity of the panel beyond one year on the merit of the case.
The Selection Committee, constituted for the purpose of making recommendations for appointment to a post, shall be eligible to exercise its functions in relation to that post until the time the appointment is made.
Therefore, it is evident that the recommendations of the selection committee are to hold good normally for a period of one year from the date of its report or until the panel is exhausted, whichever is earlier.
The stand of the respondent-Institute that no recommendation of a panel of suitable candidates was made in terms of Rule 10 is without any force.
The selection committee had recommended three candidates in order of merit.
The petitioner was admittedly at serial No. 2 in order of merit in the recommendations made by the selection committee.
The contention that three names were forwarded so that in case the first candidate does not join the post may be offered to be next candidates would not dilute the recommendations of the selection committee for the purpose of Rule 10.
The recommendations made by the selection committee in the circumstances constitute a panel of candidates suitable for filling of future vacancies in accordance with Rule 10.
The mere fact that the petitioner applied for the subsequent vacancy advertised by the respondent-Institute on 26102000 is also inconsequential in the circumstances.
As already noticed above, the result of the candidates who appeared for the interview on 2211999 for the post of Assistant Professor in Chemistry advertised on 15121998 was declared in January 2001 after the stay was vacated by this Court on 22122000.
Therefore, in the circumstances the petitioner could not have known her result and position in merit when the second post was advertised on 26102000.
Even otherwise, applying for a subsequent post which is advertised would not affect the right of the petitioner to be considered for the post to which she had already applied and was at serial No. 2 in order of merit.
11.
In this regard, a reference may be made to Virender S Hooda's case (supra) wherein the Haryana Public Service Commission advertised 12 posts of Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) in 1991.
On completion of selection, final list was published on 19.6.1992 and the appellants in the said case did not find place in the merit list against these 12 posts.
Their contention, however, was that some of the selected candidates did not join and that they should have been considered against the vacancies so arisen in accordance with the State Government circular according to which vacancies which arose within six months from the receipt of recommendations of the Haryana Public Service Commission were to be filled up from the waiting list maintained by the Commission.
The said circular also provided that if additional vacancies were after the Commission had made recommendations, such additional vacancies should also be filled up from amongst the candidates recommended by the Commission.
The Hon'ble Apex Court held that the appellants in the said case ought to have been considered when some of the vacancies arose by reason of non-appointment of some candidates recommended by the Commission and the Government ought to have considered their case as per rank obtained by them and appoint them if they came within the range of selection.
It was further held that when the vacancies arose within six months from the date of previous selection, the Government circular declaring policy of government was attracted.
12.
Thus, Virender S Hooda's case (supra) rules that not only the vacancies advertised but also the vacancies available within a period of six months after the announcement of previous selection may be filled from the amongst the waiting list in terms of the Government circular.
The government circulars were held to be enforceable.
13.
The judgment in Virender S Hooda's case (supra) was followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sandeep Singh v. State of Haryana & Another, Civil Appeal No. 7422 of 1999 decided on 9112000.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sandeep Singh's case held as follows :-  "......... even on first principle, it appeals to us to commend that the vacancies available in any particular service till the date of interview at least should be filled up from the very same examination unless there is any statutory embargo for the same.
In the case in hand, no statutory embargo has been pointed out to us.
In this view of the matter, the judgment of this Court in 1999(3) SCC 696 should apply to the facts and circumstances.
Be it stated that we have been shown the Government circular of the year 1993 in Hindi and going through the same, we are persuaded to hold that the circular says same thing what we have indicated earlier in this judgment.
In the aforesaid premises, we set aside the impugned judgments of the Punjab and Haryana High Court and allow these appeals and Writ Petitions and direct that these 4 persons, who had appeared at the competitive test in the year 1993 pursuant to the advertisement dated 24.12.1992 should be considered for being appointed to the Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch)."
14.
In the case in hand, Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute also enjoins that where the Selection Committee recommends a panel of candidates suitable for filling up future vacancies, its recommendations shall hold good normally for a period of one year from the date of its report or until the panel is exhausted, whichever is earlier.
The Selection Committee, as already noticed above, held the interview on 2211999.
Thereafter stay was granted by this Court in writ petition filed by Dr. Dhiraj Sud on 2421999 with was vacated on 22122000 and offer of appointment made to Dr. Harish Kumar in January 2001 and he joined on 812001.
Besides the second post was advertised on 26102000 i.e. before the vacation of stay on 22122000.
In the circumstances noted above, Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute applies.
The Selection Committee would be taken to have made its report regarding recommendations after the stay was vacated by this Court on 22122000.
The offer of appointment to Dr. Harish Chopra was made in January 2001 which is the date when the Selection Committee made its report.
Since the offer of appointment was made to the candidate at serial No. 1 of the panel of candidates in January 2001, it cannot be said that the panel of selected candidates recommended by the selection committee had exhausted.
Therefore, in terms of Rule 10, the recommendations of the Selection Committee are to hold good for a period of one year from the date the Selection Committee made its report.
As already noticed above, immediately on the appointment of Dr. Harish Chopra, the petitioner made a representation on 2412001 which was followed by another representation dated 532001.
Thereafter she filed the present writ petition in this Court on 17.4.2001 and notice of motion was issued on 1842001.
Therefore, the petitioner has not been dormant at any point of time and she has been asserting her rights.
Besides, the period when the say was granted by this Court in Dr. Dhiraj Sud's case (CWP No. 1497 of 1999) from 2421999 to 22122000, is not to work to the disadvantage of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute.
As held in Sandeep Singh's case (supra), the vacancy at least should be filled up from the same very examination unless there is any statutory embargo for the same.
In the present case, there is no statutory embargo.
Rather the statutory provisions require the filing up of additional vacancy from amongst the panel of candidates found suitable by the selection committee in terms of Rule 10 of the Rules and Regulations of the respondent-Institute.
One post fell vacant before the report was made and the panel was exhausted in respect of one post of Assistant Professor in Chemistry advertised on 15121998.
It is due to the stay order that the appointments could not be made.
It is, therefore, incumbent upon the respondents to comply with Rule 10 of its Rules and Regulations.
15.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner as Assistant Professor (Chemistry) being at serial No. 2 in order of merit in the select panel in accordance with the Rule 10 of its Rules and Regulations.
No costs.
Petition allowed.