Swatanter Kumar, J - By this common judgment we will dispose of 41 writ petitions afore-noticed as common questions based on similar facts arise for consideration in these petitions.
For the purpose of convenience, we have referred to the facts of C.W.P.
No. 12377 of 2002.
2.
The petitioners in these petitions are holding different posts cadre in Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewell) Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation).
In some cases, the petitioners are on deputation from their parent cadre to the Corporation.
3.
The petitioners were appointed to their respective posts after following due procedure as provided under the Service Regulations.
Some of them were granted further promotions in their respective cadre.
They have been working for a considerable time in the Corporation.
On or about 25.3.2002, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of the Chief Minister, Haryana.
It is stated that various decisions were taken pertaining to disinvestment and privatisation of public-sector undertakings in the State of Haryana and in relation to the respondent-Corporation, the matter was discussed at great length and ultimately it was decided to close down the Corporation and its various regular/work-charge employees including the deputationists were ordered to be retrenched in accordance with law.
In furtherance to this, the agenda Item No. 149 was placed before the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation in its meeting held on 1842002 in which the Board considered the matter and resolved as under :-  "149.
Meeting held on 1842002.
The BOD considered the proposal and after discussion came to the conclusion that in view of the huge losses accumulated to Rs. 115 crore as depicted in Annual Accounts of the year 1999-2000, it may not be appropriate to run the Corporation in its present form.
Thus the legal requirements and other formalities prescribed under various Acts/laws be completed for facilitating the closure of the Corporation.
Thereafter, the process of the closure of the Corporation be carried out after the guidance of Govt. of Haryana and in consultation with Ld.LR Haryana/Advocate General, Haryana as and when needed.
The Board also observed that for survival of the Corporation the right sizing may be done, if possible.
Therefore, it was also decided that other possibilities and alternatives be explored for its survival by its right sizing in view of the prevailing financial constraints, present work load in hand and anticipated/likely procurement of different kinds of works by the Corporation in future.
MD, MITC was authorised to take every kind of action at his end to achieve the above decision."
4.
The Managing Director of the Corporation filed an application under section 25-O of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) which was allowed by the order of the appropriate Government dated 2762002 (Annexure P-15).
The Corporation issued a public notice on 142002 informing the employees in furtherance to the permission granted by the Government of their retrenchment and compensation payable in terms of clause 82 of the Service Bye-laws of the Corporation.
They were required to collect the compensation so awarded.
Even individual letters were issued to various employees requiring them to hand over the charge of all records in their custody and collect their payments vide notice dated 172002 (Annexure P-17).
The petitioners are challenging the public notice dated 172002 as well as the individual notices along with the permission granted by the appropriate Government for closing the Corporation (Annexure P-15, P-16, P-17).
In fact, the petitioners also made a representation to the Government for their absorption in various other Corporations or Departments vide representation dated 852002 which was found without any merit by the Government and was rejected and subsequently also, was rejected vide order dated 2472002.
5.
The challenge of the petitioners to the impugned orders is mainly founded on the following grounds :-  1.
The permission granted by the competent Government under Section 25-O of the Act is liable to be quashed as the authorities and the Corporation have violated the provisions of the said Section in regard to various periods specified therein.
2.
The provisions of Section 25-O are mandatory and not directory in nature.
The respondents were obliged to do the acts strictly in the manner and method provided in the Section and in no other way.
The authorities and the Corporation having violated the mandatory provisions, could not have taken any consequential steps in regard to retrenchment of the petitioners.
For this purpose, the petitioners also relied upon the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in (1) State of Uttar Pradesh v. Singhara Singh and others, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 358; (2) Hukam Chand Shyam Lal v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1976 SC 789 and (3) Division Bench judgment of the Delhi High Court in Clifton Electronics v. Lt.
Governor and others, 1996 LLJ 86, to contend that the applications must be filed 90 days prior to the proposed date of closure and if 90 days period is not provided between the two dates, the closure is illegal.
(3) The orders of retrenchment by the Corporation and the order granting permission to close the Corporation by the competent Government are not in public interest and are based on incorrect statistical figures.
Public interest is the probable criteria for the concerned authorities to consider whether a particular undertaking/Corporation should or should not be closed.
(4) There is no application of mind by the Board of Directors of the Corporation and it has only carried out the mandate of the Government, which act of the Corporation is contrary to the known canons of internal management of the Company or the Corporation.
The Corporation has acted arbitrarily and discriminatorily.
(5) There are 1,000 employees of the Corporation who are on deputation and some of the employees including the Junior Engineers who were appointed by the respondent-Corporation and had gone on deputation to other Departments, including the Public Health Department, Haryana, were absorbed.
While on the contrary, the petitioners are being retrenched violating the principle of seniority.
(6) Under the provisions of Section 25-O(5) of the Act, the Corporation is required to give at least 30 days to the employees to take appropriate action for filing an application for review/reference under Section 25-O(3) of the Act.
This is a right prescribed under the statute and the respondents cannot take away the said right by creating a camouflage from the series of orders which are otherwise unsustainable.
6.
It is apparent from the above noticed contentions that case of the petitioners substance is violation of the Act besides that the facts have not been correctly appreciated.
There is alleged violation of the statutory provisions on the one hand and irregularity committed in passing and implementation of the requisite orders.
The petitioners specifically contend that even the statistical date placed before the Board of Directors was factually incorrect.
The Corporation did not suffer such losses.
On the contrary, the Corporation has sufficient finances/assets to re-establish itself by properly regulating its affairs.
Economically the Corporation is a viable unit which can be gainfully utilised for generating requisite finances.
Another matter which the Board was to consider was not the question of retrenchment simplicitor, but it ought to have applied its mind to the multi- facet problems arising from the said decision.
Decision- making process must not only be fair, but it ought to appear to be fair as well.
The petitioners include large number of employees being on deputation and they have not been repatriated to their parent Departments.
Some of their juniors have been absorbed in the deputationist-department and the seniors are being retrenched.
This would again give rise to a valid plea of discrimination.
7.
It is neither probable, nor possible for this Court to go into these disputed facts and figures in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The State for all purposes and intents, and more particularly, on the ground reality, cannot be equated to a private employer.
The obligation of State as a mass employer has a wider scope and a greater responsibility.
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the State argued and referred to the reply filed on behalf of the State to contend that the decision taken by the Board of Directors is in consonance with law and probable on internal management.
He also referred to the proceedings before the appropriate Government wherein the petitioners were given notices.
They had filed representations and all matters were taken into consideration by the authority concerned.
However, most of the pleas raised by the petitioners before this Court were not taken before the appropriate Government.
9.
Be that as it may, the pleas are based on interpretation of law.
The petitioners cannot be entirely debarred from taking such pleas before this Court in the writ petition.
So far as the constitutional validity of the various sub-sections of section 25-O of the act are concerned, it has been finally held to be intra vires the Constitution by the Apex Court in the case of Orissa Textile & Steel Ltd v. State of Orissa and others, 2002(1) SCT 1017 (SC) : (2002) 2 S.C.C.
578.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Another reason why Section 25-O was struck down was that no time-limit had been fixed while refusing permission to close down.
This is now cured by Section 25-O(4) which provides that the order of the appropriate government shall remain in force for one year from the date of such order.
Thus at the end of the year it is always open to the employer to apply again for permission to close.
The time-limit of one year makes the restriction reasonable.
Now the amended Section 25-O(3) provides that if the appropriate government does not communicate the order within a period of 60 days from the date on which the application is made, the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been granted.
Thus the defect of the absence of a provision for deemed approval has also been cured.
Under Section 25-O(7) (as it then stood), even when permission to close was granted, the employer had still to give notice and compensation as specified in Section 25-N Under the amended Section 25-O(8), the requirement of giving 3 months' notice is dropped.
All that is now required is to pay compensation which is equivalent to fifteen days average pay for every completed year of continuous service.
--- --- --- ---- Excel Wear case recognises that in the interest of general public it is possible to restrict, for a limited period of time, the right to close down the business.
The amended Section 25-O lays down guidelines which are to be followed by the appropriate government in granting or refusing permission to close down.
It has to have regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer.
However, merely because the reasons are genuine and adequate cannot mean that permission to close must necessarily be granted.
There could be cases where the interest of general public may require that no closure takes place.
Undoubtedly where the reasons are genuine and adequate the interest of the general public must be of a compelling or overriding nature.
Moreover, from Section 25-O(7) it is clear that the amended Section 25-O recognises that if there are exceptional circumstances then there could be no compulsion to continue to run the business.
However, it does not mean that some difficulty or financial hardship in running the establishment would be sufficient.
The employer must show that it has become impossible to continue to run the establishment.
Looked at from this point of view, the restrictions imposed are reasonable and in the interest of the general public.
A proper reading of the amended Section 25-O(5) shows that in the context in which it is used, the word "may" necessarily means "shall".
Thus the appropriate government "shall" review the order if an application in that behalf is made by the employer or the workman.
Similarly, if so required by the employer or the workman, it shall refer the matter to a tribunal for adjudication.
In a review the appropriate government would have to make an enquiry into all necessary facts, particularly into the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer.
An opportunity of being heard would have to be given to the employer, workmen and all interested persons."
10.
During the course of hearing, we had required the learned Advocate General, Haryana to seek instructions from the competent authority, as to if the authorities could re-consider the entire matter in its correct perspective and take decisions afresh on various aspects which were earlier not noticed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
We are happy to note that the learned Advocate General sought instructions and fairly conceded that the matter can be re-considered by the Board of the Directors and they will take decisions afresh keeping in mind all aspects of the matter.
The Board of Directors would also hear the petitioners.
11.
In view of the concessions given by the learned Advocate General, Haryana on behalf of the State of Haryana, the learned counsel for the petitioners also commonly conceded that such a course of action would be acceptable to them.
In other words, the learned counsel for the parties appearing before us are ad-idem that the matter should be re-considered by the Board of Directors after hearing the petitioners and particularly, in view of the provisions of Section 25-O(5) of the Act.
It will be appropriate to note here that some of the petitioners have filed applications for review/reference which are pending before the Government and no decision has been taken despite the fact that limitation of 30 days for disposing of such applications has been provided under the provisions of the act.
A principle of law has been clearly enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Orissa Textile & Steel Ltd's case (supra).
12.
Keeping in mind the consent given by both the parties and the afore- notice facts and circumstances of the case, we would issue the following directions in these writ petitions :-  1.
The writ petitions filed before this Court (the copies of which have already been furnished to the Government, shall be treated as applications for review/reference within the meaning of Section 25-O(5) of the Act by the competent Government.
2.
After hearing the petitioners, the competent Government shall pass orders on the said applications as expeditiously, as possible, and in any case, not later than 46 days from the date of pronouncement of this order.
The authority concerned shall take into consideration the various details in relation to economic viability of the Corporation as well as the correct statistical figures with regard to the financial position of the Corporation.
In the event appropriate Government makes a reference or reviews its order in favour of the petitioners, that would bring an end to departmental remedies, of course, subject to such orders as the Court of competent jurisdiction may pass subsequent thereto.
In the event the reference is declined and the order of review is not in favour of the petitioners, the Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation shall take a fresh decision in regard to closure of the Corporation and consequent retrenchment of its employees.
The Board shall consider all matters relating to absorption of the employees in relation to any other public sector or Government undertaking in accordance with law and the instructions issued by the Government.
The Board shall also consider the pleas of the petitioners with regard to discrimination and larger public interest being served by declining closure of the Corporation.
13.
As the scope of the proceedings before the appropriate Government and the Board of Directors is distinct and different, we would also direct the Board to grant hearing to the petitioners in respective capacity (not exceeding two representatives).
In the event the ultimate order is against the petitioners, the same will not be given effect to for a period of 7 days from the date of its passing/notification to the petitioners.
The petitioner will be deemed to have notified the final order in case the same is placed on the Notice Board of the offices of the Corporation and contents thereof and operative part of the order is published in the newspaper.
14.
We had, in some of the cases, stayed operation of the impugned orders of retrenchment compensation.
Thus, to place all the petitioners at parity, we direct that the respondent-Corporation shall pay salary to the employee till 31.82002 and for the subsequent periods, the relief to the petitioners will be decided and controlled by the order of the appropriate Government/Board of Directors or by the order of the competent court, which may be passed.
15.
The above terms and conditions of the order are just and equitable and have been passed with the consent of the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties as it would also help in avoiding unnecessary litigation.
16.
All these petitions are disposed of in the above terms leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.