VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment, we propose to dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4354, 4578, 11247, 14070, 17842 of 1998, 5805, 7255, 7325, 7367, 7390, 7402, 7589, 12264, 14014, 15939 of 1999, 16, 323, 1885, 9155, 10296 and 14567 of 2000.
It was contended that in all these writ petitions identical question is involved pertaining to Masters/Mistresses, Headmasters or equivalent posts.
We may make it clear that nothing said herein is any expression of opinion pertaining to J.BT teacher or any other person holding any other post in the Education Department.
2.
Since the questions involved in all these writ petitions are common, we are taking the basic facts from Civil Writ Petition No. 17842 of 1998 titled Smt. Hem Lata Gupta and others v. State of Haryana and others.
3.
The facts alleged are that the petitioners have been working as Masters/Mistresses/Headmasters etc. in various Govt. Schools in the State of Haryana.
Before the State of Haryana was carved out of the State of Punjab, the State of Punjab vide circular dated 23.7.1.597 had revised the pay scales of the teachers w.e.f.
151957.
It was decided that the teachers in the Education Department would be entitled to the pay scales according to their qualifications.
It had been decided that the teachers falling in category A i.e. Masters/Mistresses etc. and possessing the qualifications of BA/BSc/BCom/BSc.
(Agricultural) and BT/Diploma in Physical Education would be given a higher start of pay.
For those who possessed the qualifications of MA/MSc.
it was provided that they would be given two increments in case they are MA/MSc./M.Ed.
in third Division and five increments to MA/MSc./M.Ed.
in Ist Division.
When the instructions were not implemented, there were representations filed by the teachers.
The Govt. of Punjab on 191960 accorded sanction for the grant of advance increments to teachers/Masters who improved or acquired the postgraduate qualifications but the benefit was reduced to three increments for those who passed MA/MSc./M.Ed.
qualification in Ist Division or 2nd Division and two increments if they passed it in third Division.
The above decisions of the erstwhile State of Punjab were applicable to the State of Haryana after its bifurcation or reorganisation from the erstwhile State of Punjab from 1111966.
The Haryana Government had further issued the orders dated 511968 directing another revision of the scales of pay of teachers working in Govt. Schools in 1968.
It was stated in the order that scale of pay was being revised consequent on the acceptance of the recommendations of the Kothari Commission which strongly expressed the view that the scales of pay of teachers should be linked with the educational qualifications.
It was stated that despite the decision of the Government when the teachers were not given the benefit of higher scale of pay on the basis of their higher qualifications, a number of writ petitions were filed by the teachers who passed the BA/BSc/BT/BEd.
These writ petitions were allowed.
It is claimed that the petitioners have acquired the post graduate qualification and, therefore, are entitled to the increments as per instructions that have been issued.
4.
In the written statement filed, the pleas of the petitioners have been repelled.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners were members of the Punjab Educational Service Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955 (for short "the Rules") and their conditions of service were governed by the provisions of the said Rules.
As per Rule 10 of the said Rules, the members of the service are entitled to such scale of pay as may be authorised by the Govt. from time to time.
As per respondents, therefore, as soon as the pay scales of the employees are revised, the earlier pay scale were of no consequence.
It has been pleaded that in the Appendix A of the said Rules, the pay scale of Rs. 110-250 with a higher start of 2/5 advance increments on acquiring of MA/MSc.
qualifications which was enforced at the time of framing of the said service Rules, was only provided for the post of Masters/Mistresses and not for other categories of teachers.
The said scales of pay remained operative upto 30.11.1967.
After the State of Haryana was formed, vide letter dated 511968 the pay scale was further revised from Rs. 110-250 to 220-400.
By virtue of this letter, the earlier circulars regarding revision of pay scales issued by the earlier Governments stood automatically superseded, meaning thereby the Masters/Mistresses who were earlier made eligible for the grant of benefit of advance increments became disentitled to the benefit of advance increments on acquiring Post Graduate qualification.
In other words, the Masters/Mistresses who got the Post Graduate qualification on or after 1121967 and were in service after that date were not eligible to get the benefit of higher start of 2/3 increments because there was no provision existed in the Government letter dated 511968.
Furthermore, it is claimed that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of 2/3 advance increments on acquiring the qualifications of MA/MSc.
because the said letter had been issued by the State of Punjab and it is not applicable in the State of Haryana.
The scales are stated to have further been revised from 141979 and 111986 by framing Rules under the proviso to Aritlce 309 of the Constitution of India and these rules are known as Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1980 and Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1987.
At that time also, no provision for grant of 2/3 increments on acquiring of M/A./MSc.
qualification existed.
In this process, it was denied that the petitioners are entitled to the advance increments referred to above.
5.
It is not in controversy that in accordance with Rule 10 of the Punjab Education Service Class III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955, the pay of the members of the service shall be as authorised by the Government from time to time.
The scales of pay when the Rules were enforced have been specified in Appendix A against each post.
In the erstwhile State of Punjab, on 23.7.1957 directions/instructions were issued for revision of pay scales with respect to certain categories and pertained to the teachers in the Education Department, the instructions read as under :-  "(3) Teachers in the Education Department.
- It has been decided that all teachers according to their qualifications should be placed in the following two broad categories : Category "A" BA/BSc/BCom/BSc.
(Agriculture) and BT/Diploma in Physical Education/Diploma in Senior Basic Training.
Category "B" Group I : Matric with Basic Training (including JBTs.).
Group II : JBTs (including Assistant Mistresses) with BA/Inter-Matric plus JAV Training.
Group III : (i) Shastries (ii) Gianis, Prabhakers, Drawing Masters and Craftsman certificate Holders, (iii) Munshi Fazil (iv) B.Ts.
including SVs with training in Physical Education or Agriculture.
Group IV : Untrained/Teachers with qualifications like B.Sc.
Agriculture, B.Com., etc.
In addition there are smaller categories of special posts such as Headmasters/Headmistresses/District Inspectors of School with qualification of category "A" above.
Teachers in these categories, regardless of man and woman cadres, should carry the following scales of pay : Category "A" Rs 110-8-190/10-250 with a higher start for M.A or MSc.
as at present.
The existing percentage of posts fixed by the Government for scales of Rs. 110-8- 190/10-250 and 250-10-300 should remain unchanged at 85% and 15% respectively."
This was followed by other instructions, copy of which is Annexure P-3, dated 191960 and sanction was accorded to the grant of advance increments to the Masters working in the Punjab Education Department who improved their educational qualifications.
The relevant part of the said instructions read as under :-  "Sanction of the Government of Punjab is accorded to the grant of advance increments to the Masters working in the Punjab Education Department, who improve/have improved their education qualifications in the manner detailed below :- Personnel Nature of improved qualifications Extent of advance increments Masters Rs. 110-8-190/10-250 MA/MSc./M.Ed.
(3rd Division) 2 increments MA/MSc./M.Ed.
3 increments.
The advantages will be enjoyed only once and not for doing any subsequent MA It will of be available to those who were given higher start on entry for being MA/MSc./M.Ed.
These orders will take effect from the date of issue.
The original dates of increments shall remain unchanged and the persons concerned should be allowed to retain their old dates of increments."
In the meantime, the recommendations of the Kothari Commission had been received.
The State of Haryana had also came into being and on 511968 the pay scales of Masters and others teachers were revised.
The said letter reads as under :-  "I am directed to say that the matter concerning revision of scales of pay of teaching personnel working in Government schools in Haryana has been engaging the attention of Government for sometime past.
After careful consideration, the President of India is pleased to accept the recommendations of Education Commission, popularly known as Kothari Commission and revise the scale of pay of Government teachers with effect from Ist December, 1968 in the following manner :- Sr. No. Category of teachers Revised Grade 1.
J.BT/J.S.T./J.A.V.
and Teachers Drawing Masters, Tailoring Mistress, Art and Craft Teachers, Domestic Sc.
Mistress and Shastries I Rs. 125-5- 150/5-250 for 35% of the cadre II.
Rs. 250-10-300 5% of the cadre NB : The untrained teachers with Higher Secondary/Matriculation qualifications will draw the starting of Rs. 100/- per mensem and they will be integrated in the regular pay scales only after they attain necessary provision qualifications : i. Masters/Mistress Training Graduates i. Rs. 250-8-400/10-400 for 85% of the cadre.
ii.
Rs. 400-20-500 for 15% of the cadre.
NB : i.
The 1st and 2nd Class Graduates will be entitled to draw one advance increment in additional.
ii.
The training Graduates will be allowed the starting salary of Rs. 200/- per mensem and will be entitled for the regular scales of pay only after attaining the prescribed professional training.
3.
Lecturers (Post-graduate) i. Rs. 300-25-450/25-600 (for 1st and 2nd class MA and MSc.)
ii.
Rs. 250-25-450/25-550 (for 3rd class MAs.
and MSc.)
NB : The Lecturers will be given one advance increment as soon as they attain professional training.
4.
Headmasters/Headmistresses Principals of Higher Secondary Schools, Field Officers and Head-quarters belonging to School Inspection Cadres.
NB : The Field Officers and officers working at the Headquarters belonging to the schools Inspector Cadre will be allowed the above revised scales admissible to the Headmasters/Headmistresses etc. provided they are borne on the same cadre and have a joint seniority.
On the strength of these facts, it was argued on behalf of the petitioners that the advance increments were linked with the qualifications as recommended by the Kothari Commission.
Therefore, necessarily irrespective of the revision of the pay scales, the petitioners were entitled to the benefit of advance increments when they improve their qualifications and acquired post- graduate qualifications.
On the contrary, on behalf of the State of Haryana, it was urged vehemently that once the scales were revised and there was no provision for advance increments on revision of pay scales, the plea that advance increments had to be granted as per earlier instructions must fail.
In the revision of pay scales, no advance increments were contemplated.
6.
At this stage, we deem it necessary to mention that the instructions and rules of the erstwhile State of Punjab before 1111966 would only be attracted and the subsequent instructions, if any, will have little relevance with respect to the petitioners who are all working in the State of Haryana.
This is for the reason that all such instructions had been issued, if any, after 1111966 in the State of Punjab will have little force in the State of Haryana.
Consequently, all those precedents quoted by the learned Counsel for the petitioners pertaining to the State of Punjab need not be mentioned.
7.
It is the common case between the parties that the Government of Haryana had issued a policy letter dated 931990.
The matter as such was reconsidered and it was directed that the teachers in the Education Department are not entitled to be placed in the higher scale of pay in terms of para 2 of the Punjab Government letter No. 5056-FR-II/57/6600 dated 23.7.1957 or any subsequent letters/notifications issued by the Haryana Government.
It was further directed that the Masters/teachers in the Education Department would be placed in the scales of pay of their respective categories to which they were appointed against the sanctioned posts and mere possession/acquiring of higher qualification will not entitle them automatically to claim higher pay scales.
In other words, w.e.f.
931990 the said benefit was withdrawn and the letter/instructions, referred to, had to operate prospectively.
8.
In the case of Wazir Singh, JBT Teacher and others v. State of Haryana through its Secretary, Education Department and others, 1995 Supp.
(3) Supreme Court Cases 697, the Supreme Court was concerned with the case of JBT teachers in the State of Haryana.
Therein, it was conceded on behalf of the State that all those who had acquired the BT or B.Ed.
qualification before 931990 would be entitled to get higher scale of pay in pursuance to the letter dated 23.7.1957.
It has to be remembered that so far as JBT teachers are concerned, there has also been revision of pay scale like the case of Masters.
We find, therefore, no ground to take a separate view as is being urged on behalf of the State of Haryana.
9.
This decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Wazir Singh (supra) has been referred to with approval by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Harbans Lal and etc., Judgments Today, 1999(4) S.C.T.
722 : 2000 Supp.
(2) SC 437.
Of course, the Supreme Court was again concerned with the scales of the JBT teachers who acquired higher qualifications.
It was held that those who acquired the qualifications before 931990 would be entitled to higher scale of pay automatically and not those who acquired subsequently.
10.
In behalf of the State of Haryana, strong reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Kamal Singh Saharwat, 1999(4) SCT 320.
On the strength of this decision, it was urged that so far as the posts of Lecturer are concerned, they are governed by different set of rules and not by the Punjab Education Class III School Cadres Rules, 1955.
In paragraph 23 of the judgment, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Thus a perusal of the Education Service Rules which have been prevailing from 1955 undergoing amendments from time to time and the subsequent Government policy letters and circulars show that the teachers are not entitled to higher scale of pay applicable to the posts of lecturers automatically on their acquiring post graduate qualifications or such qualifications as are prescribed for the post of lecturers.
We have already pointed out that the post of Lecturers has throughout been governed by different sets of rules and never by the Punjab Education Service Class III School Cadre Rules, 1955 or the amendments thereto.
Hence, the common question raised in these matters has to be answered in the negative against the teachers/masters/mistresses some of whom are respondents in Civil Appeal No. 4304 of 1990 and the others being petitioners in S.L.Ps.
and appellants in Civil Appeal No.
2104/98."
Subsequently, the Supreme Court further held that the teachers were not entitled to claim higher pay on the scale of pay applicable to lecturers on their acquiring post graduate qualification without being appointed as lecturers.
The observations of the Supreme Court in paragraph 42 of the judgment are as under :-  "In the result, we have no hesitation to hold that the teachers are not entitled to claim higher pay on the scales of pay applicable to lecturers on their acquiring postgraduate qualification without being appointed as lecturers.
Learned counsel for the State of Haryana has categorically stated that higher pay on the scales applicable to the Masters was already being paid to the teachers and that at any rate the Government has absolutely no objection to pay the same if they were entitled thereto in accordance with the law laid down by this Court.
We have already referred to the fact that the only person to whom higher pay on the scales applicable to the lecturers was being paid was Kamal Singh Saharwat the first petitioner in CWP No. 712/88 before the High Court......." It is abundantly clear from the aforesaid that the cited decision has little application to the facts of the present case.
This is for the reason that the petitioners were not claiming the scale of lecturers.
They are simply seeking advance increments as per earlier instructions referred to above.
11.
It is true that the scales were revised but in the subsequent instructions copy of which is Annexure P-4, even reference has been made to the Graduates who would be entitled to one advance increment if they passed the graduation in 1st or 2nd Class.
The earlier instructions had never been superseded.
Thus, normally though on revision of pay scales there would be merger of earlier benefits as are being claimed by the petitioners but not in the peculiar facts of this case.
12.
Our attention has been drawn towards the decision of this Court in the case of Sudarshan Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 19353 of 1996 decided on April 4, 1997.
Therein certain petitioners, who were teachers in the Education Department in Haryana State, complained that the benefit of advance increments on acquiring post graduate degree had not been given to them.
This Court while considering the said controversy allowed the writ petition and held as under :-  ".......In fact, these instructions modified the provision in the rules to the extent that persons who had qualified the post-graduate examination of MA/MSc./M.Ed.
in the first or second division were made entitled to get only three increments instead of five as provided for in the rules.
Such instructions issued by the State Government as are supplemental to the rules of fill up a lacuna and fall within the orders having the force of law are facts applicable to the employees in the State of Haryana, unless a specific provision to the contrary is made by the competent authority.
However, this matter need not be considered any further in the present case as the relief claimed by the petitioners is clearly admissible to them under the statutory rules which were in force at the relevant time....." We find ourselves in respectful agreement with the said view point.
13.
There is another way of looking at the matter.
The Court will always (sic) at the arbitrariness and not permit the same.
Our attention has been drawn towards the copy of the letter from by the Board of Secondary Education Haryana to the District Education Officer, Kurukshetra and others.
In accordance with the said letters, certain advance increments had been given to some teachers in their respective grades on improving their qualifications.
The said letter reads as under :-  "In accordance with the instructions mentioned in letter No. 418-2- 77/7173 dated 2081977 from the Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana the claims of the following officials for the grant of personal pay for improving their qualification after entering into Government service were considered consequent upon the decision arrived at vide Education Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana Education Department vide letter No. 10/35-83-Edu.III(4) dated 2811982.
The following officials are allowed personal pay equal to the increment in their respective grades for a period of five years as per details given below :- Name and Designation Date from which PP for five years Inct.
granted Rate of Increment No. of Inct.
Grade 1.
Sh. Jagan Nath Tr.
GHS Pehowa 3071981 Rs. 15/- Two 400/760 2.
Sh. Partap Singh 2571979 Rs. 15/- -do- -do- 3.
Sh. Ramesh Kumar Shastri, GHS Shogal 7.9.1979 Rs. 15/- - -do- 125/250 14.
Before us, it was not the controversy that such a letter had been issued.
Once it is so, there is no ground as to why the petitioners on improvement of their qualifications should be denied such a benefit.
For these reasons, we allow the writ petitions and direct that the action of the respondents in not allowing the advance increments claimed by the petitioners is illegal.
It is directed that the petitioners should be granted the said increments claimed by them provided they have acquired the post- graduate qualification in accordance with the instructions of the year 1960 as modified in the year 1968 (Annexure P-4).
However, since the writ petitions have been filed after a long delay, the arrears shall only be confined to 38 months before the filing of the writ petitions.
The arrears that are due shall be paid within six months.
Petitions allowed.