FI Rebello, J - Both these petitions are being disposed of by a common Judgment.
Writ Petition No 1523 of 1997 was filed by the petitioner during the pendency of the approval application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act before the National Industrial Tribunal.
The petition was filed challenging the order of 25th June, 1997.
An objection was raised to the appearance of the representative of the management, Respondent No. 1, by the petitioner workman.
The National Industrial Tribunal took view that Shri Kulkarni being an office-bearer and member of the Executive Committee of the concerned Employers Association though a lawyer could appear in the matter.
Rule was issued.
By the time the petition came for final hearing the National Industrial Tribunal has granted approval of the action taken by the Management in dismissing the petitioner from their employment.
At that time Shri Kulkarni was also no longer appearing for the respondent No. 1 who were represented by Shri Pawaskar, again as an office-bearer of an Employers Association.
Petitioner had taken objection to appearance of Shri Pawaskar.
By order of 10th February, 1999 the Tribunal allowed Shri Pawaskar and Shri Mokhashi to appear as Officers of the Federation of Employers.
The petitioner reserved his right to challenge the said order.
The proceedings continued, which ultimately led to grant of approval.
Consequently, Writ Petition No 1479 of 1999.
The order allowing appearance is also impugned.
In the light of that nothing survives in Writ Petition No 1523 of 1997.
The issue raised therein can also be considered while disposing of Writ Petition No 1479 of 1999.
2.
In Writ Petition No 1479 of 1999, the petitioner who appears in person, has impugned the orders of 10th February, 1999 whereby the Management was allowed to be represented by office-bearers of an Employers Federation and order dated 31st May, 1999 whereby the National Industrial Tribunal has granted approval to the action of the respondent No. 1 in dismissing the petitioner from service in Approval Application No. 91 of 1996.
The petitioner at the time when he was dismissed from service was employed as a Foreman with the respondent No. 1.
The respondent No. 1 had applied under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act for permission before the National Industrial Tribunal, as in their opinion, industrial reference being reference No. NTB 1 of 1990 was pending.
Approval was sought based on the purported terms of reference, whereby the Appropriate Government amongst others had made reference to various disputes.
Dispute No. 7 as referred was, "what allowance, benefits and other service conditions would be relevant for the purpose of deciding the relativity/parity as between the employees of Indian Airlines and Air India as well as between various categories of employees within Indian Airlines and Air India ?"
Dispute No. 8 was "What are the categories of employees in Air India and Indian Airlines who should be treated as workmen and non-workmen depending upon the nature of duties, wage structure and other privileges, perquisites and benefits applicable to the said employees ?"
Petitioner workman had raised contentions that the reference did not cover Air India and as such the application was without jurisdiction.
Even if that be so, the order of termination would survive warranting a reference of the Individual Dispute/Industrial Dispute.
However, from the terms of the reference it is apparent that at least two of the terms concern or touch the workmen of Air India.
Hence the application filed was within jurisdiction, which jurisdiction had to be invoked.
3.
With the above background that matter may now be proceeded with.
A charge sheet was served on the petitioner dated 1st February 1996.
The relevant portion of the charge sheet reads as under :-  "You were fostered for duty in the morning shift from 0600 hrs.
to 1430 hrs.
on February 1, 1996, in LMD at NIPTC, Sahar.
It has been reported that although you did not report for duty on February 1, 1996 "........." you entered the Company premises on 121996 and instigated other employees who have reported for duty in other areas to join the illegal strike sponsored by a group of employees.
It is also reported that you have threatened the staff who were sent from MMD to LMD to meet the exigencies of work with dire consequences.
The above acts on your part constitutes misconduct under Model Standing Orders (Central) applicable to your.
You are, therefore, hereby charged with the following ...... :-  14(3)(k) : Striking work and/or inciting others to strike work in contravention of the provisions of any law or rule having the force of the law.
"14(3)(h) : Riotous or disorderly behaviour during working hours at the establishment or any act subversive of discipline."
Pursuant to the charge sheet an enquiry was conducted and the petitioner was dismissed from service by order dated 21st March, 1996.
The petitioner filed Writ Petition which was numbered as Lodging No. 600 of 1996.
A learned Judge of this Court by order dated 6th June, 1996 considering the peculiar facts and circumstances, set aside the order passed on 21st March, 1996.
The order further directed the Enquiry Committee to recommence the proceedings from the stage of recording of the plea of the petitioner.
The petitioner at the enquiry was allowed to be represented either by Mr. Chavare.
There were some other directions.
4.
The Enquiry Committee reconvened and recommenced the enquiry from the stage as directed by this Court.
The petitioner raised various objections including as to the impartiality of the Chairman of the Enquiry Committee.
Those particulars need not be gone into, as the petitioner earlier also had raised such objection.
This Court when it passed the order on 6th June, 1996 did not direct a change in the constitution of the Enquiry Committee but on the contrary directed that the Enquiry should be recommenced by the Enquiry Committee from the stage of recording of the plea of the petitioner.
At the recommenced inquiry, there were some procedural disputes as to whether the evidence by way of examination-in-chief earlier recorded in the previous enquiry, should be allowed to stand.
Ultimately the Enquiry Committee decided to examine the witnesses de novo.
The first witness to be examined was Shri DG Nayar.
The said witness was also cross-examined on behalf of the petitioner.
DG Nayar at the time he was examined was the General Manager Maintenance.
Apart from cross-examination by the petitioners representative, the Enquiry Committee also examined him.
It may be mentioned here that at the enquiry there was no Presenting Officer on the part of the Management.
The next witness examined was Shri K Prabhakaran, Assistant Security Officer.
He was first examined on 18th July, 1996 wherein his earlier statement was recorded.
Petitioner objected to the same.
Though his objections were overruled, subsequently the examination-in-chief of Shri Prabhakaran was recorded on 25th July, 1996.
Clarification to his statement was sought by the Enquiry Committee.
The defence counsel sought time.
On the adjourned date, the petitioner informed the Enquiry Committee that he had made an appeal to the Appellate Authority on 12th August, 1996 requesting that the Presiding Officer of the Enquiry Committee be changed.
The enquiry committee then met on 2nd September, 1996.
There were some representations which I will not advert to, but the enquiry thereafter was adjourned on two occasions.
On 11th September, 1996 the minutes recorded were not signed by the petitioner and defencee counsel.
The Enquiry Committee noted that as the petitioner did not wish to cross-examine Shri Prabhakaran, the evidence of Shri Prabhakaran stands closed.
The third witness examined was Shri KKA Kishore, Additional General Manager, Engineering Headquarters.
The Enquiry Committee also examined him and he was cross-examined on behalf of the petitioner herein.
On 12th October, 1996 the petitioner himself was examined.
The final statement of the petitioner was also recorded.
5.
The Enquiry Committee submitted its report and its fresh findings on 25th October, 1996 to distinguish them from the earlier findings.
The findings record that amongst various documents taken on record by the Enquiry Committee, included office note dated 1st February, 1996 by Shri KKA Kishore and Exhibit-1 furnished by the workman.
These have been considered for arriving at the findings arrived at.
It may at the outset be mentioned that amongst others the grievance of the petitioner has been that he had preferred an appeal against the order of dismissal.
There is nothing on record as to what has happened to this Appeal till today.
Appeal is provided in terms of Model Standing Order 14(6).
The notice of 1st February, 1996 of Shri Kishore shows that the activities of LMD were affected due to strike by some of the staff covered under Air India Employees Guild.
He had sent Technicians and Cleaners from MMD to LMD at about 800 am on 1st February, 1996.
The staff who were sent to LMD came back because Shri AR Joshi, Sr. Foreman and Shri KV Deshpande, Offg.
Foreman threatened them with dire consequences if they got down from the bus and worked in LMD.
He immediately arranged security protection for the staff and requested them to go to the LMD.
The staff however refused to got to LMD stating that they do not want to take risk.
It may be mentioned that it terms of the order of this Court, the enquiry was to recommence from the stage of recording of the plea of the petitioner.
The charge sheet was read to DG Nayar and he was asked to make a statement of fact within his knowledge relating to other charges against the petitioner.
The Enquiry Committee, held that both the charges proved namely striking work and/or inciting others to strike work in contravention of any provisions of any law or rule having the force of law and secondly riotous or disorderly behaviour during working hours at the establishment or any act subversive of discipline.
Based on this report, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner by DG Nayar by letter dated 25th October, 1996.
DG Nayar was one of the witnesses examined by the Enquiry Committee.
Shri Nayar set out that he had gone through the report of the Enquiry Committee and found that the Enquiry Committee based on the evidence adduced had concluded that the charges levelled had been established.
The petitioner was called upon to show cause as to why the findings of the Enquiry Committee should not be accepted.
The petitioner protested by his letter of 26th October, 1996 that Shri Nayar was a witness himself and therefore could not be a Judge in his own cause.
In reply to this letter Shri Nayar wrote back to the petitioner that he should address his reply to Shri Gogoi.
The petitioner protested against this saying that the Appellate Authority was Shri Gogoi.
The petitioner called on Shri Gogoi who was the Director of Engineering and the Appellate Authority, to treat the letters as reply to the show cause notice dated 25th October, 1996.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner from time to time had been representing to the Appellate Authority about the constitution of the Enquiry Committee and other matters in the conduct of the enquiry proceedings.
By the letter of 29th October, 1996 Shri DG Nayar reclused himself from the matter and called on the petitioner to send the reply to the findings with comments to Shri Gogoi, Director of Engineering.
6.
The next relevant letter is dated 25th November, 1996.
There are several statements in the suit letter which I will not presently refer to.
Suffice it to say that the Director of Engineering informed the petitioner that he found no merits in the contentions and allegations raised and therefore was accepting the report being in full concurrence with the same.
It is then set out that the continuance of the petitioner in service would be prejudicial to the interest of the company and that the ends of justice would be met if the petitioner was awarded the punishment of dismissal from the services of the Company.
It is then set out that the Director of Engineering had gone through the past record to find out as to whether there were any extenuating circumstances warranting lesser punishment, but found there were none.
The petitioner, therefore, was called upon to show cause as to why the proposed punishment should not be awarded and that if he did not hear anything from the petitioner within the stipulated time, it would be presumed that he has nothing to say in the matter about the proposed punishment and that they would proceed further in the matter.
On issuance of the said notice, it seems that the petitioner had written to the Appellate Authority (Shri Gogoi) that he proposed to move this Court.
A petition was filed being Writ Petition No 2225 of 1996.
This Court by order of 8th November, 1996 held that the petition was premature and therefore allowed the petitioner to withdraw the petition.
This letter of 25th November, 1996 was apparently in reply to the petitioner's reply dated 18th November, 1996.
The petitioner therein had protested that the Appellate Authority could not become the Competent Authority.
It is in response to this letter that the letter dated 25th November, 1996 was addressed to the petitioner.
The petitioner wrote to the Director of Engineering who had issued the show cause notice by letter of 27th November, 1996 pointing out that the entire LMD and some MMD staff had given a written statement which the committee had taken on record on 23rd February, 1996.
It is pointed out that if the said statement was considered then the charge of instigation no longer survived.
In response to paragraph 5 of the letter dated 25th November, 1996 the petitioner referred to the letter of 14/25th November, 1995 which was taken on record by the Enquiry Committee.
Therein it has been mentioned by the Managing Director of Air India that he was impressed by the dedication and devotion of the petitioner to the organisation which prompted the petitioner to analyse the present system and propose a better system.
Employees like the petitioner it was set out are assets to any organisation.
The petitioner reiterated that the Appellate Authority could not become the Competent Authority.
The petitioner, however, came to be dismissed from the service of the respondent by order dated 3rd December, 1996.
7.
The respondents thereafter filed the Approval Application No. 91 of 1996 on 6th December, 1996.
In the application for approval, paragraph 14, it is set out that the Competent Authority had forwarded a copy of the report of the Enquiry Committee and called on the petitioner to show cause why the finding should not be accepted by letter dated 25th October, 1996.
The petitioner had replied by his letter dated 26th October, 1996 wherein he objected to the Competent Authority as the Competent Authority was a witness at the enquiry.
In view of the said stand the Competent Authority forwarded the papers to the Director of Engineering who was accordingly so informed.
The Director of Engineering by his reply of 18th November, 1996 called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why the findings should not be accepted.
The petitioner, it is contended, filed his reply.
The date on the reply is apparently a mistake.
It is then set out that the Competent Authority considered the reply, the report of the Enquiry Committee and concurred with the findings and found there were no extenuating circumstances warranting lesser punishment and proposed to impose the punishment of dismissal and communicated the same to the petitioner.
The petitioner filed his reply to the same on 27th November, 1996.
The Competent Authority after going through the circumstances taking into account the serious and gave nature of misconduct and as there was no mitigating circumstances in its opinion warranting lesser punishment, imposed the punishment of dismissal with effect from the date of communication by the Establishment Division of HRD Department.
It is then set out that by letter No. EMP-1/1/3605 dated 6th December, 1996 addressed to the petitioner by the Assistant Manager (Personnel), the order of dismissal was communicated to the petitioner.
With the said letter the respondent No. 1 also sent a cheque bearing No. 848679 dated 6th December, 1996 for Rs. 16,829/- being the wages for one month as required under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was then set out that the petitioner was dismissed after holding a proper and valid enquiry in accordance with the principles of natural justice, equity and fair play and after compliance of the provisions of Model Standing Orders.
It is then set out that in the event the tribunal came to the conclusion that the enquiry suffered from any infirmity or that the findings of Enquiry committee are not correct and vitiated then the Management sought leave to adduce evidence in order to substantiate the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The respondents sought approval for their action.
The petitioner filed his fresh reply on 6th February, 1997.
With specific reference to paragraph 18 of the Approval Application, the petitioner denied that the cheque dated 6th December, 1996 being wages as required under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act had been received by him or that any communication of dismissal was communicated on 6th December, 1996.
It was therefore submitted that the approval should not be granted.
Petitioner sought leave to amend, modify and vary the statement.
A further reply was filed on 21st March, 1997.
Therein also it was reiterated that the respondent was unable to show any receipt for the cheque as stated in paragraph 18 of the Approval Application.
In between the petitioner also objected to the appearance on behalf of the respondent which I will advert to later on.
The petitioner thereafter also filed subsequent other statements and relied on various documents.
8.
Regarding objection by the petitioner to representation by a lawyer, the learned Presiding Officer of the National Industrial Tribunal held that the office-bearer of an Employer's Association can represent the employer and consequently rejected the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner under Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On 17th November, 1998 there is another order arising from a fresh application filed to represent the respondent as an officer of the Employers Association.
By the said order, the National Industrial Tribunal upheld the objection raised by the petitioner regarding appearance of those who sought to represent the respondents.
Review came to be filed which was dismissed by order dated 4th January, 1999.
Thereafter, by another application some other sought to represent the respondent as office-bearers of the Employers Federation of India.
That was also objected to.
That objection was overruled and they were allowed to represent the respondents by order of 10th February, 1999.
That is also the subject matter of the present petition.
The petitioner on 16th February, 1999 filed a precise in the application, stating that the application for approval could proceed without prejudice to the rights of the petitioner to challenge the said order.
9.
Before the National Industrial Tribunal examination-in-chief was led on affidavits.
The respondents examined one Prabhakar Krishnaji Rane who set out that on 6th December, 1996 on instructions of his superior he went to the workman's residence along with one GY Kokate to serve the original letter covering the dismissal of Shri Joshi along with the cheque for one month's wages.
That cheque was dated 6th December, 1996 drawn on Bank of India, Nariman Point Branch, bearing No. 848679 in favour of petitioner in a sum of Rs. 16,829/-.
Reliance was placed on a copy of the letter along with the cheque.
It is his case that the letter and the cheque were put in an envelope and closed by him.
On reaching the residence of the petitioner he had handed over the envelope to the petitioner who enquired of them as to who had sent them and why he was disturbed at 1800 hrs.
It is then set out that Shri Joshi opened the envelope read the contents of the letter as well as the accompanying cheque.
It is his case that the petitioner informed him that he could not give an acknowledgment or the receipt for the same.
When the said witness insisted acknowledgment of the letter as well as the cheque, he was informed by the petitioner that he would refuse to accept the letter of communication and the cheque and that he would like to take (talk ?)
with his superiors.
It is the case of the witness that the petitioner spoke to Shri Shiv Kumar on telephone and informed him that he would not give acknowledgment of the letter of communication or the cheque.
It is the case of the witness that as the petitioner refused to acknowledge receipt of the communication he insisted that he would not leave residence without the acknowledgment or in the alternative to hand over the letter and the cheque which he was holding so that he could carry it back to office for want of acknowledgment.
It is the case of the witness that thereafter the petitioner told him that he will only accept the letter of communication of dismissal but not the cheque.
The petitioner dictated the letter as to why he was not accepting the cheque.
The witness wrote the writing in the exact words dictated by the petitioner.
The witness then set out that the petitioner signed the letter in Marathi in his presence.
The witness Mr. Rane then left the residence along with cheque and the letter as dictated and duly signed by the petitioner.
When he reached the office he took keys from security control and opened the office.
Shri Shivkumar by then had reached the office.
The witness reported the matter to Shivkumar who had entrusted the said assignment to him.
It is the case of witness that Shri Shivkumar dictated letter bearing No. EMP/-1/2/5/3605 dated 6th December, 1996, with the said letter it is the case of the witness he once again enclosed the said cheque which was retuned by the petitioner and sent the letter and cheque by post.
It is his case that he put letter and the cheque personally in an envelope, closed it, and went to the post office.
He produced a copy of the letter and a copy of the receipt received by him from the post office, which are marked exhibits "4" and "5" respectively.
The letter dated 6th December, 1996 refers to what transpired and that the cheque was being sent by speed post along with the order of dismissal.
The respondent also examined Mr. Valerian Anthony Ferreira, General Manager, HRD, who was the convener of the Enquiry Committee.
10.
By order of 31st May, 1999 the Presiding Officer granted approval to the application filed by the respondent.
While granting approval, the arguments on behalf of the petitioner that the principles of natural justice was violated and finding by the enquiry committee was perverse were noted.
The further objection was noted that it was the Appellate Authority who had issued the show cause notice and who had passed the order of dismissal.
After examining the material on record, the Learned Presiding Officer of the National Industrial Tribunal held that issuing of show cause notice by Shri Tandon or by Shri Gopal it could not be said that the enquiry held was in contravention of principles of natural justice and fair play.
The learned Presiding Officer then considered the evidence of Shri Nayar.
Reference is made to Shri Deshpande who as per the office note along with the petitioner had instigated and threatened the staff.
Reference is then made to the evidence of Prabhakaran.
The contention that the evidence of Shri Prabhakaran and Shri Kishore being hearsay was rejected, relying on the observation of the Apex Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, (1982) I Lab LJ 46 : (1997 Lab IC 845) and in the case of JD Jain v. The Management of State Bank of India, AIR 1982 SC 673 : (1982 Lab IC 356).
The role of Shri Nayar as a witness and the person who issued the show cause notice, it was found, had not resulted into any illegality.
It was, therefore, held that the enquiry was fair and proper and in consonance with the principles of natural justice and fair play.
Coming to the Approval Application, the case of the Respondent that the cheque was sent by speed post by a covering letter along with the order of dismissal was held no to be proved.
The envelope when opened in the Court it was found, that there was no cheque in it.
The learned Presiding Officer, however, held that as the cheque was received by Shri Joshi and he had returned it to Mr. Rane when Mr. Rane had gone to the petitioner's house and once the cheque towards one month's wage was tendered, the requirement of Section 36(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act had been complied with and it could not be said that there is no tender of one month wages.
The learned Presiding Officer also held that sending the cheque had been proved by production of postal receipt.
Another issue raised was whether the payment by cheque represented one month's wages.
It was contended that the wages included all remuneration.
That in the instant case productivity incentive allowance had not been paid.
The learned Presiding Officer had held that when the petitioner was not working there was no question of the employee contributing to production and therefore being eligible for productivity linked allowance.
That contention was therefore rejected.
In view of the above, permission was granted to the action of the respondent dismissing the petitioner from service.
11.
We may now proceed to dispose of the various contentions as raised in the petition.
Before doing so it will be necessary to briefly recapitulate some aspects subsequent to the finding of the recommenced Enquiry Committee.
Shri DG Nayar, General Manager, by his letter of 25th October, 1996 called on the petitioner to show cause as the letter indicates after going through the report of the enquiry committee and having come to the conclusion that the charges against the petitioner had been established as to why the findings of the enquiry committee should not be accepted.
The petitioner was called upon to give his reply, if any.
On 26th October, 1996, on receipt of the letter dated 25th October, 1996, the petitioner wrote to the Appellate Authority, the director of engineering, protesting against he show cause notice issued by Shri DG Nayar as Shri DG Nayar was one of the witnesses at the enquiry conducted against the petitioner.
On 29th October, 1996 Shri Nayar referring to the petitioner's letter of 26th October, 1996 set out herein that as the petitioner had raised objections against him, the papers and proceedings had been forwarded to Shri Gogoi, Director of Engineering.
The petitioner was called upon to give his comment on the enquiry report to Shri Gogoi, Director of Engineering.
It is seen that petitioner on receipt of the said letter pointed out to Shri Nayar that Shri Gogoi is the Appellate Authority in so far as the enquiry report is concerned and as such could not be a Competent Authority.
On 18th November, 1996 Shri Gogoi wrote to the petitioner, a Xerox copy of which has been handed over at the time of argument, calling on the petitioner to give his reply and comments on the enquiry report.
The petitioner was called upon to show cause as to why the findings of the enquiry committee should not be accepted.
Petitioner was also informed that if they did not hear anything it will be construed that the petitioner had nothing to say against the findings and that the matter will be proceeded further.
The petitioner replied by letter of 11th November, 1996.
The date seems to be a typographical error, as it was fixed on 21st November, 1996.
In that letter petitioner pointed out that the Appellate Authority could not become the Competent Authority.
The petitioner in the reply also pointed out the various objections raised by him before Shri Gogoi as the Appellate Authority in the matter of conducting of the domestic inquiry and the manner in which it was conducted.
It was also brought out that questions which were legally valid were also not permitted by the Enquiry Committee.
The petitioner therein challenged the conduct of the enquiry itself.
Shri Gogoi in reply to the said letter wrote to the petitioner by letter of 25th November, 1996 in reference to the petitioner's letter dated 11th November, 1996 pointing out, that the reply was in response to the letter of 18th November, 1996 and the date 11th November, 1996 must have been inadvertently mentioned.
In the said letter Shri Gogoi pointed out that the charge sheet dated 1st February, 1996 was issued to the petitioner for instigating the employee who had reported for duty in other areas to join illegal strike sponsored by a group of employees on 1st February, 1996.
It is then set out that after considering all the aspects, no merit was found in the contention as raised on behalf of the petitioner.
It was then further set out that the report of enquiry committee was being accepted.
Shri Gogoi pointed out that having regard to the grave nature of the misconduct committed by the petitioner, his continuance in service will be prejudicial to the interest of the company and as such ends of justice would be met if the petitioner was awarded the punishment of dismissal from service.
It was pointed out that in the said letter, the past record of the petitioner had been gone through and there were no extenuating circumstances awarding lesser punishment.
The petitioner was called upon to show cause as to why proposed punishment should not be awarded.
The petitioner in turn by his letter of 27th November, 1996 drew the attention of Shri Gogoi, Director of Engineering to the statement signed by the entire LMD staff as also some of the MMD staff, which the enquiry committee had taken on record on 23rd February, 1996.
It was pointed out that in the said statement signed by the employees, it was clearly mentioned that the petitioner was not in any way involved with the concerted action taken by the said employee.
It was also pointed out that none of the management witnesses had produced any evidence in support of the charge.
The attention of Shri Gogoi was brought to the letter written by the Managing Director to the petitioner dated 14th/25th November, 1995 which was taken on record by the enquiry committee on 4th March, 1996 the date is wrongly given as 14th/25th November, 1995.
The petitioner specifically drew the attention of Shri Gogoi, that the Managing Director of Air India in his letter had stated that he was impressed by the dedication and devotion of the petitioner to the organisation, which had prompted the petitioner to analyse the present system and propose a better system and further that employees like petitioner are assets to any organization.
It was reiterated that Shri Gogoi as Appellate Authority could not become the Competent Authority and therefore disputed the legal authority of the notice.
Subsequent to this the services of the petitioner came to be dismissed by order bearing No. E/17-21/4229 dated 3rd December, 1996.
The order was to take effect from the date of its communication to the petitioner by the Establishment Division of HRD Department.
12.
At the outset it will have to be examined whether the enquiry as conducted complied with the principle of natural justice and fair play and was in conformity with the requirement of the Model Standing Orders.
The law is now well settled that the enquiry must be conducted in accordance with the standing orders applicable to the delinquent workman and satisfy the principles of natural justice and fair play.
In the instant case, it is admitted by the respondent No. 1 themselves in their application for approval filed before the National Industrial Tribunal that it is Model Standing Orders (Central) which were applicable when the enquiry was conducted.
The enquiry must also conform to the Standing Orders and the principles of natural justice and fair play.
See Cooper Engineering Limited v. Shri PP Mundhe, AIR 1975 SC 1900 : (1975 Lab IC 1441).
In the event the Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court arrives at a conclusion that the enquiry conducted was not in conformity with the Model Standing Orders or natural justice, then if the employer seeks opportunity to lead evidence in his written statement or in the application itself under Section 33(2)(b) it is incumbent on the industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court to grant permission to the employer to lead evidence (see Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation v. Smt. Lakshmidevamma, 2001(2) SCT 1041 (SC) : 2001 AIR SCW 1981 : (2001 Lab IC 1777).
There is now an added element that if the Industrial Court or the Labour Court comes to the conclusion that the findings recorded are perverse the enquiry is vitiated and the employer must be given an opportunity to lead evidence before the Tribunal or the Court as the case may be.
(See Bharat Forge Co Ltd v. AB Zodge, 1996(3) SCT 848 (SC) : (1996)4 SCC 374 : (AIR 1996 SC 1556).
It may be noted that the Apex Court in Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation has recognised that the right of the management to lead evidence before the Tribunal or Labour Court is not a creation of statute but a procedure laid down by the Apex Court to avoid delay and multiplicity of proceedings in the disposal of dispute between the management and the workman.
The preliminary enquiry was whether the enquiry conducted was in compliance with the Standing Orders and principles of natural justice.
Considering Bharat Forge Co Ltd (supra) findings will also be a part of the preliminary enquiry and not at a subsequent stage.
In the instant case respondent No. 1 had sought an opportunity to lead evidence if the enquiry is held to be vitiated.
If this Court, therefore, comes to the conclusion that the enquiry is not fair and proper, being contrary to the Model Standing Orders or the principles of natural justice and fair play and/or that the findings are perverse then it is bound to give to the employer, respondent No. 1 herein, an opportunity to lead evidence as sought for by Respondent No. 1 in their approval application.
13.
The first question is whether the enquiry is in compliance with the Standing Orders.
The Standing Orders applicable to the petitioner are as set out in the Schedule-I of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 which are the Model Standing Orders applicable to the petitioner.
The Schedule provides the matters to be provided in Standing Orders under the Act.
The rules provide for certain additional matters to be provided in the Standing Orders.
Schedule-I to the rules are the Model Standing Orders as framed.
Model Standing Order 14(5) provides that the authority imposing punishment shall take into account the gravity of misconduct the previous record, if any, of the workman and any other extenuating or aggravating circumstances, that may exist.
Under Model Standing Order 14(6) a worker aggrieved by the order imposing punishment may, within 21 days from the date of receipt of the order, appeal to the Appellate Authority.
In terms of model Standing Orders 14(6)(b) and (c) the employer must first specify the Appellate Authority and the Appellate Authority, after giving an opportunity to the workman of being heard shall pass such order as it thinks proper on the appeal, within fifteen days of its receipt and communicate the same to the workman in writing.
Under Model Standing Orders 14(4)(c) if the workman is found guilty of the charges framed the employer after giving workman a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed in terms of Model Standing Order 14(5) can impose the punishment.
What is, therefore, required is that there must be an authority appointed by the employer to impose punishment as also an Appellate Authority appointed by the employer for hearing the appeal contemplated by Model Standing Order 14(6).
In the instant case the petitioner has been representing to Shri Gogoi as the Appellate Authority.
His grievances against the Enquiry Committee were addressed to Shri Gopal as the Appellate Authority.
When Shri DG Nayar sought to issue the show cause notice as the Competent Authority, the petitioner protested before the Appellate Authority (Shri Gogoi) that the witness could not become the Competent Authority.
When Shri Gogoi issued the notice as the Competent Authority, the petitioner protested on the ground that Shri Gogoi was the Appellate Authority.
Petitioner was entitled to a right of an appeal in terms of the Model Standing Order 14(6).
Even if it is assumed that Shri Gogoi was the Competent Authority, at least there is no finding to that effect by the learned Tribunal.
Neither has any material being produced to show how Shri Gogoi acted as the Competent Authority.
The petitioner was denied the right of an appeal in as much as the Appellate Authority exercised the powers of the Competent Authority.
The employer did not nominate any person to be the Appellate Authority in place of the Appellate Authority who acted as Competent Authority, at least the record does not show.
There is, therefore, clearly an infraction of the Model Standing Order 14(6).
Apart from that if Shri Gogoi was the Appellate Authority even though he may be an Officer higher than Shri Nayar unless the employer, the respondent No. 1 had appointed him as the competent Authority he could not have assumed the authority of the Competent Authority.
There is nothing on record to show that Shri Gogoi was appointed as the Competent Authority in place of Shri Nayar or a finding by the learned Tribunal.
The only note on record is that Shri Nayar after the petitioner raised an objection asked the petitioner to forward his representation to Shri Gogoi.
How Shri Gogoi assumed jurisdiction as the Competent Authority, at least is not on record.
To my mind, therefore, there is infraction of Model Standing Orders which must result in holding that the petitioner was denied the opportunity of appeal and that being so the enquiry conducted has to be held in contravention of the Model Standing Orders.
It may be pointed out that right of appeal is an important remedy which the Model Standing Orders have given to the workman.
The employer could not have brushed it aside, more so after the petitioner had protested and brought the same to the notice of Shri Gogoi.
No doubt it is contended on behalf of the Respondent No. 1 by their learned counsel relying on the Judgment of the Apex Court in State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1669, that petitioner must show that prejudice was occasioned to hold that the enquiry held is not fair and proper.
The Apex Court itself has noted that the test of prejudice will be applicable only to procedural provisions and not to a substantive provision.
The right of appeal is substantive who hears it, is procedural.
Petitioner on the other hand has relied on the judgment of the learned Single Judge of the P & H High Court in M/s.
Meters and Instruments Pvt. Ltd. v. Dev Dayal Sharma, (1982)45 Fac LR 90 : (1982 Lab IC 766) to contend that as right of appeal was denied to the petitioner, there was infraction of the Model Standing Orders.
The Tribunal ought to have rejected the approval application on failure to hold an enquiry or on setting aside of the enquiry held, does not automatically result either in reinstatement of the workman or the Tribunal refusing to grant approval if opportunity is sought to lead evidence.
The employer can still avail of an opportunity to lead evidence.
The law has shown no such indulgence at least till date to a workman who could not participate in an enquiry or who could not lead all his evidence before the Enquiry Officer, on account of sheer ignorance of himself or his representative.
In these circumstances, infraction of denial of an opportunity must be held in favour of the workman.
Even if the judgment in the State Bank of Patiala (AIR 1996 SC 1669) (supra) relied upon by respondent No. 1 is considered, it must be borne in mind that the Apex Court in that matter was considering Articles 311 and 14 of the Constitution of India, violation of which results in the order being set aside.
Even assuming that those steps would apply to a domestic enquiry under the Standing Orders or Model Standing Orders, it cannot be said that the right of appeal is merely procedural and the workman was not prejudiced nor could make a grievance about the same.
On the contrary, the right of appeal confers on the workman the right for reconsideration of his case by the employer himself.
In that appeal as provided under the Model Standing Orders, the workman has a right to be heard.
It is, therefore, an important right conferred on the workman by the Model Standing Orders.
The workman is entitled for an entire re-consideration of the findings based on the material on record.
Failure to comply thereto with the said Model Standing Order must be held, to result in failure of justice and consequently the order of dismissal must be held to be bad subject to the employers right to lead evidence.
14.
We may now examine whether the principles of natural justice and fair play were complied with in the conduct of the enquiry proceedings and the submission of the report by the Enquiry Committee.
In the first instance, it must be remembered that order of dismissal initially passed was set aside pursuant to minutes of the order filed in Writ Petition (bodg.)
(sic) No. 600 of 1996 on 6th June, 1996.
In terms of the direction, the Enquiry Committee was to recommence the proceedings from the stage of recording of the plea of the petitioner.
The Enquiry Committee had that in mind as seen from the minutes recorded on 4th July, 1996 when Shri DG Nayar, General Manager (Maintenance) was examined as a Management witness.
Apart from his the respondent No. 1 examined one Shri K Prabhakaran, Assistant Security Officer and Shri KKA Kishore Additional General Manager, Engineering Head Quarters.
The Enquiry Report of the second enquiry, the recommenced enquiry if so described would show that the enquiry committee in paragraph 102 relied on Exhibit No. 1 which is purported to have been produced by respondents.
It has also relied on Exhibit "A" office note of Shri KKA Kishore.
From the records of the enquiry before this court at least I do not find that the said report had been taken on record at the enquiry unless it had been taken on record when the enquiry had earlier commenced and before the petitioner came to this Court.
On the other hand, the petitioner in his final statement had produced a statement signed by the entire LMD and some MMD staff wherein they had pointed out that the petitioner had not instigated or was involved in any way in keeping them away from work on 1st February, 1996.
This finds no reference in the report submitted bearing in mind that the charge against the petitioner was that he had instigated staff who had reported for duty to go on strike.
The copy of the first findings has also been produced before me.
From that I find various documents were taken on record.
The report dated 1st February, 1996 of Shri DG Nayar and report dated 1st February, 1996 of Mr KKA Kishore which have already been referred to, in so far as workman is concerned the representation by the LMD staff had been taken on record as Exhibit No. 2.
In the second enquiry reference is made to some documents of the petitioner herein under paragraph 24 of the enquiry proceedings.
In view of the same and as the petitioner has been appearing in person I had called on the respondents to produce both the reports given by Shri DG Nayar and Shri KKA Kishore.
An examination of the said documents, if had been considered by the enquiry committee, certainly some explanation would have to be given.
It am not, however, concerned with that aspect.
Suffice it to say that the Enquiry Committee while recording its findings has not taken into consideration the representation by the staff of LMD which was before it, but has taken into account the report of Shri Kishore which at least had not been produced when he was examined at the second enquiry.
All that can be said is that it was on record pursuant to the first enquiry.
We therefore have a case where the enquiry committee has taken note of some documents and excluded others.
To my mind considering that the petitioner was appearing in person, non-consideration of document on record and selective consideration of some documents must result in holding that the Enquiry Committee failed to comply with the principles of natural justice and fair play.
The documents not considered or ignored had a vital bearing on the charges levelled against the petitioner and the evidence produced before the Committee.
To my mind on that count also the enquiry is liable to be set aside.
15.
We then come to the issue whether the findings are perverse, was there material before the Enquiry Committee to arrive at the conclusion that they have arrived at, that the petitioner was guilty of the charges levelled against the petitioner.
On behalf of the respondent No. 1 their learned Counsel has relied on the Judgment in the case of State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, AIR 1977 SC 1512 : (1977 Lab IC 845) to contend that at a domestic enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence will not apply and that there is no allergy to consider hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
To the same effect is the Judgment of the Apex Court in the case of JD Jain v. The Management of State Bank of India, AIR 1982 SC 673 : (1982 Lab IC 356) wherein the Apex Court has considered what can be said to be hearsay evidence.
The Apex Court noted that the word `hearsay' is used in various senses.
Sometimes, it means whatever a person declares on information given by someone else.
For the purpose of departmental enquiry, complaint, certainly not frivolous, but substantiated by circumstantial evidence, is enough.
In that case there was a verbal complaint in respect of the withdrawal of excess money from the Bank.
That complaint was made in presence of four witnesses.
The complainant could not be examined but four witnesses in whose presence the complaint was made were examined.
The Court held that evidence was direct and therefore not hearsay.
In the instant case as already set out the charge against the workman was striking work and/or inciting others to strike work in contravention of the provisions of any law or rules having the force of law.
In so far as striking work is concerned the Enquiry Committee in paragraph 107 has given finding as under :-  "The charge-sheeted employee had entered the Hangar with a purpose even though he had requested for leave which was granted to him".
It is, therefore clear, on that day the petitioner according to finding of the Enquiry Committee was on leave.
If he was on leave, he could not have struck work.
Even Shri Gogoi in his letter of 25th November, 1996 had informed him in reply to the petitioner's letter of 11th November, 1996 that he was being charged for instigating other employees who had reported for work.
Thus it could not be said that the first part of the Standing Order 14(3)(k) was attracted.
The issue then would be whether there was material in support of the other charges of riotous or disorderly behaviour during working hours at the establishment or any act subversive of discipline.
Even if therefore the petitioner was not on strike, he still could be charge-sheeted, if it could be shown that he was in the establishment during working hours which has not been denied.
But it had to be further proved that the petitioner had indulged in riotous or disorderly behaviour or any act subversive of discipline or instigation of staff who had reported for duty to go on strike.
When the petitioner represented by his letter of 11th November, 1996 (21st November, 1996) Shri Gogoi by his letter of 25th November, 1996 clearly informed him that he was charge-sheeted for instigating the employees who had reported for duty in other areas to join illegal strike sponsored by group of employees on 1st February, 1996.
No reference is made to the second charge.
However, we may assume that before the Competent Authority the findings of the Enquiry Committee on that count was also available.
If the office note of Shri DG Nayar dated 1st February, 1996 is considered it sets out that at 1100 am on 1st February, 1996 he found Mr. AR Joshi, Senior Foreman and Shri KV Deshpande, Officiating foreman of LMD talking to group of people in Hangar No. 2.
They were instigating staff and telling them not to work and also to leave the premises.
It is his case that he immediately told Mr. Joshi and Mr. Deshpande to go out of the premises or else he would call security to drive them out from the area.
Subsequently, they left the premises.
In his oral evidence recorded on 4th July, 1996 in his statement all that he states is that on 1st February, 1996, during the industrial unrest he was trying to mobilise the MMD staff to go on work in LMD area and that when he went to take a round, Mr. AR Joshi was surrounded by a group of Technicians and a vehement discussion was going on.
When he approached them the discussion stopped.
He asked Mr. Joshi to leave the Hangar as he was not in MMD, which he did.
The Enquiry Committee has examined Shri DG Nayar.
The Enquiry Committee asked Shri DG Nayar whether MMD staff proceeded to LMD after Joshi left the LMD Hangar as per his instruction.
His answer was that out of the many bus load of staff sent from MMD to LMD only few returned, rest worked in LMD.
He was asked whether the petitioner was in MMD Hangar for a purpose or support required by MD.
His answer was he does not know because the petitioner did not tell him anything.
The Enquiry Committee then asked Shri Nayar whether taking the entire scenario, as to what Shri Joshi was doing in that Hangar, especially when he was not on duty.
The answer given was that the staff were generally agitated about the on-going industrial dispute so it looked as though they were discussing that day's industrial scenario.
Another question was whether the staff went to work after discussion.
Answer was on terminating the discussion he asked Joshi to leave that area and then MMD staff were asked to get on with the job which they did.
In cross-examination the petitioner asked Shri Nayar if there was any restriction of any staff having Identity Card to enter the premises.
The answer was a clear `no'.
The next question was whether he left the Hangar as per instruction of Shri Nayar, the answer was `yes'.
then a direct question was put by Shri Joshi as under :-  "Was I instigating the staff ?"
The answer was as reproduced below :-  "No.
I cannot say either way because I have not heard what you and your colleagues were talking.
However, since there was a group of staff around you who have come on duty and there was commotion in that area, I assumed there was difference of opinion and to preclude any possibility of further disturbance I asked you to leave the MD (LMD ?)
Hangar."
The witness was further asked whether apart from petitioner any other LMD staff was there along with him.
The answer was one Shri KV Deshpande, Offg.
Foreman was also there.
The further answer is that Shri Deshpande at a slight distance was talking to few other MMD staff.
The next witness examined was Shri K Prabhakaran.
At the hearing held on 18th July, 1996 the enquiry committee merely reproduced the report of Shri Prabhakaran already given in previous enquiry.
What is relevant from that is the following :-  "On enquiry from the staff, it is learnt that Mr. Deshpande, Mr. Joshi and other staff of LMD threatened them and sent them back.
Afterwards those staff of MMD were not willing to go back in spite of the Security coverage given to them."
His statement was once again recorded on 25th July, 1996.
In this statement he has stated as under :-  "On enquiry from few of the staff, I came to know that LMD staff threatened them and sent them back."
It was the Enquiry committee who sought clarification as to who amongst the staff of LMD who threatened the staff who had come.
The answer given is the striking staff of LMD were led by Mr. AR Joshi and Mr. Deshpande.
For reasons set out in the proceedings, the petitioner had protested against the manner in which the enquiry was conducted and had refused to cross-examine the said witness.
In view of that the evidence of said witness was closed.
We then have the statement of Shri KKA Kishore whose office note I have already reproduced.
In his office note dated 1st February, 1996 which has been considered by the Enquiry Committee though it was not produced by him, he has stated that he had sent technicians and cleaners from MMD to LMD at about 800 am on 1st February, 1996.
It is then set out that staff who were sent to LMD after a short while returned back because Shri Joshi, Sr. Foreman and Shri KV Deshpande, Offg.
Foreman of LMD threatened them with dire consequences, if they get down from the bus and worked in the LMD.
He arranged security protection and requested them to proceed to LMD, however, the staff refused to go.
In his statement, he has set out that on coming to know that there was mass absenteeism of staff of LMD he came and tried to mobilize staff and proceed to LMD to carry on the job.
It is his evidence that at 800 am one vehicle came to Major Maint, followed by another vehicle in about 15 to 20 minutes from the arrival of the first vehicle.
The witness and Shri DG Nayar, then Additional General Manager, MMD requested the staff to proceed to LMD in the vehicle which have come in front of Hangar No. 2.
The staff from Cabin and Major Maint, got into the vehicle and proceeded to LMD.
At around 915 am one of the vehicles came back from LMD and staff got down from the bus and came to the Hangar.
He enquired of the staff as to why they had come back.
It was conveyed to him that they were not allowed to get down for the bus as they were threatened by Shri AR Joshi and Shri KV Deshpande, Sr. Foreman and Offg.
Foreman with dire consequences.
In spite of his offering security the staff did not go.
The Enquiry Committee then enquired of him whether any strike notice was given by the employee to which he answered as yes and the notice was given by Mr. VA George.
In the cross examination of the witness, the witness has stated that he has not seen the petitioner in any of the Hangar.
When the witness was asked at what time the MMD staff was sent to LMD hangar, his answer was that it was given in his earlier statement.
He was then specifically asked as under :-  "Have your seen Mr. Joshi participating or instigating other employees in the strike which was held on 121996 ?"
The answer given was as below :-  "I do not recollect.
The above questions are purely testing my memory.
Whenever, I was told that people had been gathering at difference places I did see some people in front of the Old THQ gathered but I do not recollect their faces as such."
This evidence was recorded on 9th October, 1996.
The incident is supposed to have happened on 1st February, 1996.
The petitioner was examined.
In his deposition he has stated that the LMD Hangar was empty, there was no aircraft in LMD.
MMD Hangar was having 747-200 aircraft.
In the final statement recorded the petitioner has stated that he had applied for leave on 1st February, 1996, on 31st January, 1996 and the leave was granted.
There is no restriction for Air India staff to enter Air India premises in their leave period and he had come on 1st February, 1996 to invite some of his friends for his marriage anniversary party.
Extracts of evidence reproduced are considering the issue being considered and the finding already given that the enquiry was in non-compliance of the Model Standing Orders and the principles of natural justice.
This is the evidence on record.
From this evidence can it be said that the findings of the Enquiry Committee as upheld by Shri Gogoi that the charges are proved can be sustained.
As already pointed out Enquiry Committee itself has given a finding that the petitioner was not on duty on that date.
The charge against the workman was that he instigated employees in other areas who reported for work.
The evidence on records is that LMD staff had gone on mass absenteeism.
No one has stated that those employees posted in LMD had reported for work or were instigated not to work.
The charge, therefore, can only be in other work areas i.e. MMD.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner instigated the staff in LMD.
On the contrary as set out earlier from the evidence of the Management witnesses itself, more specifically Mr. Kishore, it is clear that there was mass absenteeism in LMD.
The staff of LMD gave a representation that they had not reported to work and that the petitioner had nothing to do with this.
In so far as MMD is concerned, again we have considered the evidence of both the witnesses Shri Nayar and Shri Kishore.
Shri Kishore has not seen the petitioner.
The only other evidence was of Shri Nayar which has been reproduced earlier wherein he stated that he found the petitioner surrounded by some workers, when he was asked to go, he left and the workers resumed their duty.
It was not the case of the management that the workers in MMD went on strike.
On the contrary their case was that they had sent staff from MMD to LMD.
At least the evidence of Shri Nayar does not say that the LMD staff were instigated by the petitioner to go on strike.
In his cross- examination, the question directly put to him has been reproduced.
The first answer of the witness was an emphatic `No'.
After that he said he cannot say.
At least, therefore, there is no material to hold that the petitioner had instigated the staff of LMD to go on strike.
16.
The next charge is that the petitioner threatened staff, who were sent from MMD to LMD to meet exigency of work with dire consequences.
No member of the staff who had gone from MMD to LMD and who was threatened has been examined.
No explanation has been offered as to why they were not examined.
It is also not the case that none of those staff is available.
On the contrary from the evidence of Shri Nayar it is clear that on a question by the enquiry committee whether the MMD staff proceeded to LMD he has answered that out of many bus load of staff sent from MMD to LMD only few returned, rest worked in LMD.
In so far as Shri Kishore is concerned, he has stated that the staff from MMD to LMD were sent on a request being made by him and Shri DG Nayar.
It is Shri Kishore who states that one of the vehicles came back on the ground that staff was threatened and they would not go in spite of the security.
Now what is material is that the names of both the petitioner as a foreman and Shri KV Deshpande as the Offg.
Foreman were included.
Nothing seems to have come on record as to whether any action was taken against Shri Deshpande.
It may be mentioned that this exercise has been done in the interest of justice as the petitioner is appearing in person.
The petitioner has asked question about Shri Deshpande but did not proceed to ask further, whether any enquiry was conducted against Shri Deshpande and what was the punishment meted out to him, as the same role alleged against the petitioner was also alleged against him.
It is in this context that the nature of evidence has to be considered.
No witness who was threatened has been examined though available.
The petitioner was seen only in the MMD Hangar.
In his statement he may have said that he had gone for the LMD Hangar but has also stated that there was nobody in the LMD Hangar nor any aircraft.
Therefore, the evidence holding that the petitioner had threatened the staff, to my mind, also was not proved.
The purported hearsay evidence as given in this case could not have been considered.
17.
After the totality of this evidence is examined it will be clear that the findings at least in respect of the first charge are totally perverse.
So also would be in the case of the second charge if the evidence considered to be hearsay is rejected.
On that count also the enquiry and consequent dismissal based upon the enquiry is liable to be set aside.
18.
We then come to the third contention in so far as the compliance with the requirement of Section 33(2)(b) is concerned.
The petitioner in so far as this charge is concerned has contended as seen in his reply to the application that he was not paid a month's wages nor was the dismissal letter served upon him.
The learned Industrial Tribunal, however, came to the finding that the cheque was received by Shri Joshi.
This was based on a purported writing by the witness who had gone to give the letter of dismissal and the cheque for one month's wages to the petitioner at his residence on behalf of respondent No. 1 at 1830 hrs.
The note indicates the return of the cheque and that he could not give acknowledgement for any letter which is backdated.
The petitioner's signature thereon is in Marathi.
The argument of the petitioner is that the signature on the letter is not his signature.
That has not come clearly in his evidence.
However, the respondent No. 1 had not come to the Court on the ground that they had complied with the requirement of Section 33(2)(b) by sending cheque and letter by personal delivery at the residence of the petitioner.
On the contrary in their application before the tribunal for approval they have stated that both the cheque and letter of dismissal was sent by registered post.
The learned Tribunal has not taken note of the said variation between the pleadings of the respondent No. 1 and the evidence led before it.
Therefore that finding of compliance is also set aside and the issue is remanded for re-consideration in the context of pleading and proof.
19.
We may consider some of the judgments cited for the purpose of finding out exactly the duty cast on the Tribunal while considering an application under Section 33(2)(b).
The purpose behind the requirement of complying with payment of one month's wages and impugned application before the Tribunal is set out in the Judgment of the Apex Court in the case of MD Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation v. Neethivilangan Kumbakonam, 2001(2) SCT 1118 (SC) : 2001 AIR SCW 2023 : (2001 Lab IC 1801) (Para 11) :-  "The purpose of the prohibitions contained in Section 33 is two- fold.
On the one hand, they are designed to protect of industrial conciliation, arbitration and adjudication, against employer's harassment and victimisation, on account of their having raised the industrial dispute or their continuing the "pending proceedings", on the other they seek to maintain status quo by prescribing management conduct which may give rise to "fresh disputes which further exacerbate the already strained relations between the employer and the workmen".
However, the section recognises the right of the employer to take necessary action like the discharge or dismissal on justified grounds.
To achieve this object, ban has been imposed upon the employer exercising his common law, statutory or contractual right to right to terminate the services of his employees according to the contract or the provisions of law governing such service.
The ordinary right of the employer to alter the terms of his employee's services to their prejudice or to terminate their services under the general law governing the contract of employment has been banned subject to certain conditions."
In Swatantra Bharat Mills, New Delhi v. Ratan Lal, (1960) 1 Lab LJ 558 : (AIR 1961 SC 1156) the Apex Court was considering the issue as to what the Court considering the petition for approval under Section 33(2)(b) must consider.
The Apex Court observed that all that the tribunal must enquire is as to whether there was a prima facie case.
In Punjab Beverages Pvt Ltd., Chandigarh v. Suresh Chand, AIR 1978 SC 995 : (1978 Lab IC 693) the Apex Court observed as under (para 15) :-  "Where the Tribunal entertains an application for approval under Section 33(2)(b) on merits, it applies its mind and considers whether the dismissal of the workman amounts to victimization or unfair labour practice and whether a prima facie case has been made out by the employer for the dismissal of the workman.
If the tribunal finds that either no prima facie case has been made out or there is victimisation or unfair labour practice, it would refuse to grant approval and reject the application on merits.
Then of course the dismissal of the workman would be void and inoperative, but that would be because the Tribunal having held that no prima facie case has been made out by the employer or there is victimisation or unfair labour practice, it has refused to lift the ban."
What has to be considered while granting or refusing approval is the law as laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Lalla Ram v DCM Chemical Works Ltd, (1978) 3 SCC 1 : (1978 Lab IC 716).
The Apex Court after considering case law has laid down the following principles in so far as granting approval :-  (a) Whether a proper domestic enquiry in accordance with the relevant rules, Standing Orders and principles of natural justice has been held;  (b) Whether a prima facie case for dismissal based on legal evidence adduced before the domestic tribunal is made out;  (c) Whether the employer had come to a bona fide conclusion that the employee was guilty and the dismissal did not amount to unfair labour practice and was not intended to victimise the employee regard being had to the settled position that though generally the award of punishment of misconduct under the Standing Orders is a matter for the management to decide and the Industrial Tribunal is not required to consider the prosperity or adequacy of the punishment or whether it is excessive or too severe, yet, an inference of mala fides may, in certain cases be drawn from the imposition of unduly harsh, severe, unconscionable or shockingly disproportionate punishment;  (d) Whether the employer has paid or offered to pay wages for one month to the employees; and  (e) Whether the employer has, simultaneously or within such reasonably short time as to form part of the same transaction, applied to the authority before which the industrial dispute is pending for approval of the action taken.
The Apex Court then notes that if there is a compliance of the said requirements the approval would relate back to the date of the dismissal.
If the domestic enquiry, however, suffers from any defect or infirmity, the authority will have to find out on its own assessment of the evidence adduced before it whether there was justification for dismissal.
If it so finds, it will grant approval to the order of dismissal which would relate back to the date of dismissal, provided the employer had paid or offered to pay wages for one month to the employee and the employer had, within the time indicated above, applied to the proper authority for approval.
In this Judgment for the view being taken although the enquiry is set aside and the matter is being remanded for re-consideration.
I am on facts not applying the principles laid down in MD Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation (2001 Lab IC 1801) (supra) that the workman be treated as in continuous service and entitled to all consequential benefits, as the matter whether approval should be granted or not has to be decided.
I may also point out as the workman is appearing in person and as the enquiry shows that apart from the workman, the role of Shri Deshpande was similar.
What action was taken against Shri Deshpande would have been a relevant consideration to consider the issue of victimization, as in respect of similar conduct you cannot exclude one person, without showing how his case was different from that of the petitioner.
The order of the tribunal shows that the tests as required and as laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Lalla Ram (supra) were not fully considered.
To that extent the issue can be left open for reconsideration before the tribunal after parties are given an opportunity to lead their evidence.
20.
The only other issue that remains is whether the order of the Tribunal permitting Office Bearers to be represented considering Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act can be said to be justified.
To my mind considering the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Paradip Port Trust, Paradip v. Their Workmen, (1977) 2 SCC 339 : (1976 Lab IC 1770) a lawyer by himself cannot appear without the consent of the opposite party and leave of the tribunal.
Lawyer, however, can appear before the Tribunal in capacity of an office-bearer of a registered trade union or an officer of association of employers and no consent of the other side and leave of the tribunal will, then be required.
Once such a question arises it is for the Tribunal to decide on the facts of each case.
The Tribunal in this case after considering the material has held that Shri Pawaskar is an officer of the Federation.
Once that be the finding, to my mind, no case is made out for disturbing the said finding.
Though authorities were cited, I do not propose to go into those judgments considering the findings recorded.
21.
The only other aspect which needs to be touched upon is the case of the petitioner that even assuming that one month's wages were sent or handed over by cheque, those were not wages to which he would be entitled to.
It is his case that productivity linked allowance was not included in the said amount computed as one month's wages.
The petitioner has been unable to show any settlement under which an employee not on duty is entitled to claim productivity linked allowance.
Some circular was tried to be shown which to my mind does not answer the issue.
The Tribunal has recorded the finding that productivity linked allowance is payable only in the event the workmen contributes for production.
The learned tribunal relied upon a circular by management that those who participated in the demonstration and hunger strike are not eligible for productivity incentive allowance.
In terms of the settlement, performance linked incentive payment was not to be accounted for pay for any purpose and it was payable to workers on their fulfilling the revised productivity norm.
The Tribunal then held that when the petitioner was not working he would not be eligible for productivity linked allowance.
To my mind, therefore, this is a finding of fact.
There is nothing before me to hold that the said finding is perverse or contrary to any settlement.
In the light of that the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner on that count must be rejected.
The finding on this issue stands concluded and it will not be an issue for consideration by the Tribunal on remand.
22.
Petition is made partly absolute, in terms of prayer clause (a).
The order dated 31st May, 1999 is quashed and set aside.
The order dated 10th February, 1999 is affirmed.
The matter is remanded to the National Industrial Tribunal to dispose of the same in terms of the directions contained in the judgment within six months from today and in terms of what has been set out in the body of the judgment.
Rule discharged in Writ Petition No 1523 of 1997.
In the circumstances of the case, each party to bear their own costs.
All Authorities concerned to act on the ordinary copy of this order duly authenticated by Associate of this Court.
P.A.
to give ordinary copy of this order to the parties concerned.
Order accordingly.