Swatanter Kumar, J - These petitions are directed against the award pronounced by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat dated 16.4.2001.
Vide the impugned award the learned Labour Court answered the reference against the workman.
According to the workman he was appointed and worked with the management as Chowkidar on monthly salary of Rs. 1150/- from 2571994 to 141997.
His services were terminated without following due process of law.
He prayed for reinstatement, continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
Upon reference being made by the appropriate Government, notice was issued to the management, who took up the stand before the Labour Court that the petitioner had no locus standi and the claim petition was not maintainable, relationship of employer and employee was denied and objection with regard to misjoinder of parties was also taken.
3.
The stand of the Haryana Financial Corporation was that it had entered into an agreement dated 2731992 with Universal Security Agency to provide security services.
This agreement was terminated on 3131997 and another security agency was engaged for the purposes of providing security to various units which were taken over by the Corporation.
4.
The learned Labour Court framed the issues.
However, issues No. 2 and 3 can be usefully referred at this stage :-  1.
Whether reference petition against Haryana Financial Corporation is maintenance ?
OPW  2.
Whether petitioner was employee of M/s. Universal Security Agency, if so, to what effect ?
OPM.
5.
The case of the workman was that he is employee of Haryana Financial Corporation.
However, he produced no evidence, oral or documentary, to show that he was employee of the Haryana Financial Corporation.
Even in his statement he could not give the name of the employer.
It was for the workman to discharge the preliminary onus in regard to relationship of employer and employee.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner even could not refer to any evidence on record which could remotely suggest that petitioner was employee of the Haryana Financial Corporation.
He himself states that he is not employee of the security agency.
As such the claim was rightly rejected by the learned Labour Court.
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioners relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Suresh and others, 1999(2) SCT 600 (SC) : 1999(2) SLR 1 to contend that the Court should lift the veil and find the reality of existence of relationship between the Haryana Financial Corporation and the workman.
No doubt the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the basis of the evidence before the Court held that the veil should be lifted and exploitation of labour should be prevented.
Their Lordships held.
"The so-called contract system was a mere camouflage, smoke and a screen and disguised in almost a transparent veil which could easily be pierced and the real contractual relationship between the Haryana State Electricity Board on the one hand and the employees on the other hand could be clearly visualised."
The learned Counsel also relied upon the case of M/s. Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd v. State of UP (All.
), 1999(4) SCT 348.
7.
The principle of law afore-noticed cannot be disputed.
However, it was for the workman to bring on record minimum cogent and relevant evidence in support of his claim of employment.
The situation created in the present case is attributable to none-else but the workman himself.
In absence of any evidence, no reasonable person could come to a finding other than the one recorded by the Labour Court.
In fact, in the afore-noticed cases of Haryana State Electricity Board and M/s. Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd it was observed by the Court that in the finding of facts recorded by the Labour Court the High Court should not normally interfere.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated, we see no merit in these petition.
The same are dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.