Amitava Lala, J - This writ petition is virtually made for the purpose of transfer of the writ petitioner from the School in question to any other School taking various grounds in such writ petition.
However, a Special Officer was appointed by this Court on 7.1.1999 for the purpose of enquiry as to the state of affairs and furnish a report before this Court.
However, with the intervention of the Special Officer as well as the Assistant Inspector of Schools, the petitioner joined the Institution.
Therefore, there is no question of any such allegation as made in the writ petition.
Now, the remaining question is in respect of giving the financial benefit when the incumbent was absent in the Institution.
2.
According to the petitioner, the petitioner was prevented from joining his service but as per the School authority the petitioner was voluntarily absented from joining in the School.
The petitioner has relied upon a judgment in the case of Pran Gopal Roy and ors. v. Lakshmi Banerjee, reported in 1996(1) SCT 680 (Calcutta) : 1995(5) S.L.R.
694 wherein a single Bench of this Court held that when an incumbent has worked in his working place and no departmental proceeding was initiated as against him, such incumbent is entitled for the salary being a property within the meaning of Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
But before drawing up an inference in this respect one has to come to a definite conclusion as to whether the writ petitioner voluntarily absented himself from joining his service or he was actually prevented from his duties.
This cannot be decided by the Writ Court at this stage without a proper inference in this respect by an appropriate authority.
3.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-school authority has relied upon an order of the Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) South 24- Parganas, under Memo.
No. Gen/2025/1(2) dated 481998 to the extent that "this unauthorised absence of Sri Sardar amounts to dereliction of duties."
4.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner contended before this Court that there is a specific provision in the Management Rules of the School Code under Section 28(8) and (9) prescribed for the purpose of taking a disciplinary proceeding to the extent of the order of suspension or dismissal or removal of the service.
Therefore, until and unless a decision to that extent is taken by way of disciplinary proceeding, it cannot be said that the petitioner did not perform his duties.
It is not known to the petitioner what prevented the school authority in drawing up a preceding taking the leave or approval from the appropriate authority.
To that extent, to come to a definite conclusion the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the School authority contended before this Court that there is one non-teaching staff in the school and in such situation a drastic step, if taken in the process as proposed, then the School will run without any non-teaching staff.
This was not the desire of the School.
Therefore, the incumbent cannot take advantage of the situation nor for the generosity of the school in this respect.
Therefore, to come to a conclusion whether the petitioner will be allowed to get the salaries and benefits for the period or not, the Court has to draw a line herein.
5.
The Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the concerned District Inspector of Schools contended before this Court that as per the circular being No. 1071 Edn.
(S)/IS-1977 dated 19th August, 1977, the Joint Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, issued a Memorandum on behalf of the State that what will happen in respect of absence of Teaching and Non-teaching Employees of Recognised Non-Government Secondary School, prevented under dures from attending their Schools and performing normal duties.
As per such Memorandum, the incumbent in such case will get the incremental benefits as a special case.
6.
According to the learned Counsel that he was prevented by the school authority from joining his service, so he is governed by such circular for incremental benefit.
7.
The Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the School authority contended before this Court that by citing a Single Bench judgment that the petitioner cannot say that the same is the last word of law specially in view of several Supreme Court and High Court judgments.
Moreover, it has to be construed that a person actually worked did not give any salary in that respect.
8.
The Learned Counsel appearing on benefit of the School authority has also cited a judgment in the case of Bank of India v. TS Kelawala and Ors, reported in 1991(3) SCT 503 (SC) : 1990(4) SCC 744, wherefrom I get as follows :  "It is not enough the employees attend the place of work.
They must put in the work allotted to them.
It is for the work and not for their mere attendance that the wages/salaries are paid.
For the same reason, if the employees put in the allotted work but do not, for some reason - may be even as a protest - comply with the formalities such as signing the attendance register, no education can be effected from their wages.
When there is a dispute as to whether the employees attended the place of work or put in the allotted work or not, and if they have not, the reasons therefor etc. the dispute has to be investigated by holding an inquiry into the matter.
In such cases, no deduction from the wages can be made without establishing the omission and or commission on the part of the employee is concerned."
9.
Therefore, after considering all pros and cons I hold that in case of omission and commission one principle has to be followed which cannot be fit in an appropriate Rule 28(8) of the Management Rules, 1963 under the School Code to the extent for removal order, dismissal or termination order of the temporary employees including suspension.
But such omission and commission has to be decided under the proper perspective.
10.
In the instant case, there is already an observation by the concerned District Inspector of Schools which may cause prejudice if I send the matter to him.
Therefore, I find that the question as to whether the petitioner was prevented from joining the School or temporarily absented himself from his duties in the School will have to be decided by the appropriate authority, i.e.
The Director of School Education, West Bengal.
The decision has to be given by the Director of School Education, West Bengal, upon giving an opportunity of hearing to all the parties and by passing a reasoned order thereon within a period of 8 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
For the purpose of effective adjudication, a copy of the writ petition along with all annexures can also be treated as representation of the petitioner.
11.
As a result of the same, the demand of any salary, if any, to the extent of giving incremental benefits as prescribed under the Circular will be given by the Director of School Education, West Bengal actually which will remain effective upon the parties in future consequently other financial benefit will be treated as notionally.
The Special Officer so appointed by this Court is discharged herein without any remuneration because of the reason that he himself refused to receive any remuneration in view of the financial stringency of the petitioner which has been recorded herein and certified the conduct of the special officer.
The writ petition is, thus disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
A letter written by the petitioner dated 25895 filed in Court today be kept with the record.
Let an urgent xeroxed certified copy of this judgment and order if applied for, be given to the Learned Advocates for the parties within 7 days from the date of submitting the requisites.
Order accordingly.