BH Marlapalle, J - The petitioner was enroled in the Army as General Duty Clerk in Corps of Signals at Aurangabad, on 12587 and after completing his training period came to be posted at 15 in Infantry Divisional Signal Regiment, at Amritsar in September, 1988.
He claims to have suffered Central Nervous System Seizures in 1990-91 and was therefore, operated for Bilateral Recurrent Dislocation of Shoulders Joint, in Military Hospital, Jalandhar.
As a result of this operation he was primarily placed in Low Medical Category "CEE" (Temporary) for six months and was thereafter upgraded to Low Medical Category "BEE" (Permanent).
He was continued in the same medical category and was granted sheltered appointment.
In August 1992 he was posted at Signals Records at Jabalpur.
He got married with Pratibha @ Varsha @ Prajakta on 17.12.1993 while on casual leave from 13th to 27 December, 1993.
On expiry of the leave he rejoined his duties at Signals Records, Jabalpur and again suffered from Bilateral Recurrent Dislocation of Shoulders joint.
He was,therefore, admitted in Military Hospital at Jabalpur on 1211994 and came to be transferred to the Military Hospital, Kirkee (Khadki) Pune, for major orthopaedic surgery.
He was operated and hospitalised from 8.1.94 till the end of January 1995.
After discharge from the hospital, he joined his duties at Signals Records, Jabalpur and on his request he was posted to 4 Radio Monitoring Company, Wanowrie, Pune in May, 1995 on medical grounds for a period of two years.
2.
The petitioner alleges that after he came to be posted at 4 Radio Monitoring Company, Wanowrie, his problems started at the instance of his wife Prajakta.
He claims that the respondent No. 9 started harassing, illtreating and abusing him, as a result of which he lost his mental balance on 29.12.95 and came to be hospitalised in the Psychiatrical Ward of Command Hospital (Southern Command), Pune, wherefrom he was discharged on 2411996.
On 13296 he submitted a representation to respondent No. 5 with a copy to respondent No. 6 listing out his grievances.
He claims that this representation was submitted to get protection from the illtreatment at the hands of respondent No. 9.
His parents came to Pune on 14296 and met the respondent No. 9 as well with a request to release the petitioner on authorised leave, so that he could be taken for medical treatment to Jalgaon.
His leave was sanctioned from 15.2.96 to 14496.
On 19296 the petitioner's parents submitted a representation to the President of India.
On 14.3.96 the respondent No. 8 issued a telegram asking him to rejoin on 20396, for Release Medical Board.
This telegram was received by the petitioner on the same day and on 15.3.96 he replied it intimating his inability to rejoin as he was undergoing medical treatment.
Respondent No. 8 despatched another telegram on 18.3.96 to the petitioner cancelling his leave and asking him to rejoin on 22396 without fail.
The petitioner did not rejoin and instead on 22396 he submitted a detailed representation listing out his grievances of illtreatment and harassment at the hands of respondent No. 9.
The respondent No. 8 addressed a letter to the District Superintendent of Police and District Collector at Jalgaon on 29496 informing them that the petitioner was absent without leave with effect from 15496 and to take steps to apprehend the petitioner and to hand over him to the regimental centre/unit.
A copy of the said letter was also addressed to the petitioner's father informing him that the petitioner had over-stayed his leave from 15496 and he was directed to report back forthwith.
The petitioner's father submitted a letter to the Superintendent of Police and the Collector, Jalgaon on 6596 stating therein that the petitoner had over-stayed the sanctioned leave for justifiable reasons.
A similar letter was also addressed by the petitioner to respondent No. 6 on 9.5.96.
It wouldm be desirable to Note at this stage that in the said letter the petitioner clearly stated that till the investigations into his representations against respondent No. 1 were finalised, he ought to continue his leave for the sake of his life and the leave period may be regularised.
3.
The petitioner did not report for duty and engaged in correspondence with the office of the President of India and other respondents.
On 41296 the respondent No. 7 addressed a letter to the petitioner's wife at her matrimonial address stating therein that the petitioner was declared as deserter from service with effect from 15496 and the credit balance on finalisation of his accounts was Rs. 14,959/-.
She was called upon to forward an application for claiming the said amount so as to enable the office to process the case.
The said letter was delivered at the residential address of petitioner and therefore, he submitted a representation dated 20.12.96 to respondent No. 7 contending that he could not be treated or termed as a deserter in the absence of any procedure having been followed as required under the Army Act, 1950 and the Army Rules, 1954.
The petitioner continued to engage in the war of words with the authorities and did not take any steps to either report for duty or to surrender, for almost six months.
On 24797 he submitted a representation to respondents Nos. 6 and 8 reiterating his complaints against respondent No. 9 and praying for enquiry against him.
He stated in the said representation that using police force against him for securing his presence would be deterimental and against the spirit of his constitutional fundamental rights specially when he was not a criminal and had not committed any offence.
On 18997 he sent a telegram to the said authorities intimating his willingness to join duty on assurance of justice and safety to his life.
By telegraphic message dated 21.12.97 the respondent No. 8 called upon the petitioner to surrender to Superintendent of Police, Jalgaon for onwards disposal.
The petitioner did not surrender and on 11.2.98 he submitted a letter to respondent No. 6 requesting him to stay the departmental action against him and more particularly stating "I am ready and willing to join my duties provided, you give me simple assurance of safety to my life and liberty, and provide me the Duty Journey Warrant for joining my duties at 4 Radio Monitoring Company, Wanowrie, Pune."
A similar letter was sent on 21199 by the petitioner to respondent No. 6 and in para 6 of the said letter he stated "If, however, for some reasons it is not possible for you to issue me the said journey warrant, I am ready to join the duties at my own costs.
Your orders to me for joining my duties at the same Unit are kindly solicited."
The respondent No. 8 gave a telegraphic reply advising the petitioner to surrender to the nearest police authorities.
This telegram was replied by the petitioner on 521999 stating that he was not a deserter and the request of respondent No. 8 to the police authority to arrest the petitioner and produce was highly arbitrary and invasion on life and liberty.
The petitioner had also stated that he was moving the High Court to protect his fundamental rights.
He approached this Court on 5.4.1999 praying for directions to drop all actions against him, to return his personal belongings left behind while proceeding on leave on 14296, to pay all dues including pay and allowances with effect from 15496 and to pay the regular salary by money order treating him to be on active duty, to pay an amount of Rs. 14,959/- offered to his ex-wife Prajakta, to grant pensionary benefits as permissible after promotion to the possible higher rank in low medical category "BEE" and to rehabilitate him by means of giving him an employment in the Central Government in the same rank other than Armed Forces and finally directing Union of India to pay an amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- as penal costs for disturbance and damages to his social status due to involvement of police authorities which had caused him mental harassment.
(4) By communication dated 30799 the respondent No. 7 informed the petitioner that he was dismissed from army service with effect from 30499 under the provisions of Section 20(3) of the Army Act, 1950 and on 6899 the petitioner submitted a representation against the said order of dismissal and the petition came to be amended consequently by incorporating an additional prayer for declaration of the dismissal order as illegal.
5.
An affidavit in reply on behalf of the respondents No. 1 to 8 has been filed by a Lt. Col. Dhianchand Dogra, Station Headquarter at Aurangabad.
It has been contended in the said affidavit that as per AO No. 46/80 as no sheltered appointment was available in the unit for the petitioner, a discharge order was issued by Signals Records and therefore, the petitioner was required to report to the concerned office on 17796 for discharge formalities, which was a reason for cancellation of the petitioner's leave by telegram dt. 14.3.96.
As the petitioner failed to rejoin pursuant to the recall, he was declared a deserter after expiry of leave granted to him.
It is further stated that as the petitioner had not completed requisite service he was not entitled for any pensionary benefits and as on the date of the submission of the affidavit the petitioner was a deserter and he was required to submit before the Army authorities.
This affidavit in reply has been presented before us on 1012000 and there is no other affidavit stating the reasons or circumstances in support of the order of dismissal passed u/S 20(3) of the Army Act.
The affidavit in reply filed indicates that as on 1012000 the petitioner was required to surrender.
The petitioner has filed written pleadings in support of his contentions that the order of dismissal is illegal and contrary to the provisions of the Army Act and rules thereunder.
6.
At our instance the original file maintained by respondents Nos. 6 and 8 has been submitted before us.
It is evident from the said file that by General Order dated 26699 (Part II) as many as 74 army men came to be dismissed from service by invoking the powers u/S 20(3) of the Army Act by the respondent No. 6 and the petitioner's name is at serial No. 17 in the said order.
This dismissal is with effect from 30499 and by communication dated 30799 the Superintendent of Police at Jalgaon, was informed that the petitioner was dismissed from army service with effect form 30499.
A copy of the said order was forwarded to the petitioner's ex-wife.
In the said original file there is a communication dated 23499 submitted by respondent No. 6 regarding dismissal of 74 army men with effect from 30499 u/S 20(3) of the Army Act and it had not been practicable to comply with Army Rule 17 in these cases.
The file also shows that a Court of Enquiry as required u/S 106 of the Army Act was held on 15596 with Capt.
Pritam Singh as the Presiding Officer and two other members.
In all 5 witnesses were examined and findings were submitted on 26596 holding that the petitioner had over-stayed leave with effect from 15496 and was still absent.
The Court recommended that he be declared a deserter with effect from the said date.
This report was forwarded to the higher authority and it was indicated that after the approval was received a show cause notice would be issued to the petitioner as and when he would rejoin voluntarily.
Discharge order dt. 28296 in respect of 20 army men is on record and the name of the petitioner is at serial No. 16.
This order indicates that the petitioner was discharged on account of low medical category under Army Rule 13(3) Item III (IV) read in connection with sub-rule 2(A).
On 18.1.96 the respondent No. 1 submitted a note to respondent No. 6 stating therein that the petitioner should not be retained in service even a day longer than necessary for the reasons stated therein.
It was also observed that the petitioner was indisciplined and most of the unit's working time was spent in handling him which was not good for the unit discipline.
7.
When the affidavit in reply was presented before this Court on 1012000 it was contended by the respondents Nos. 1 to 8 that the petitioner was discharged from service u/S 46/80 and he was required to surrender to complete the formalities whereas on the other hand by General order he was dismissal from service u/S 20(3) of the Army Act with effect from 30499 and there is no justification in support of the order of dismissal in the affidavit in reply, in spite of the fact that the petition was amended before the affidavit in reply was filed and challenge to the legality of the dismissal order has been specifically raised.
During the course of arguments the learned Additional Standing Counsel for the respondents Nos. 1 to 8 submitted that the petitioner was dismissed by invoking the powers u/S 20(3) of the Army Act, as he remained absent without leave for a period over 3 years continuously i.e. from 16.4.96 onwards.
Respondent No. 6 is the competent officer to pass the said order by invoking the inherent powers and when the petitioner had admittedly failed to report for duty inspite of reminders/telegrams to surrender and rejoin, no further defence is required in support of the said order.
To a specific query as to whether the required procedure contemplated under the Army Act and the Rules thereunder was followed before the dismissal order was issued, no reply came forward from the learned Additional Standing Counsel and therefore, we had to scrutinise the original file to examine if there was any material indicating procedural compliance before the dismissal order was passed.
8.
AO No. 46/80 pertains to the disposal of permanent low medical category personnal and para 2 thereof sets out general principles in the following terms :  (a) "The employment of permanent low medical category personnel, at all times, is subject to the availability of suitable alternative appointment commensurate with their medical category and also to the proviso that this can be justified in the public interest and that their retention will not exceed the sanctioned strength of the regiment/corps.
When such an appointment is not available or when their retention is either not considered necessary in the interest of the service or it exceeds the sanctioned strength of the regiment/corps, they will be discharged irrespective of the service put in by them."
The affidavit in reply filed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1 to 8 opposed the petition on the basis of the abovementioned provisions of AO No. 46/80.
However, this stand has been given up subsequently on account of dismissal order having been passed with effect from 30499 u/S 20(3) of the Army Act and we are therefore, required to examine the legality of the said dismissal order and nothing else.
Sections 19, 20 and 22 of the Army Act deal with the termination of service, dismissal or removal from service and retirement, release or discharge from service respectively.
Section 39 of the said Act deals with absence without leave.
The relevant provisions of these sections are reproduced below for ready reference :  "19.
Termination of service by Central Government : Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from the service, any person subject to this Act.
20.
Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Chief of the Army Staff and by other officers.
(3) An officer having power not less than a brigade or equivalent commander or any prescribed officer may dismiss or remove from the service any person serving under his command other than an officer or a junior commissioned officer.
22.
Retirement, release or discharge : Any person subject to this Act may be retired, released or discharged from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.
39.
Absence without leave : Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say :  (a) absents himself without leave; or  (b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him, or  (c) being on leave of absence and having received information from proper authority that any corps, or portion of a corps, or any department, to which he belongs, has been ordered on active service fails, without sufficient cause to rejoin without delay; or  (d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appointed for exercise or duty; or  (e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his superior officer, quits the parade or line or march; or  (f) when in camp or garrison or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by any general, local or other order without a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or  (g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school when duly ordered to attend there;  shall, on conviction by Court martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
9.
Special Army order 9/S/89 deals with desertion and paragraph 20 prescribes the procedure for dismissal.
It states that a person subject to the Army Act, who does not surrender or is not apprehended will be dismissed from service under Section 19 read with Rule 14 or Section 20 read with Rule 17 as the case may be in accordance with the instructions.
Clause (b) of the said paragraph provides that an order of dismissal can be passed after 3 years of absence/desertion in other cases.
It is contended that the petitioner was covered under the provisions of Clause (b) of paragraph 20 of S.A. No. 9/S/89 and the impugned dismissal order has been issued under the said order.
10.
Rule 15 of the Army Rule, 1954 prescribes the procedure for termination of service by the Central Government on grounds other than misconduct, whereas Rule 15A provides for the procedure regarding release on medical grounds.
Rule 17 of the said Rules provides for the procedure for dismissal or removal by the Chief of the Army Staff and by other officer and it specifically states that no person shall be dismissed or removal under sub-section (1) or sub- section (3) of Section 20 of the Army Act, unless he has been informed of the particulars of the cause of action against him and allowed reasonable time to state in writing any reasons he may have to urge against his dismissal or removal from the service.
It further states that if in the opinion of the officer competent to order the dismissal or removal, it is not expedient or reasonably practicable to comply with the provisions of this rule, he may, after certifying to that effect, order the dismissal or removal without complying with the procedure set out in the said rule.
11.
Even if we presume that the respondent No. 6 was empowered to pass an order of dismissal against the petitioner under paragraph 20(b) of the S.AO 9/S/89 by invoking the powers u/S 20(3) of the Army Act, the mandatory procedure prescribed under Rule 17 of the Army Rules, 1954 is a condition precedent for such an order.
It is well settled principle in service jurisprudence that the procedural safeguards are significant and important and they ought to be followed/complied with by the authorities in support of the order of punishment or orders of removal/dismissal from service.
As stated earlier neither there is an affidavit in reply filed before us justifying that the respondent No. 6 had reached to a conclusion that it was not expedient or reasonably practicable to comply with the provisions of Rule 17 nor there is anything on record to show that any such opinion was arrived at and recorded by the said officer.
Notwithstanding the fact that the petitioner engaged merely in war of words for over a period of 3 years and did not report for duty, we cannot be unmindful of the fact that the respondent No. 6 was under statutory obligation to comply with the requirements of Rule 17 before the impugned order of dismissal was passed.
We have also noted that a copy of the dismissal order was never forwarded to the petitioner and mere intimation was given to his ex-wife.
We, express our dissatisfaction in this regard and we have no hesitation to hold that the mandatory provisions of Rule 17 of the Army Rules have been thrown over board by respondent No. 6 while passing the dismissal order against the petitioner, during the pendency of the instant petition.
It was the mandatory duty to respondent No. 6 to inform the particulars of cause of action against the petitioner and allow reasonable time to state in writing any reasons he may have to urge against his dismissal from service.
This has not been done.
In the case of Capt.
Virendra Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 947 : (1981 Lab IC 433) an order of dismissal came to be challenged before the Supreme Court on account of failure to comply with the procedure embodied under Rules 15 and 15A of the Army Rules and the Supreme Court held that failure to follow the procedure would invalidate the termination of service and even the top brass must act according to law as lawlessness in the Defence Force is a grave risk and the inevitable result of the invalidation of the termination of service would be that the army personal comes back into service.
The ratio laid down by the Apex Court applies to the instant case as well and the dismissal order passed against the petitioner without complying with the requirements of Rule 17 of the Army Rules cannot be sustained.
12.
However, as we have noted in the earlier paragraphs, it was the petitioner who did not report for duty and kept on writing letters praying for protection for his life and liberty under the pretext that he apprehended eminent danger to his life/safety at the hands of respondent No. 9 and his subordinates.
We are not impressed with the behaviour of the petitioner in not reporting or surrendering to respondent No. 8 and he must therefore, suffer the consequences.
It is for these reasons that the petitioner shall not be treated to be on duty for the purposes of his salary or other financial benefits as if on acting duty.
We must at this stage refer to the following observations of the Apex Court in the case of Capt.
Virendra Kumar (supra) (at page 436 of Lab IC) :  "The fact that the order of release or termination is invalid for non compliance with the procedural requirements does not make the officer a permanent or regular Commissioned Officer.
His services are still liable to be terminated, but the correct procedure has to be followed."
This view was reiterated by the Apex Court in its subsequent judgment in the case of Capt.
Virendra Kumar v. The Chief of the Army Staff, New Delhi, AIR 1986 SC 1060.
It is, therefore, obvious that the respondent Nos. 6 to 8 have the authority to proceed against the petitioner for remaining absent without leave from 16.4.96 onwards as per the provisions of the Army Act and the Rules framed thereunder as well as the special Army Orders issued from time to time.
13.
In the result, the order of dismissal passed u/S 20(3) of the Army Act, 1950 with effect from 30.4.1996 against the petitioner is hereby quashed and set aside with liberty to the respondents Nos. 1 to 8 to proceed against the petitioner afresh as per the provisions of the Army Act and the Rules framed thereunder including the special Army Orders issued from time to time, on account of absence without leave from 16.4.96 onwards.
The petitioner shall not be entitled for salary/allowances as if on active duty from 16.4.96 onwards till to date.
In case the respondents Nos. 1 to 8 desire to proceed against the petitioner afresh, the said action shall be completed within a period of three months from today.
The petitioner to surrender forthwith.
14.
Rule made absolute in terms of the above order.
No costs.
Order accordingly.