JS Khehar, J - By this order, it is proposed to dispose of CWP Nos. 20155 of 2001 and 1112 of 2002 wherein the controversy relates to the validity of weightage prescribed in the prospectus for admission to MDS Courses for the academic Sessions 2001-2002 for which an entrance test was conducted by the Kurukshetra, University, Kurukshetra on 24102000.
It would be pertinent to mention that on the basis of merits of candidates determined by the aforesaid entrance test, admissions were to be made in post graduate dental courses being conducted at the Government Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar.
Another fact which needs to be noticed is that Government Dental College, Rohtak is affiliated to the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak whereas the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar is affiliated to Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
2.
The provision, the vires of which is the subject-matter for consideration of this Court, is a part of the prospectus for the MDS entrance examination for DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar and Government Dental College, Rohtak, 2001 issued by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
The same is being extracted hereunder :-  "Weightage.
(i) Weightage for graduates of Dental College, Rohtak, D.A.V.
Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar through All India (CBSE) quota who are resident/domicile of Haryana = 10 marks.
(ii) Weightage for candidates who are resident/domicile of Haryana but have passed their BDS from Dental Colleges other than the Dental College, Rohtak and D.A.V.
Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar."
= 05 marks.
3.
It is pointed out by the learned Counsel representing the petitioner in both the cases that Clause (i) has been invoked by the authorities so as to give weightage to two categories of candidates.
Firstly, to candidates who had qualified their graduation examination from the Government Dental College, Rohtak and the DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar, (i.e. to candidates having been admitted to the graduate course against the Sate quota).
Secondly, to candidates who had been admitted to the graduate course being conducted at the Government Dental College, Rohtak and the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar from all India quota (commonly known as the CBSE quota), who are domicile/residents of the State of Haryana.
4.
Learned Counsel for the respondent-University, Mr. SC Sibal concedes that Clause (i) of the weightage clause is not happily worded.
However, when read in conjunction with Clause (ii), it is obvious that the intent of the authorities, which framed the prospectus was to give weightage to the two categories referred to above.
Confining clause (i) only to those candidates, who were admitted to graduate course at the Government Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar against the all India seats is obviously absurd.
A collective analysis of the two clauses leads to the inevitable conclusion that the rule framing authority was desirous of granting weightage to domicile/residents of the State of Haryana whether or not they had passed the qualifying examination from the State of Haryana.
Those, who had passed the qualifying examination from an institution from outside the State of Haryana, and were also domicile/residents of the State were granted 10 marks (as weightage) under Clause (i).
Those who were domicile/residents in the State of Haryana, but had qualified the graduate examination from an institution other than the two institutions, referred to in Clause (i) were to be given weightage of 5 marks only.
Accordingly, on a harmonious construction of the two clauses, it is inevitable to conclude that the weightage conceived of in Clause (i) is for all candidates admitted to the State seats and to the all India seats, subject to the condition that they were domicile/residents of the State of Haryana.
Those eligible for weightage under Clause (i) were entitled to double the marks as against those eligible under Clause (ii) i.e. to 10 marks.
5.
The contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner in CWP No. 1112 of 2002 is that the weightage envisaged under the provisions extracted above can be described as institutional weightage i.e. weightage to grant preferential treatment to students who had qualified from a particular institute.
It is submitted that in the background of the provisions of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India, the provisions of weightage for institutional preference has repeatedly been declared to be ultra vires the Constitution of India.
To substantiate his claim, learned Counsel for the petitioner (in CWP No. 112 of 2002) has placed reliance on the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in PK Goel and others v. UP Medical Council and others, 1992(3) SCT 135 (SC) : AIR 1992 (SC) 1475, wherein the Court observed as under :-  "It is not necessary for us to labour on the point in issue inasmuch as the point stands concluded by the following decisions of the Court in State of Rajasthan v. Dr. Ashok Gupta, 1989(1) SCC 93 : AIR 1989 SC 177 and in Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Thukral, Anjali Deokumar, 1989(2) SCC 249 : AIR 1989 SC 1194.
In Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta's case, a benefit to the extent of 50% in total marks was given by way of college-wise institutional preference in Rajasthan and the same was struck down by this court on the ground of being unreasonable and arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution In Municipal Corporation of Great Bombay v. Thukral Anjali Deokumar (supra) the question was regarding admission to Post-graduate Degree/Diploma Courses in medical colleges run by Municipal Corporation and State Government.
College-wise institutional preference was given under Rule 4(A) of Rules for admissions framed by Bombay Municipal Corporation and Rule 5 framed under resolution for admission of Maharashtra Government.
This Court held as under (at page 1203 of AIR)."
"There is no intelligible differentia for the classification by way of college-wise institutional preference as provided by the impugned rules distinguishing the preferred candidates in respect of each college from those excluded from such classification.
By such classification or college-wise institutional preference, merit has been sacrificed, far less it has been preferred.
When the University is the same for all these colleges, the syllabus, the standard of examination and even the examiners are the same, any preference to candidates to the post-graduate degree course of the same University, except in order of merit, will exclude merit to a great extent affecting the standard of educational institution.
In such circumstances, college-wise institutional preference cannot be supported and, it has already been noticed that this Court has not approved of such preference at all."
6.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgment, it is submitted that the weightage of 10 marks out of a maximum of 200 marks has the effect of benefiting candidates eligible for weightage by 5% of the maximum marks.
In similar circumstances, it is submitted that weightage to the aforesaid extent was quashed by the Supreme Court as noticed above.
Learned Counsel also relied upon another Division Bench judgment of this court in Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(3) SCT 745 (P&H) (DB) : 2001(3) RSJ 394 wherein, it is observed as under :-  "We may now deal with the additional point raised in these writ petitions.
Petitioners in these writ petitions are students who have passed their MBBS examination from the college and are seeking admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses in the same College.
Their grievance is that for admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses the respondents have denied them 10 per cent weightage of the marks secured by them in PGET as being done before the issuance of the impugned notification dated 512001.
This weightage is claimed by the petitioners on the ground that they have passed the qualifying examination namely MBBS from the same College.
In other words, the petitioners are claiming college based institutional preference for admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses.
This claim of theirs has been resisted by the respondents particularly by the learned Counsel for the University on the ground that such a preference if allowed would be constitutionally invalid and would offend against the principles of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution This question is also not res integra and arose directly before the Apex Court in State of Rajasthan and another v. Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta and others, AIR 1989 SC 177.
In that case what was under challenge before the Court was the Ordinance of the University of Rajasthan which provided for uniform addition of 5 per cent marks to the students applying for admission to the Post Graduate Course in any one of the five Medical Colleges provided the students had passed his final MBBS examination from the College to which admission in Post Graduate course was sought and after examining the issue threadbare and on the basis of the competitive data based study noted that such institutional preference would lead to disastrous result violating Article 14 of the Constitution"  7.
I have considered the submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner (in CWP No. 1112 of 2002).
It is not possible for me to accept the contention that weightage under the provisions extracted above, has been granted to students of a particular institution.
The issue which confronted the Apex Court and the Division Bench of this Court (which have been relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner) was in respect of the grant of weightage for admission to an individual institution, whereas in so far as the present controversy is concerned, it is not a matter of dispute that there are only two Dental Colleges in the State of Haryana where Post Graduate Dental Courses are being conducted i.e. the Government Dental College, Rohtak and the DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar.
These colleges are affiliated to the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, respectively.
It is, therefore, obvious that weightage conceived of in the provisions extracted above, relates to preference at the State level and not the institution level.
During the course of arguments, the attention of this Court was invited to the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Mohan Bir Singh Chawla v. Panjab University, Chandigarh, 1996(3) SLR 766 wherein after noticing a large number of judgments rendered by the Apex Court itself, the following conclusions were drawn :-  From the decided cases, following principles emerge:  (a) College-wise preference is not permissible in any event.
(b) University-wise preference is permissible provided it is relevant and reasonable.
Seventy to eighty per cent reservation has been sustained, even where students from different universities appear at a common entrance test.
The trend, however, is towards reducing the reservation and providing greater weight to merit.
The practice all over the country today, as a result of the decisions of this Court, is to make fifteen percent of the seats in MBBS course and twenty five per cent of the seats in post- graduate medical courses in all the Government medical Colleges in the country (except Andhra Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir) available on the basis of merit alone.
Students from anywhere in the country can compete for these seats which are allotted on the basis of an All India test conducted by the designated authority.
(c) The rule of preference on the basis of domicile/requirement of residents is not bad provided it is within reasonable limits, i.e. it does not result in reserving more than eighty five per cent seats in graduate courses and more than seventy five per cent seats in post-graduate courses.
But district-wise reservations are an anathema.
(d) Where the students from different universities appear at a common entrance test/examination (on the basis of which admissions are made) the rule of university-wise preference too must shed some of its relevance.
The explanation of difference in evaluation, standards of education and syllabus lose much of their significance when admission is based upon a common entrance test.
At the same time, the right of the State Government (which have established and maintained these instructions) to regulate the process of admission and they desire to provide for their own students should also be accorded due deference.
(e) The fair and proper rule is : the higher you go, in any discipline, lesser should be the reservations - of whatever kind.
It is for this reason that it was said in Dr. Pradeep Jain that there should be no reservations in the matter of admission to super-specialities, though in the recent decision in Rajiv Gopinath Bhat, a different view appears to have been taken while affirming the principle of merit, at the same time.
In the larger interest of the nation, it is dangerous to depreciate merit and excellence in any field."
It is evident from the aforesaid conclusions that weightage provided to effect University-wise preference and the rights of State Government to protect and provide for preference for students belonging to the same State has been declared as valid in law.
The weightage clause, which is the subject-matter of challenge in the instant case.
Certainly does not provide for weightage for admission to any individual institution; the said weightage, therefore, cannot be described as institutional preference as suggested by the learned Counsel for the petitioner (in CWP No. 1112 of 2002).
Since the weightage is for institutions, which are affiliated to different Universities within the State of Haryana, it is evident that the scope of weightage transgresses even the University barrier.
In fact, when examined in its totality, intent and object of the weightage clause is to grant weightage to all dental graduates, who have domicile/residence in the State of Haryana.
Higher weightage is, however, conceived of for those who acquired their graduation degrees from within the State of Haryana i.e. from the Government Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenancy Dental College, Yamuna Nagar.
The judgments relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner (in CWP No. 1112 of 2002) are, therefore, not relevant to the controversy being adjudicated upon in the instant case.
8.
Learned Counsel appearing in CWP No. 20155 of 2001 has also challenged the vires of the provisions of weightage (extracted above), on the ground that in not granting weightage of 10 marks to candidates who had acquired their graduation degrees from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula cannot be justified in law.
In fact, it is the case of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the instant classification, which excludes the graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula from weightage under Clause (i) i.e. for 10 marks is un-fair and unreasonable and clearly contrary to the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It is pointed out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner (in CWP No. 20155 of 2001), that there are only three colleges in the entire State of Haryana conducting graduate level dental courses namely Dental College, Rohtak, DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar and BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula.
For domiciles of the State of Haryana, graduates of Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar have been granted the weightage of 10 marks whereas similar weightage has not been granted to the graduates of BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula.
Under Clause (ii), graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula who are domicile/residents of the State of Haryana have been merely granted weightage of 5 marks.
Learned Counsel representing the University has justified the grant of lesser weightage to graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula even though they are domicile/residents of the State of Haryana, by asserting that weightage of 10 marks has been allowed to graduates of Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar on account of the fact that the aforesaid two institutions conduct post graduate courses.
The only reasons for excluding the weightage of 10 marks in so far as graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula, is that the said institution conducts course only upto the graduate level.
9.
I have considered the submission made by the learned Counsel for the parties.
In my view, for a classification to be valid and justified, it must have a nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
In the instant case, the object sought to be achieved is admission to a post graduate course in dentistry.
What is relevant for the aforesaid admission is graduate level qualification.
The graduate level course conducted by the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar, which is affiliated to the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, has been recognised for weightage of 10 marks whereas the graduate level course of BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula, which is also affiliated to the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, has not been granted weightage of 10 marks.
There can be absolutely no distinction in the aforesaid two institutions in so far as the course content is concerned and the qualifying examinations are concerned.
Consequently, there can hardly be any justification for granting a higher weightage to graduate of the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar, and a lower weightage to the graduates of the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, it is inevitable to arrive at the conclusion that the classification, which excludes graduates of the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula for purposes of weightage of 10 marks, suffers from vide of discrimination and arbitrariness.
The said classification having no nexus to the objects sought to be achieved is clearly un-constitutional and is liable to be set aside.
10.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner in CWP No. 20155 of 2001 has placed reliance on two judgments of the Apex Court namely State of Rajasthan and another v. Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 177 and Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay and others v. Thukral, Anjali Deokumar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1194.
Both these judgments are in respect of weightage on the basis of institutional preference wherein it was held that the rule providing for college-wise preference was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The said judgments are clearly inapplicable to the present controversy.
11.
Mr. Sandeep Chahar, Advocate appeared for respondent No. 9 (in CWP No. 20155 of 2001), he has placed reliance on the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Mohan Bir Singh Chawla v. Punjab University, Chandigarh, 1996(3) SLR, already referred to above.
He has also placed reliance on the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Sanjay Ahlawat v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 1995(2) SCT 716 (SC) : 1995(2) SCC 762.
The latter judgment was duly taken into consideration by the Apex Court while it culled out the various principles governing preference in admissions, in Mohan Bir Singh Chawla's case (supra).
The conclusions/principles drawn in the aforesaid case have been extracted above.
Based on the aforesaid conclusions, learned Counsel representing respondent No. 9, opposed the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioners canvassing for the grant of weightage of 10 marks for the graduates of the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel representing respondent No. 9 that weightage granted to the graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula would fall within the ambit of institutional preference, which has repeatedly been declared to be impermissible by the Apex Court.
It has been concluded by me hereinabove that the weightage envisaged in the prospectus of the MDS entrance examination for the Government Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenancy Dental College, Yamuna Nagar is neither institutional preference nor preference at the University level.
The object of the said weightage is preference for all graduates in dentistry, who are domicile/residents of the State of Haryana.
It is in the aforesaid circumstances and the larger objective projected by the weightage provisions extracted above that this Court has arrived at the conclusion that the exclusion of graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula, for weightage of 10 marks is arbitrary and discriminatory.
12.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate was permitted to intervene in CWP No. 20155 of 2001 on behalf of Rajesh Johal and Anil Yadav, who had secured the third and seventh positions, respectively in the entrance test conducted by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel representing the interveners that the weightage conceived of in the prospectus for admission to the Post Graduate Courses being conducted in the Government Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar besides being mis-conceived is impermissible in law.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel for the intervenors that weightage for the purpose of preference would be valid if the same grant benefits to students of a particular University only.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel for the intervenors that the instant weightage granted by Clause (i) transgresses the University barrier inasmuch as it allows weightage to graduates from two different Universities.
In this behalf, learned Counsel for the intervenors has placed reliance on the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Gujarat University v. Rajiv Gopi Nath and others, 1996(3) SCT 407 : 1996(4) SCC 60.
In the aforesaid case, the rule framed by the University provided that first preference should be given to students of the University itself.
Students from other Universities were not denied admission but they were ranked next to the students of the parent/admitting University.
As the respondent in the aforesaid case had been denied admission on account of the fact that he was not a student of the Gujarat University, he challenged the aforesaid rule.
It is evident that the aforesaid rule was upheld by the Apex Court in the judgment referred to above.
On the strength of the aforesaid judgment, it was submitted that it is only open to the authorities which framed a rule, which envisages preference to a particular University; for those who had acquired the qualifying examination from institutions not affiliated to a particular University, should be excluded from weightage/consideration unless seats remain vacant after considering the claims of all eligible applicants from the University.
The contention of the learned Counsel for the intervenors is un-acceptable in law.
Merely because a particular rule has been declared void, it cannot be considered that only the said rule is valid or acceptable in law, or stated conversely no other rule would be valid in the eyes of law.
From the decisions cited at the Bar, it is evident that institutional preference has been declared ultra vires the provisions of the Constitution of India, by the Apex Court.
Preference at a larger level i.e. University level has been found to be acceptable in law.
Likewise, preference to a domicile/resident of a particular State has also been found to be valid.
Dental College are only being conducted by three institutions in the State of Haryana, which are affiliated either to the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak or to the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
Since reservation has been granted to graduates from institutions affiliated to these two Universities, it is evident that the scope of weightage/preference is not limited to the barriers of a University but has been extended to more than one University.
That being so, it is not possible for this court to accept the contention of the learned Counsel for the intervenors.
From the judgments referred to by the learned Counsel for the petitioners as also from the conclusions drawn in the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Mohan Bir Singh Chawla v. Panjab University, Chandigarh (supra), the contention of the learned Counsel representing the intervenors to the effect that weightage to be valid must be confined University wise for preference to students who seek admission to higher courses in the same University.
In fact, the State of Haryana is breaking the barriers of restriction by not limiting weightage at the University level, and is extending it for all graduates domicile/resident in the State of Haryana.
13.
In Dr. Parag Gupta v. University of Delhi and others, 2000(2) SCT 834 (SC) : 2000(2) RSJ 759, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "These decisions lead us to the following principles; though University-wise preference is permissible, college-wise preference is not 70% to 80% reservation has been sustained even where the students from different Universities appear at a common entrance test.
After the decisions in Dr. Pradeep Jain and followed by Dinesh Kumar the practice all over the country was to make 15% of the seats in MBBS course and 25% of the seats in postgraduate medical courses in all the Government Medical Colleges in the country available on the basis of merit alone.
Students from anywhere in the country can complete for these seats which are allotted on the basis of an all India test conducted by the designated authority.
The rule of preference on the basis of the domicile or requirement of residence is not bad provided it is within reasonable limits and does not result in reserving more than the aforesaid percentage.
Where the students from different universities appear at a common entrance test the rule of University-wise preference loses its relevance.
The explanations of difference in evaluation, standards of education and syllabus lose much of their significance when admission is based upon a common entrance test.
At the same time, the right of the State Government to regular the process of admission and their desire to provide for their own students should also be accorded due deference.
In the light of these principles, we examine the facts arising in the present case."
And in Abhinab Aggarwal and another v. Union of India and others, 2001(1) SCT 1125 (SC) : 2001(1) RSJ 117, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "In a way the decision in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Vineet Singh, 2000(4) SCT 324 (SC) : 2000(7) SCC 262, covers the matter in dispute.
In that case extending the principle in Dr. Parag Gupta's case, the High Court of Allahabad had directed to allow taking entrance examination in respect of all students who had migrated to other States and sought for admission in their home States.
This Court explained that the decision in Dr. Parag Gupta's case was applicable only to those selected pursuant to 15% All India quota provided under a scheme framed in Dinesh Kumar's case.
It is submitted that in these cases independent of Dr. Pradeep Gupta's case, the petitioners' case has to be examined as to whether the petitioners are discriminated against the other students in their home States.
The question of attaining uniformity in the matter of admission in PG medical courses in all medical colleges is wrought with many complexities.
Students who have studied outside Delhi are also eligible to the 25% All India quota provided under the scheme for admission to PG medical courses.
In view of the law declared by this Court and directions issued pursuant thereto, schemes have been framed by respondents' institutions.
We reiterate that it would be ideal for the States/authorities concerned to acehive uniformity by adopting appropriate criteria in the matter of admission to PG courses in medical colleges.
When the admission rules have been framed pursuant to the decisions of this Court to which we have adverted to and those decisions have been rendered bearing in mind the scope of Article 14 of the Constitution vis-a-vis the local needs, we do not think, it is permissible or appropriate for us to disturb that scheme.
Hence, we decline to interference with the process of selection being made to consider the cases of the petitioners."
14.
The scheme of weightage under reference in the instant case has obviously been framed in view of the decisions rendered by the Apex Court in Sanjay Ahlawat's case and in Vineet Singh's case (referred to above) subject to the infirmity pointed out hereinabove i.e. the exclusion of BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula from weightage of 10 marks.
15.
For the reasons recorded above, CWP No. 1112 of 2002 is dismissed.
CWP No. 20155 of 2001 is allowed inasmuch as Clause (i) of the provision relating to weightage, which excludes graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula from the award of 10 marks is held to be ultra vires the provisions of the Constitution of India.
The claim of the intervenors to the effect that weightages should be limited to admission confined to graduates from a particular University, is also held to be unacceptable in law.
16.
This court by its order dated 20.12.2001 stayed the finalisation of the result for admission to the post graduate courses in dentistry for which the entrance test was held by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra on 24102000.
The sole criterion for admission besides the weightages which are subject-matter of consideration (in the two writ petitions being disposed of by this order), is merit obtained by the candidates in the entrance test held on 24102000.
Clause (i) of the provisions relating to weightages has been struck down by this Court.
The only defect therein as has been pointed out hereinabove is the exclusion of graduates of the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula of the grant of weightages envisaged by clause (i) of the weightage provision i.e. for weightage of 10 marks.
In the peculiar facts of the instant case, liberty is granted to the University to re-draw Clause (i) of the provisions relating to weightages by including therein weightage of 10 marks for graduates from the BRS Dental College, Kot Bila, Panchkula, who are domicile/resident in the State of Haryana, at par with the graduates from the Dental College, Rohtak and DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar; and thereupon to finalise admissions for the academic session 2001-2002 on the basis of marks obtained by candidates in the entrance test conducted by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra on 24102000, so as to avoid the washing out of one academic session.
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
Petition disposed of.