Swatanter Kumar, J - All the petitioners joined as T Mates in the office of Executive Engineer, Mechanical Division.
PWD B&R Branch Gurgaon.
The pay scales of certain categories of employees were modified or revised with effect from 151990.
The persons with Matric and ITI qualification who were in the pay scales of Rs. 750 - 940/- were placed in the scale of Rs. 1200 - 2040/-.
On 26.5.1993 the respondents passed an order stating that petitioners were not entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1200 - 2040/- as their prescribed qualification is not Matric with ITI.
The said order was challenged in CWP No. 7499 of 1993 which has been admitted for regular hearing and vide interim order dated 1661993 the Division Bench directed that salary of the petitioner will not be reduced.
According to the petitioners another writ petition was filed by other T Mates of Mechanical Division of PWD B&R, Ambala Cantt being CWP No. 10414 of 1993.
This writ petition was allowed by the High Court and Special Leave Petition filed by the State against the said judgment of the Division Bench was dismissed.
2.
The petitioners were thereafter granted pay scale of Rs. 4000 - 6000/- vide office order No. 6B and 60 dated 29.1.1998 with effect from 111996.
Again, their pay was fixed in the pay scale of Rs. 5000 - 7850/- vide office order No. 55 dated 3091999.
The petitioners claim that despite the orders in the other cases, the respondents vide their order dated 2352000 have re-fixed the pay of the petitioners in the pay scale of Rs. 2650 - 4000/- with effect from 111996, thus causing a considerable deduction in the salary of the petitioners.
The petitioners have challenged this order passed by the respondents, copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/5.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
The facts are not much in dispute in the present case.
The basic contention of the respondents is that for the post of T. Mate to which the petitioners were appointed, there are no prescribed qualifications of Matric and ITI.
As such they are not entitled to the benefit of the circulars issued by the Finance Department in regard to placement in the higher grade.
The petitioners were appointed on purely temporary work charge basis.
The higher scale was given to them wrongly.
As such the order dated 2352000 is correct and the pay of the petitioners ought to be reduced.
4.
At the very outset we must notice that order dated 2352000 had been passed at the back of the petitioners.
The impugned order cannot be said to be an order of correction.
The petitioners were granted the higher pay scales with effect from 111990 and 111996 respectively.
They have drawn these pay scales for years together and have been discharging their duties and functions regularly.
All concerned authorities have specifically or by necessary implication concur in the fixation and payment of salary to the petitioners in the higher scales.
It was a decision made consciously by the authorities which was given effect to in all respects and for considerably long period.
It is not a case of mistaken impression or clerical errors which could be corrected by the respondents without affording any opportunity to the petitioners of being heard or showing cause against the proposed action of reduction in salary/scale, more particularly when such orders passed by the respondents had already been quashed by the Courts.
5.
It is a settled principle of law that where-ever rights of employees are likely to be adversely affected there is a mandatory obligation upon the State-employer to give notice to the employee before passing such orders.
Concededly there is violation of the principle of audi alteram partem and the order passed by the respondents cannot be sustained for this serious violation of basic rule of law.
In this regard reference can be made to a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, 1967(2) S.C.R. 625, wherein the Hon'ble Aex Court held as under:-  "We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences as already stated, informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
6.
Coming to the main contention raised on behalf of the respondents that there are no prescribed qualifications for the post of T Mates under any rules and as such the mere fact the petitioners are holding the qualification of Matric and ITI, per se would not entitle them for the benefit of the Government instructions in regard to payment of salary in the higher pay scales.
This contention of the respondents need not detain us any longer in view of the judgment of this Court in the case of Labh Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 311 (P&H) : CWP No. 10414 of 1993 decided on 291994, where the Court after discussing at some length the controversy in issue, decided as under:-  "Learned counsel for the respondents may be correct in arguing that no statutory rules have been framed by the Government for making recruitment against the posts of T Mates and, therefore, qualifications cannot be said to have been prescribed by the statutory rules.
However, mere absence of statutory rules cannot lead to an inference that no qualifications have at all been prescribed.
It is well settled that in the absence of statutory rules, the Executive has the power to issue administrative instructions/orders for regulating recruitment and the conditions of service of the Civil posts.
Article 166(3) of the Constitution of India confers such administrative powers on the Government.
Therefore, even though statutory rules do not prescribe qualifications for recruitment to T Mates, the appointments made by the concerned Executive Engineer after sending a requisition to the Employment Exchange or otherwise on the basis of specified qualifications is sufficiently indicative of the fact the qualifications have been prescribed by executive decision.
Learned Deputy Advocate General has not been able to show as to how the Executive Engineer has made recruitment on the posts of T Mates without there being any qualification.
In fact the stand taken by the respondents stands belied by the fact that in the standing orders issued by the department qualification for the post of T Mates has been prescribed as ITI pass in respective trade or three years experience in the trade concerned.
These qualifications have been enumerated in Annexure-D contained in Technical Memo No. 6/88 containing rules and instructions for running and upkeep the vehicles and other machinery working in Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads), Haryana.
This document has been published under the authority of the Government of Haryana and, therefore, there is no reason to believe that these are not the prescribed qualifications.
To me it is clear that by virtue of Annexure-D, appended to the Technical Memo No. 6/88, the department has prescribed the qualifications for appointment on the post of T. Mate and precisely for this reason the Executive Engineer had incorporated these qualifications in the various notifications sent by it to the Employment Exchange.
It is thus clear that each of the petitioners had been recruited with the qualification of ITI and some of qualifications of Matric with ITI Therefore, no illegality can be said to have been committed by the Superintending Engineer or by the Executive Engineer concerned in granting them the benefit of pay in the grade of Rs. 950 - 1400 and Rs. 1200 - 2040/- respectively.
In fact, the action which has now been initiated by the respondent-Superintending Engineer is wholly illegal apart from being arbitrary and discriminatory.
I am fortified in taking this view by the decision of this Court in Balbir Chand v. State of Haryana, 1994(2) R.S.J.
509, wherein a learned single Judge has directed the Government to give pay scale of Rs. 950-1400 to the persons possessing the qualification of ITI/Polytechnic Certificate.
The court has held that once a person has been recruited with the qualification of ITI/Polytechnic Certificate, the Government cannot deny him the benefit of pay scale in the grade of Rs. 950 - 1400/- In CWP No. 7928 of 1993 (Ram Kishan and three others v. State of Haryana), a Division Bench of this Court issued a direction on 1121993 for fixation of the pay of the petitioners according to their qualification of Matric with ITI" 7.
In the case of Labh Singh and others (supra), judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ram Kishan and others (supra) was relied where the Division Bench had granted relief to the petitioners.
The special leave petition No. 9401 of 1994 preferred by the State titled as State of Haryana versus Ram Kishan and others, against the judgment of the Division Bench in the case of Ram Kishan and others was dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Curt vide its order dated 1531996.
In other words, the decision of the Division Bench and the judgment in the case of Ram Kishan and others (supra) has attained finality.
8.
In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the plea taken by the respondents is not sustainable in law.
The respondents in fact are obliged to pass orders in conformity with the judgment of the Court passed in similar matters on earlier occasions.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated, we accept this writ petition and quash the order dated 2352000 Annexure P/5 to this writ petition.
The respondents, obviously, will be at liberty to pass any appropriate order re-fixing the salary of the petitioners in accordance with law and rules.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitoin allowed.