SS Nijjar, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed challenging the judgment of the trial Court in Suit No. 34 of 321994 decided on 2121992 by Gurnam Singh, PPS, Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Kapurthala dismissing the suit filed by the plaintiff and the judgment of the appellate court dated 15.6.1999 rendered by the Court of Baldev Singh, District Judge, Kapurthala dated 15.5.1999 dismissing the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant.
2.
The facts which are necessary for the decision of this RSA may be briefly noticed.
The plaintiff instituted the suit against the defendant for declaration to the effect that he is senior as Patwari to respondent No. 3.
A further declaration was sought to the effect that the order dated 3151993 of respondent No. 2 promoting respondent No. 3 to the post/rank of Kanungo is void, illegal and against the principles of natural notice.
The plaintiff also prayed for issuance of a mandatory injunction to respondent No. 2 to consider the case of the plaintiff for promotion to the post of Kanungo from the date from which his junior (defendant No. 3) has been promoted to the post of Kanungo and for the grant of consequential benefits.
It was pleaded that the appellant was appoint as Patwari on 19.5.1992 in the category of Ex- Serviceman.
His date of birth is 2461944.
His name was not included in the seniority list dated 3121992 of the Patwaris of District Kapurthala.
On the other hand, respondent No. 3 Palla Singh was also appointed from category of Ex-Serviceman as Patwari on 19.5.1992.
Respondent No. 3 has been wrongly shown senior to the appellant and also promoted as Kanungo by order dated 3151993.
Before instituting the suit, necessary notice was given to the respondents No. 1 and 2 under Section 80 CPC.
Respondent No. 3 filed the written statement.
It was pleaded that plaintiff has no locus standi to file the suit.
The plaintiff is estopped by his act and conduct to file the present suit.
The plaintiff has not served any notice under Section 80 CPC.
On merits, it was stated that he had joined earlier to plaintiff and as such has promotion order is legal and valid and binding on the plaintiff.
It was further stated that he is senior.
He has rightly been shown senior in the joint seniority list.
Since the plaintiff never challenged the seniority list, as such he is estopped from challenging it now.
Defendants No. 1 and 2 also filed the written statement and took the same stand as defendant No. 3.
The plaintiff filed replication denying the allegations made in the written statement and reiterated the averments made in the plaintiff.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  "1.
Whether the order dated 31.5.93 of Collector Kapurthala by virtue of which defendant No. 3 was promoted to the rank of Kanungo is illegal and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for relief of declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for relief of mandatory injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the suit is not property valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD 5.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit ?
OPD 6.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 7.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit ?
OPD 8.
Whether the plaintiff has not served u/s 80 CPC notice upon the answering defendant ?
If so, its effect ?
OPD.
9.
Relief."
3.
The plaintiff stepped into witness box in support of his case as PW-1, and thereafter closed his evidence.
The defendants examined DW-1 Pala Singh and DW-2 Ajit Singh and closed the evidence.
The trial Court discussed issues No. 1 to 3 together.
The trial Court held that name of the plaintiff appears at Sr. 118 of the seniority list of the Patwaris and the name of defendant No. 3 is at Sr. No. 105.
It is further held that there are 12 Patwaris between the plaintiff and defendant No. 3.
Therefore, these Patwaris have better right than the plaintiff challenging the promotion of defendant No. 3 Pala Singh.
Adverting to the evidence of DW-2, Ajit Singh, the trial Court notices that both Pala Singh and Shangara Singh have signed and thumb-marked the entries in their service books after admitting the contents of the same to be correct.
It is further noticed that both of them never made any representation regarding the entries in their service book regarding the date of their joining.
It is further noticed that the plaintiff did not file any appeal or revision against the promotion order dated 3151993.
Therefore, the trial Court has come to the conclusion that the order dated 3151993 passed by Collector, Kapurthala is legal.
Issues No. 1 to 3 have been decided in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff.
Issues No. 4, 5, 6 and 7 were not pressed by the defendants at the time of arguments.
These issues have been decided against the defendants and in favour of the plaintiff.
Issues No. 8 has also been decided against the plaintiff as according to the learned trial Court, it was necessary to serve the notice under Section 80 CPC upon defendant No. 3 Pala Singh.
The appellate Court affirmed the finding given by the trial Court on issues No. 1 to 3.
Since no other point was agitated before the appellate Court, no other issues have been discussed.
Having failed before both the courts below, the plaintiff (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) has preferred the Regular Second Appeal in this Court.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
5.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that findings of fact recorded by both the Courts below are perverse as they are based on misappreciation of the evidence.
This in itself, according to the learned counsel, would constitute a substantial question of law to enable this Court to entertain and adjudicate the present Regular Second Appeal.
There is no dispute with the aforesaid proposition of law.
In fact, the law on this point has been recently reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ishwar Dass Jain (Dead) thr.
Lrs.
v. Sohan Lal (dead) by LRs., 2000(1) RCR(Civil) 168 (SC) : JT 1999(9) SC 305.
It has been held that the HIgh Court can interfere with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the Courts below, if vital piece of evidence has not been considered, which, if considered, would have led to a different conclusion.
In light of the aforesaid ratio, I have perused the judgments of both the Courts below very carefully and have also gone through the record of the case meticulously.
A perusal of both the judgments of the Courts below exhibits a sad absence of application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case.
The trial Court has given findings that the seniority inter se of the members of the service is to be determined from the date of joining of the candidates.
If two candidates join on the same date, then elder in age is to rank senior.
It has further been held that appellant and defendant No. 3 (hereinafter referred to as "respondent No. 3") joined on the same day ie 2051992.
It is also held that both of them were posted as Patwari on 19.5.1992.
Since respondent No. 3 was senior in age, he was correctly ranked senior to the appellant.
The appellate Court while affirming the aforesaid finding, has held that respondent No. 3 is elder to the appellant.
Therefore, he has been rightly ranked senior.
A bare perusal of the record would have shown that respondent No. 3 was born on 9121961 whereas, admittedly, the appellant was born on 2461944.
In the face of this documentary evidence, the findings recorded by both the Courts below have to be termed as conjectural and suffering from the vice of non-application of mine.
Under no circumstances, could it be said that respondent No. 3 was elder in age to the appellant.
Admittedly, both the appellant and respondent No. 3 were selected on the same date.
They joined on the post of Patwari on the same date.
6.
I am of the considered opinion that the appellant was clearly entitled to the placed above respondent No. 3 in the seniority list.
His case for promotion to the post of Kanungo also had to be considered on the basis that he was senior to respondent No. 3.
7.
Consequently, Regular Second Appeal is allowed, judgment and decree of the trial Court dated 2121997 and the judgment and decree of the appellate Court dated 15.6.1999 are hereby set aside.
The suit of the appellant is decreed as prayed.
The order dated 3151993 promoting respondent/defendant No. 3 to the post/rank of Kanungo is void and is, therefore, set aside.
A mandatory injunction is issued to defendant No. 2 to consider the case of the plaintiff/appellant for promotion to the rank/post of Kanungo from the date defendant/respondent No. 3, his junior was promoted to the post/rank of Kanungo.
In the event, the plaintiff/appellant is promoted from the date his junior was promoted i.e. 3151993, he shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
The appeal allowed with costs.
Decree sheet be prepared accordingly.
Office is directed to return the records of this case forthwith.
Appeal allowed.