Swatanter Kumar, J - As all these above five petitions raised a common question of law based on somewhat similar facts, we consider it appropriate to dispose of these petitions by a common judgment.
2.
All the petitioners in each of these petitions are working as Beldars, Chowkidars, Malis, Pump Operators, Fitter, Coolies, Sewermen etc. in the Public Health Department of State of Punjab.
These petitioners are posted and are working in different districts of the State of Punjab.
According to the petitioners, they are working in their respective posts for a considerable period in their respective departments.
The period of employment varies from 3 years to 14 years.
On the date of institution of the respective petitions.
During this long period the petitioners have worked to the satisfaction of all concerned.
The petitioners also satisfy the prescribed qualifications for appointment to the respective posts where they are working presently.
According to the petitioners despite the fact that there is continuity in their employment for this long period, they are still being paid the daily wages and their names have been recorded in the muster roll maintained by the department.
On these premises, the petitioners pray that the payment of daily wages by the State is apparently unfair and contrary to the law enunciated by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, they pray that the State be directed to pay them regular pay scale or atleast the minimum of the pay scale which their counter-part regular employees are receiving.
The petitioners have further pleaded that they are doing identical work and duties which are being performed by the regular employees holding the same posts and in the same department and the districts.
The petitioners rely upon a judgment of this Court in CWP No. 7533 of 1995, titled as Talwinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 1831998, which decision has been affirmed by the Letters Patent Bench and other Division Bench judgment of this Court where equal pay for equal work was granted and the said orders have been affirmed by the Apex Court.
3.
At this stage itself we may notice that in all these writ petitions, except CWP No. 10210 of 2000, petitioners have prayed for payment of regular pay scale and have claimed arrears with interest.
In that writ, the petitioners had also claimed the relief in relation to regularisation of their services in the respective departments, however, learned counsel for the petitioners, on 13122000 made the following statement :-  "Learned counsel for the petitioners has made a statement that in view of the Government Policy dated 2312001, the petitioners do not press the relief for regularisation of service and the relief now sought is confined only to the payment of minimum of the regular pay scale."
In view of the statement of learned counsel for the petitioners, only limited relief remains for consideration as has been raised in the other petitions.
4.
Upon notice the respondents filed reply wherein it was contended that the petitioners are daily wagers who are engaged from time to time depending on the work requirement and they performed different duties.
It was stated that in view of the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Jasmer Singh and others, 1997(1) RSJ 445 : 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC), the petitioners are not entitled to the minimum of the pay scale.
In the reply the differentiation between daily wagers and regular employees were highlighted.
This differentiation related to method of recruitment control over the working of the employees and payment of their wages.
However, in reply on merits, it was admitted that the petitioners have been working in the department for the period mentioned by them and their names were being maintained on the muster rolls by the respective departments.
They were being paid salary after expiry of one month as per common schedule of Rates determined by the department.
It was also stated that the Government is taking steps for regularising the employees in terms of its reviewed policy for regularisation of adhoc, work charged, casual and daily rated employees dated 751983 which, of course, stands now superseded and the latest regularisation policy dated 2312001 has become effective as noticed by us in the order dated 13122001.
As far as the question of law whether the petitioners herein are entitled to get minimum of the pay scale on the principle of equal pay for equal work or not, need not detain us any further as it is squarely answered by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 931 (P&H) CWP No. 14050 of 1999, decided on 13122001, where the Court, in similar facts and circumstances, answered the question of law as under :-  "The petitioners, who are working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger-keepers, Pump Operators, Mali-cum-Chowkidars, Fitters, Petrol Men and Surveyor etc., and are satisfying the afore-stated essential ingredients, are entitled to the minimum of the pay scale (basic pay and dearness allowance alone) admissible to their counter-parts working on regular basis in the same department."
The above judgment is applicable to the facts of the present case on all force and on the known cannons of principle of ratio decidendi.
5.
The petitioners in these petitions have been employed by the State.
They have already worked for a fairly reasonable time.
They have continued in service for 3 to 14 years in the respective departments.
It has no where been disputed in the reply and in fact the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, fairly conceded that the petitioners have been performing the same work, which their counter-parts in the regular employment have been discharging in relation to these posts.
There are no complaints about the working of the petitioners.
Thus, all the ingredients stated by the Full Bench for grant of relief of equal pay for equal work has been satisfied and the petitioners are entitled to get minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance alone and not the regular pay scale with increments and other attached benefits in terms of the judgment of the Full Bench.
6.
The only question that has now to be considered by us as to whether the petitioners are entitled to the arrears, if so for what period and with what interest, if any.
The petitioners have been working for a considerable time i.e. from 3 to 14 years and majority of them have been working for the last more than 10 years.
They have never approached Court of law for grant of such relief and in fact they have not raised this claim before the competent authority i.e. the State.
In some of the cases before us for the first time they served notice upon the State on 1022000.
The receipt of this notice is not admitted by the State.
The conduct of the petitioners prior to the institution of these petitions certainly indicates that the petitioners worked on the given rates without any protest or demur.
They cannot take advantage of their own conduct and there is no justification or explanation placed on record by the petitioners for such a considerable delay and laches in approaching the Court.
They serve the notice in February, 2000 and immediately after service of notice they filed the present petitions.
7.
On the question of grant of relief to the petitioners we must examine the various facets of this controversy.
We have already noticed that the petitioners worked in their respective posts for a considerable period without any protest or demur.
If they were aggrieved in regard to payment of minimum wages, as according to them they were entitled to regular pay scale, it was for them to specifically raise such a claim before the respondents.
Even otherwise, it is a settled principle of law that serving of a justice demand notice is normally a principle requisite to the entertainment of a petition by the High Court in exercise of its powers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners, apparently and admittedly, did not serve any such notice till February, 2000, and immediately thereafter without waiting for a period of two months to be elapsed, filed the present writ petitions.
If the petitioners are granted regular pay scale right from the date of their appointments, it will not only be contrary to the settled law, but would also be unfair and inequitable.
The petitioners were fully entitled in law to raise a demand for grant of regular pay scale but they opted to waive such claim for all this period.
If such a claim was raised on earlier occasions, the Government was obviously entitled to exercise its options in that situation.
Now to create such liability upon the State in face of implied waiver on the part of the petitioners, in our view, would be unjust.
8.
Keeping the peculiar facts and circumstances of these cases in mind and more particularly the conduct of the petitioners we are of the considered view that ends of the justice would be met if the State is directed to pay the arrears being minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance as prescribed under rules from the date of institution of the petitions.
We find no justification for allowing any interest and the said claim of the petitioners is rejected.
For the reasons aforestated and following the law enunciated by the Full Bench of this Court, we allow these writ petitions limited to the extent afore- noticed.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.