R Gururajan, J - The petitioner-employee is before this court challenging the award dated 15-2-2001 passed, by the Labour Court, Mangalore, in ID No. 147/1989.
2.
The petitioner joined the services of the respondent in the year 1957.
In terms of the service condition, employees have to retire after completion of 58 years.
The service condition provides for submission of Birth Certificate, School Leaving Certificate, Insurance Policy, Horoscope, subject to the discretion of the management and any proof of age of an employee.
3.
According to the petitioner's averments, at the time of employment, the respondent-management did not insist for any production of age proof documents.
The management issued a memo on 9-4-1965 directing the employees to produce documents in support of age on or before 30-6-1965.
Date of submission of documents was extended up to the end of August 1969.
Again the date was extended till 31-1-1971.
The management, subsequently, in the year 1972 issued a memo declaring that the age of petitioner is 40 years and the date of birth is 26-7-1931 in terms of certificate by the Chief Medical Officer.
The petitioner made a representation on 5111974 to correct his date of birth as 6.7.1938 instead of 26-7-1931.
It was based on the school certificate.
An endorsnent has been issued by the company to get the declaration from a competent Court of Law.
Subsequent representations have been made to reconsider the decision.
Finally, the management issued an order retiring the petitioner from the service, on the basis of medical certificate of the Medical Officer of the Company.
The said matter was taken by way of a Reference in ID No. 147/1989.
Matter was contested.
After contest, the Labour Court, in the impugned award has rejected the claim of the petitioner.
Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner is before this court.
4.
Heard the Counsel for the petitioner.
Perused the material placed before this court.
5.
The petitioner-workman had filed an application u/s 10(4-A) of the I D Act before the Labour Court, Manglore, seeking an order to set aside the termination dated 3171989 with a further direction for reinstatement with all other benefits.
The same is contested.
Evidence was recorded before the Labour Court.
The workman has been examined as WWI and the management.
has examined his witness.
The Labour Court further heard the parties and passed the impugned award rejecting his application.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner is seeking reinstatement on the ground that his date of birth has been wrongly recorded by the respondent-management.
In fact in the claim statement, emphasis is laid with regard to his attaining the age of superannuation on 6-7-1996 and not earlier to this.
According to the petitioner, the correct date of birth is 6-7-1938.
The management has denied this.
The management has referred to the various facts referred to by me in the earlier paragraphs in their statement.
The management states that the petitioner having failed to produce the transfer certificate within the time limit prescribed, no relief can be granted.
The management also states that there is no premature retirement, as contended by the workman In the light of this contention, the Labour court has, framed the following issues reading as under :  1) Is this present application maintainable ?
2) Whether retiring of Applicant by opponent on the ground of attaining age of superannuation is justified ?
3) If not to what reliefs the applicant is entitled ?
Thereafter, the Labour Court discussed the matter in detail and rejected the award.
The Labour Court in the impugned award noticed the various material facts.
The standing orders of the Company provides for recording of the age of every employee at the time of his employment.
The employee should for this purpose produce any of the following documents namely, Birth Certificate, School Leaving Certificate, Insurance Policy, Horoscope, subject to the discretion of the management and any proof of age of an employee.
Subsequently, from the material on record, it is seen that the petitioner did not produce any documents in support of the date of birth.
In those circumstances, memos have been issued by the management, as I see from the material on record.
In the year 1965, the management has asked all those employees and Heads of Department who have neither produced the documentary evidence nor given any declaration to submit the documents in proof of their age or declaration on or before 30-6-1995.
Again in the year 1969, as per Annexure C2, Ex.M10, the management has stated that time has been extended for production of documents till the end of August 1969, as a very special case.
Again on 15-12-1970, Ex.M11, the Company has issued another memo-extending the time for production of documents till 15-1-1971.
Ex-M12, Annexure C4 is another memo extending time for production till 31.1.1971.
All these documents have been referred to in the evidence and has been taken note of by the Labour Court, as I see from the material on record.
The workman did not produced any acceptable evidence.
It was in those circumstances, he was subjected to medical examination and as per the memo dated 25.2.1972, he was declared as 40 years as on 2671971 based on the medical certificate.
Thereafter it is seen from the material on record that the petitioner on 5-11-1974 has submitted a letter seeking for correction to correct the date of birth as 6-7-1938 i.e. 37 years instead 43 years.
A reply has been sent on 1-1-1975 directing him to get a declaration in a Competent Court of Law.
He has not moved the court in terms of memo.
The Labour Court also notices another document in this regard.
The Labour Court notices that there is no explanation forthcoming as to why till 1974, the workman has not taken any steps in the matter.
The Labour Court has also referred to the evidence in para 13, The Labour Court further notices the document dated 18-3-1983.
In addition to noticing all these aspects.
the Court notices the evidence in the award.
The Labour Court also notices the judgment of the Supreme Court in AIR 2001 SC 72 : 2001 Lab IC 28 and the judgment of this Court in W.P. No. 39155/1992 dated 27-9-1999.
After noticing these two judgements, the Labour Court holds that no case is made out.
After carefully perusing the award in the light of' various documents referred to above and the evidence, I am clearly of the view that no case is made out for my interference in this petition.
The petitioner has slept over this matter and he is trying to wake up after a long lapse of time.
He has been given several opportunities to produce the documents in support of the same.
He has failed to do so.
In those circumstances, the management has, rightly, in my view, subjected him to the medical examination in terms of the standing order and thereafter terminated the services.
It is a well settled principle of law that the workman cannot be permitted to seek for change of date of birth after a long lapse of time.
Any change after a long lapse of time would result in unavoidable difficulties to the management, in addition to causing injuries to a fellow workman.
The fellow workman would also be affected on account the change by way of seniority, promotion, quarters, etc.
Taking into consideration all aspects of matter, I am of the view that the present award is based on facts/records and the law governing the subject.
No interference is called for in the case on hand.
7.
Petition stands rejected, accepting the award by this court.
Petition rejected.