Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the letter dated 862001, Annexure P/6 to the writ petition, vide which the Principal of Seth Jai Parkash Mukand Lal Institute of Engineering and Technology Radaur, District Yamunanagar, cancelled the provisional admission of the petitioner to B Tech.
Electrical Course.
2.
The petitioner passed his 10+2 examination with 85% marks in aggregate, while obtaining 4667% marks as aggregate of pre-required subjects viz Physics, Chemistry and Maths.
With an intention to take admission and pursue Engineering courses, the petitioner appeared in the common Entrance Test for the academic sessions 2000-2001 held by Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar (hereinafter referred to as the University).
The petitioner qualified the Entrance examination, while securing rank 8693 and was required to submit the application for admission to the course by July, 2001 at the office of the University.
The petitioner on the basis of his merit was given admission in the respondent-College against NRI seat.
After counselling the petitioner paid the requisite fee of Rs. 53176/- to the respondent College.
According to the petitioner, no objection was taken to his admission and the petitioner even took the first semester examination with the respondent-College, which is affiliated to the University.
The University served a show cause notice dated 12th April, 2001 upon the petitioner stating that the petitioner did not satisfy the eligibility condition for taking the Entrance Test as well as for admission to the Graduate Engineering Courses, therefore, the admission of the petitioner to the course was liable to be cancelled.
To this show cause notice, the petitioner submitted a detailed reply dated 23rd April, 2001, stating that he had paid substantial amount to the College, the College had granted him admission with their open eyes and there was no concealment on his part, therefore, the question of cancelling his admission does not arise.
However, as already noticed, vide letter dated 8th June, 2001, the admission to the petitioner was cancelled, giving rise to the present petition.
3.
Upon notice, different written statement was filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 respectively.
It was stated that the petitioner did not satisfy the eligibility condition to the Common Entrance Test as well as admission to the course and, as such, after serving show cause notice upon the petitioner his admission has been cancelled in accordance with the rules.
In regard to delay in cancelling the admission, it is stated that the petitioner has been given admission in an irregular manner as he is relative of one of the members of the Managing Committee of the concerned College and the admission was given in collusion and without any intimation to the University.
When in 2001, the University received the admission form and consequent knowledge of the petitioner of the fact that he does not fulfil the requisite qualification, a show cause notice dated 12th April, 2001 was served upon him and his admission was cancelled.
It is also stated that the petitioner misrepresented the facts to the University and the Counselling Body as he made an attempt to mis-lead the authority by showing incorrect percentage in the application form submitted for admission.
The written statement of respondent No. 1 has been supported by respondent No. 2.
4.
At the outset, it will be appropriate for us to refer to the eligibility condition for admission, as stated in the brochure.
Eligibility condition for admission  "The candidate must have passed the 10+2 examination of Haryana School Board or its equivalent examination from a recognised board/University with PCM and English and must have obtained at least 50% marks in the aggregate of PCM (mere pass for admissions to Agriculture Engg.
at HAU Hisar and some other REC(s) as per details in part D of the brochure in case of SC/ST candidates no minimum percentage of marks is prescribed and mere pass in qualifying examination with the said subjects is adequate."
5.
The bare reading of the above eligibility clause clearly specify that a candidate can take Entrance Test and consequent admissions to the Graduate Engineering Courses only if he had obtained 50% marks in aggregate in Physics, Chemistry and Maths subjects.
The exemption from the rigorous of this condition is only available to SC/ST candidates, who were required to pass the qualifying examination.
All other candidates must satisfy this eligibility condition, which is a condition precedent to the admission.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner had got 4667% marks as aggregate in Physics, Chemistry and Maths in 10+2 examination and thus was not eligible to take Entrance Test and consequently admission to the Engineering Courses.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also could not deny this fact and unable to bring to our notice any clause in the brochure which would render the petitioner eligible.
Another factor which could not be disputed on record is that taking of Entrance Test as well as admission were provisional and subject to confirmation by the University.
In fact, as per the terms and conditions of the brochure, the admission of a candidate be controlled as per the rules and regulation of the College and the University to which such College is affiliated.
8.
The petitioner admittedly does not satisfy the prescribed percentage under the eligibility condition for admission and as such, admission of the petitioner to the course was made on incorrect premises, as stated above.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously contended that the College had give admission to the petitioner with their open eyes and as the petitioner had paid the fees and pursued the course for more than a year therefore, he is entitled to and should be permitted to complete the academic course.
For this purpose, he relied upon three judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the cases Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, A.I.R. 1976 Supreme Court 376, Rajdendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University and another, AIR 1986 SC 1449 and A. Sudha v. University of Mysore and another, A.I.R. 1987 Supreme Court 2305.
10.
No doubt, in some of the these cases, the Hon'ble Apex Court permitted the candidate to continue the course keeping in view the facts and circumstances of those cases, but on the question of law, their Lordships still upheld the stand of the University to determine the equivalence of other courses satisfying the eligibility condition.
It is pertinent to notice at this stage, that in the case of Shri Krishan (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court specifically held that in order to seek benefit of pursuing courses, it was necessary that the applicant ought not have mis-represented the facts before the concerned authority.
In fact, their Lordships specifically observed "it is neither a case of suggestio falsi, or suppression veri".
In the present case, the validity of the eligibility condition has not been questioned by the petitioner.
Even if it was, it could hardly be of any help to the petitioner.
The University has the competence and authority to impose and enforce such like eligibility condition.
Once the eligibility condition for admission is prescribed it must be and ought to be adhered to by the University itself.
The Court cannot direct the University to act against its own Calender or Prospectus.
The University has specifically taken up the plea that it has enforced the eligibility condition against all concerned and no admissions have been made contrary to the terms and conditions of the brochure.
In the light of these facts, the conduct of the petitioner has to be examined by this Court.
11.
Admittedly, the petitioner does not satisfy the prescribed percentage under the eligibility condition and was given admission on incorrect premises.
According to the University there were two basic facts, which resulted in admission of the petitioner in the respondent-College.
Firstly, the petitioner is stated to be related to one of the members of the Managing Committee of the respondent-College and secondly in the application form for admission the petitioner had mis-stated his percentage, which mis-led the authority in granting admission to the petitioner.
To the averments made in the written statement by the University, no rebuttal is placed on record by filing replication.
During the course of hearing, we had also asked the University to produce on record the photo copies of the record.
Photo copy of the admission form has even been placed on record.
The application form submitted by the petitioner clearly shows the mis-representation by the petitioner.
There was no occasion and in fact, there is no column to show the total marks percentage, still the petitioner opted to write his total marks at the bottom of the prescribed space.
It will be more appropriate for us to refer to the relevant part of the application.
(e)  Subject Maximum Marks Marks obtained %age Phy.
49 100 Chem.
54 100 Math.
37 100 Total PCM English 57 100 (f) Details of compartments if any Yes No + + + Total +2 Marks =55% + + 12.
The petitioner was required to state the total marks obtained in PCM (Physics, Chemistry and Maths) but the petitioner added the marks obtained by him in English and thus incorrectly stated his percentage as 55% which misled the authority to grant him admission.
The petitioner could take Common Entrance Test also provisionally because he had got compartment in his 10+2 examination.
In all fairness, the petitioner must have stated his correct percentage of the PCM, which was admittedly 4667%.
Being relative of one of the members of the Managing Committee, it appears to us, that the petitioner took undue advantage and got admission into the BTech.
Electrical Course by misleading the authority.
Thus, it is not a case, which can falls within the exceptions carved out in the afore-stated judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, as the petitioner had by his conscious act mis-led the authority and made false suggestion and was a case of Suggestion falsi.
The conduct of the petitioner is such, which would dis-entitle him from claiming discretionary relief from the court in exercise of its power under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, as the person, who claims equity must not do equity alone but should also approach the court with compete and true facts.
The petitioner had filled up the application form for admission in his own hand writing and he was fully aware of the mis-representation made by him but still he chose to remain completely silent in regard to this entire aspect of the case.
The Hob'ble Apex Court in the case of Gurdeep Singh v. State of J and K and others, 1995 Supp (1) Supreme Court Cases, 188 held that High Court should not direct the University to act contrary to their Calender or Brochure and grant seats or permit continuation of the courses on the plea of sympathy.
Exercise of writ jurisdiction on misplaced sympathy has been deprecated by the Hob'ble Supreme Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under :-  "What remains to be considered is whether the selection of respondent 6 should be quashed.
We are afraid, unduly lenient view of the courts on the basis of human consideration in regard to such excesses on the part of the authorities has served to create an impression that even where an advantage is secured by stratagem and trickery, it could be rationalised in courts of law.
Courts do and should take human and sympathetic view of the matters.
That is the very essence of justice.
But considerations of judicial policy also dictate that a tendency of this kind where advantage gained by illegal means is permitted to be retained will jeopardise the purity of selection process itself; engender cynical disrespect towards the judicial process and in the last analysis embolden errant authorities and candidates into a sense of complacency and impunity that gains achieved by such wrongs could be retained by an appeal to the sympathy of the court.
Such instances reduce the jurisdiction and discretion of courts into private benevolence.
This tendency should be stopped.
The selection of respondent 6 in the sports category was, on the material placed before us, thoroughly unjustified.
He was not eligible in the sports category.
He would not be entitled on the basis of his marks, to a seat in general merit category.
Attribution of eligibility long after the selection process was over, in our opinion, is misuse of power.
While we have sympathy for the predicament of respondent 6, it should not lose sight of the fact that the situation is the result of his own making.
We think in order to uphold the purity of academic processes, we should quash the selection and admission of respondent 6."
13.
Further reference can be made to the recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of KG Ashok v. Kerala Public Service Commission, 2001(4) Services Law Reporter 243 : 2001(2) SCT 1005 (SC), where their Lordships held that where facts have been concealed despite clear warning in admission brochure and notice, no relief could be granted.
14.
In the light of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner mis-led the authority in getting admission to BTech Electrical Course.
The action of the University in cancelling the said admission vide letter dated 862001, Annexure P/6 to the writ petition cannot be held to be unjustified for illegal.
The University has acted in accordance with the settled principle of law.
It served a show cause notice upon the petitioner, which the petitioner replied to.
The University having found the reply unsatisfactory cancelled the admission of the petitioner.
It is conceded before us that the petitioner does not satisfy the prescribed percentage of the eligibility condition for brochure as stated in the brochure.
We find no merit in this writ petition and decline to interfere.
The writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.