NK Sud, J - The two petitioners in the present writ petition are aggrieved by the order of the Executive Director dated 1171997 (Annexure P-7) whereby their services have been terminated.
The relevant facts leading to the aforesaid termination order, as stated in the writ petition, are as under :-  2.
The respondent-Punjab Backward Classes Land Development and Finance Corporation (for short the Corporation) advertised for the recruitment to 11 posts of Clerk vide advertisement dated 18.9.1996, a copy of which has been placed as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
All the necessary qualifications and conditions were mentioned in the advertisement.
The petitioners applied for the aforesaid posts and appeared in the typing test of English and Punjabi on 30111996.
Having qualified in the test, they appeared for the interview before the Selection Committee on 3121996.
Thereafter, they were issued appointment letters dated 30121996 appointing them as clerks on probation on the terms and conditions mentioned therein.
The conditions Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of this letter which are relevant for the purposes of this petition and read as under :-  "1.
You are appointed against a purely temporary post and subject to that is stated in item (iii) below, your services will be liable to be terminated at any time on a notice of one month, or either side provided that either side would be required to pay in lieu of short notice, salary for the period by which the notice falls short of one month.
2.
You will be treated on probation for a period of 2 years which may be extended up to a maximum of years.
During the period of probation or during the extended period thereof, as the case may be, if your work/conduct is found to be unsatisfactory, your services will be terminated forthwith without giving any notice or pay in lieu thereof, on completing the probationary period satisfactorily your services will be liable to be terminated on a notice of one month provided that the Corporation would be prepared to pay in lieu of short notice, your salary for the period by which the notice falls short.
Similarly, in case you desire to leave the service of this Corporation during the period of probation period, whether original or extended as the case may be you shall have to deposit one month salary with the corporation or the salary for the period of short of such notice.
3.
You shall have to serve the Corporation atleast for 2 years before you are allowed to go to any other undertaking or Department and in case you may wish to leave the service of the Corporation, you will do so, after giving the notice as above and tendering you resignation."
3.
After completing the necessary formalities, the petitioners were allowed to join duty as Clerks from 711997.
On 1071997, the petitioners duly reported for duty ad marked their attendance in the register.
Thereafter, they suddenly fell sick and left office after leaving an application for leave for one day with the branch Incharge.
On the next day, i.e. on 1171997, when they reported for duty they were not allowed to mark their presence and were informed that their services would be terminated and the order would be despatched to their residence.
The petitioners, thereafter, sent applications through Speed Post on that very day, i.e. on 1171997, enclosing medical certificates dated 1071997 certifying that petitioners No. 1 and 2 were suffering from Gastroenteritis and fever respectively and had been advised rest for one day.
The termination order dated 1171997 (Annexure P-7) was received by petitioner No. 2 on 14.7.1997 whereas petitioner No. 1 did not receive the order as her address had not been correctly mentioned in the endorsement forwarding a copy of the order to her.
4.
In the above factual background, it has been contended in the writ petition that the petitioners had been appointed after following due procedure.
They were fully qualified and had cleared the typing test in English and Punjabi and had been selected by the Selection Committee after an interview.
Their work and conduct had been good/very good and there was nothing adverse in their services record.
It has further been contended that even though they were on probation, their services had been terminated not because their work and conduct and not been found satisfactory but as a measure of punishment.
The ground as per the termination order was that "it is not considered necessary to keep them in service".
Such a ground was not available to the Corporation for terminating the services of a probationer.
It has further been alleged that the impugned order has been issued in violation of the terms of the appointment letter.
The requirement of giving one month's notice had also been violated.
Further, neither of the petitioners had ever been issued any notice seeking their explanation for any misconduct nor had any inquiry ever been held against them and, therefore, it was alleged that the termination was a colourable exercise of power by the respondent.
5.
On notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
In the preliminary objections, it has been explained that the petitioners had no right to challenge the order of termination which was strictly in accordance with the terms of the appointment letter.
In the appointment letter, it had clearly been mentioned that the petitioners were on probation for two years and if during probation, their work and conduct was found to be unsatisfactory then their services could be terminated without giving any notice or pay in lieu thereof.
It has also been stated that many complaints had been received by the Government against the appointment of Clerks and the matter was being looked into.
In this context, the petitioners and all other appointees were asked to appear in a Typing Test on 1071997.
The petitioners instead of appearing in the test left their seats without permission leaving a note that they had all of a sudden got indisposed and were leaving office.
When on the next day, the petitioners were called upon to explain their wilful absence, they refused to do so.
This, according to the respondent, was an act of indiscipline.
It is alleged that the petitioners had slipped away to avoid the test and, therefore, had left the office without permission on the ground of sudden illness.
It has further been explained that since the petitioners were on probation their services were terminated.
It has also been mentioned that the petitioners had joined on 711997 and by the end of the financial year on 3131997, they had put in less than three months of service and, therefore, the question of recording any proper Annual Confidential Report did not arise.
The act of indiscipline of leaving office without permission itself reflected on their conduct and was a sufficient ground for terminating their services during probation.
6.
In response to the written statement, the petitioner No. 1 filed an affidavit dated 1391997 claiming :- that the Annual Confidential Reports for the period 3131997 had already been written by the Corporation authorities and the petitioners had earned good reports; that no letter was issued to the petitioners asking them to appear in the typing test again; that services of three other candidates namely Anju Prashar, Jagtar and Umesh, who had also been selected along with the petitioners as Clerks were also terminated on 991997 although they had appeared in the fress typing test on 1071997 and had been cleared the same; that the written statement filed by the respondent clearly showed that their services had been terminated on account of misconduct for which neither any inquiry about the wilful absence had been afforded to them; that the petitioners were never made aware of the complaints received by the Government; and that although the services of the petitioners had been terminated simpliciter in an innocuous manner, the basis behind the termination order was to punish them.
In an additional affidavit dated 2091997, petitioner No. 1 has averred that although two Clerks namely Vipin Kumar and Ajit Singh, who were selected along with them, could not clear the typing test on 1071997 yet their services were not terminated.
7.
The respondent filed a reply to the affidavit of the petitioner No. 1 dated 1391997 in which it was clarified that as per the advertisement dated 18.9.1996 (Annexure P-1) 11 posts of Clerks along with same other posts had been advertised.
The Selection Committee selected 11 persons for these posts and kept some persons on the waiting list.
The petitioners were not amongst the 11 persons selected against 11 posts but were in the waiting list.
The 11 persons selected against the advertised posts were still serving in the Corporation.
Five persons including the petitioners from the waiting list were also given the appointment against purely temporary posts and, therefore, it was not correctly stated by the petitioners that they were appointed against the advertised posts.
It has also been clarified that the services of the three persons namely Anju Prashar, Jagtar Singh and Umesh had been terminated by giving them one month's salary in lieu of notice in accordance with the condition No. 1 of their appointment letters.
They were also in the waiting list and had been appointed against the temporary posts which had not been advertised.
It has further been averred that the aforesaid three persons have accepted their order of termination and, therefore, reference to their termination by the petitioners is of no consequence.
8.
Mr. KL Arora, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioners, contended that the impugned order terminating the services of the petitioners is not termination simpliciter but has been passed by way of punishment.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in AP State Fed.
of Cooperative Spinning Mills Ltd v. PV Swaminathan, 2001(3) SCT 128 to contend that even though an order of termination may be innocuous yet the attending circumstances may show that the order in fact is punitive.
Such circumstances could be gathered even from the assertions made in the counter affidavit filed before the High Court.
He referred to the written statement of the respondent wherein it has clearly been stated that the order had been prompted by the alleged wilful absence of the petitioners from duty on 1071997 in order to avoid taking the fresh typing test.
According to him, the Court is not to go by the language of the order but has also to look into the circumstances under which it had been passed to judge whether it is a termination simpliciter or termination by way of punishment.
He further contended that although the language or the wording of the order does not contain any stigma yet keeping in view the circumstances under which it had been passed, there can be no doubt that it is punitive in nature and casts a stigma on the petitioners.
According to him, it was clearly founded on the alleged wilful absence from duty without permission on 1071997.
In such circumstances it was mandatory for the respondent to hold a regular inquiry into the allegation of misconduct before passing such a stigmatic order of termination.
In this behalf he referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dipti Prakash Banerjee v. Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta, 1999(1) SCT 861.
He referred to head notes B and C which read as under :-  "B.
Constitution of India, Article 14 - Probation - Stigma - Termination during probation - Whether the reasons would cast a stigma and affect the future career of the employee in getting employment depends on the facts and circumstances of each case and the language or words employed in the order of termination of the probationer - If it leads a person to believe that there was something wrong with the employee as regards his conduct or character, it will certainly cast a stigma - It is not necessary that words amounting to stigma must be contained in the order of termination itself but may be contained in the enclosures, documents or proceedings referred to therein - Findings or preparation of false bills and misbehaviour with women based on a formal enquiry are stigmatic.
C. Constitution of India, Article 14 - Probationer - Natural Justice - Stigmatic order of termination or probationer based on formal enquiry by show cause notice without holding regular enquiry into the allegations of misconduct - Order held vitiated - Findings arrived at by such formal Committee cannot be used for terminating the services of a probationer."
9.
He also relied on another decision of the Apex Court in Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, AIR 1974 SC 2192, in which it has been held that the fact of holding the enquiry is not always conclusive.
What is decisive is whether the order is really by way of punishment.
If the facts and circumstances of the case indicate that the substance of the order is that the termination is by way of punishment then a probationer is entitled to the protection of Article 311.
It is the substance of the order and not the form that would be decisive.
He also cited Division Bench decisions of this court in Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd v. Mandeep Singh, 1991(1) RSJ 824 : 1991(1) SCT 521 (P&H)(DB), Ambala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, 1991(3) SCT 694 and Rakesh Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1999(3) SCT 645 to the same effect.
10.
He, then, referred to the decision of a Single Judge of this Court in Harbans Singh v. Secretary, Government of Punjab and another, 1992(8) SLR 691 : 1993(3) SCT 633 (P&H), in which it has been held that a probationer can be reverted from a higher post if, during the period of probation, his work was not satisfactory.
However, if the foundation of the order of reversion was misconduct and the authorities wanted to punish him for that reason and revert the Government servant without following the procedure laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution, then, the order of revision could not be justified merely on the ground that the Government servant is a probationer.
Reliance was also placed on a decision of the Apex Court in Shri DK Yadav v. M/s. JMA Industries Ltd, 1993(4) SLR 126 : 1993(3) SCT 537 (SC), to contend that an order of termination involves civil consequences of jeopardising not only an employee's livelihood but also his career and livelihood of his dependents and, therefore, before taking any action of putting an end to the tenure of an employee/workman, fair play requires that a reasonable opportunity to put forth his case is given and domestic enquiry conducted complying with the principles of natural justice.
He also placed reliance on a decision of this Court in Santosh Kumar Sharma v. Haryana Land Reclamation and Development Corporation Ltd, 1991(2) SCT 121, to the same effect.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also contended that from the facts and circumstances of the case, it is clear that the order of termination had been passed merely to punish the petitioners for not appearing in the typing test held on 1071997.
According to him, for respondent was not even competent to order this test as the petitioners had already cleared the necessary typing test before their appointment.
He relied on the decision of this Court in Pawan Kumar and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1992(3) RSJ 146 : 1992(3) SCT 98 (P&H)(DB), in which it has been held that once the petitioners had cleared all the tests and had come to the required specifications as laid down by the Board constituted on that behalf, there was no question for the respondents thereafter to again put the petitioners to the same tests.
Thus once it is found that the second typing test itself was not required, the charge against the petitioners could no longer survive.
12.
Mr. Arora also referred to the decision of this Court in Hindu College, Sonepat v. Sadhu Ram Saini, 1992(2) SCT 603, wherein termination from service for wilful absence from duty without giving an opportunity of hearing was held to be violative of principles of natural justice.
However, he fairly conceded that the Court was dealing with the termination of service of a regular employee and not a probationer as in the present case.
13.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also referred to condition No. 3 of the appointment letter (Annexure P-4) to contend that the petitioners had been bound down to serve for at lest two years and therefore their services could not have terminated before the expiry of the aforesaid period of two years.
14.
Mr. Arora, then, pointed out that three other persons namely Anju Prashar, Jagtar Singh and Umesh, who were also appointed along with the petitioners from out of the waiting list and whose services had also been terminated by giving them one month's notice in accordance with condition No. 1 of the letter of appointment, had made a representation to the respondent on the basis of which they have been taken back in service.
Thus, the petitioners being similarly situated also ought to have been taken back.
15.
Mr. MJS Sethi, Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent, contested the claim of the petitioners.
He pointed out that the petitioners were merely probationers and their appointment was governed by the terms and conditions of the letter of appointment dated 30121996 (Annexure P-4).
By referring to condition No. 2 in the aforesaid letter which has already been reproduced in the earlier part of this judgment, he pointed out that the respondent was fully competent to terminate the services of the petitioners during the probation, if their work and conduct was not found to be satisfactory and for this purpose neither any notice nor any pay in lieu thereof was required to be given to the petitioners.
According to him, if during the course of probation, some omission or commission of an employee comes to the notice of the employer, then there are two courses open before the employer.
He can either conduct an inquiry into the matter and take action in the light of the findings arrived at in such inquiry.
In the alternative, he can discharge the employees forthwith on the ground that the work or conduct of the employee has not been found satisfactory.
In the later case, it is purely the satisfaction of the employer which is the deciding factor and such satisfaction is not open to challenge.
However, the order of termination should be termination simpliciter and not ex-facie stigmatic and punitive.
He did not dispute the proposition that an order of termination which casts stigma on the employee cannot be sustained even in the case of a probationer if such an order is passed without conducting a proper inquiry and without affording a reasonable opportunity to the employee to explain his/her conduct.
But that was not the position in the present case.
To elucidate this point, he referred to the decision of the Apex Court in VP Ahuja v. State of Punjab, JT 2000(3) SC 1 : 2000(2) SCT 327 (SC), in which an order of termination of services of an employee during the period of his probation was set aside as the order was ex-facie stigmatic as also punitive.
The order under challenge before the Supreme Court in that case was in the following terms :-  "ORDER Sh. VP Ahuja, s/o Late Sh. HN Ahuja was appointed on probation for 2 years as Cheif Executive of the Cooperation Spg.
Mills Ltd, vide orders Enst.
No. Spinfed/CCCA/7844-45 dated 2991998 and posted at Bacospin.
However, he failed in the performance of his duties administratively and technically.
Therefore, as per Clause-I of the said appointment order, the services of Sh. VP Ahuja are hereby terminated with immediate effect.
Sd/-  (Managing Director) SPINFED"  As against this, the order of termination in the case in hand reads as under :-  "OFFICE ORDER Miss Rajwant Kaur and Mrs. Meena Singla, Clerks on probation and it is not considered necessary to keep them in service and therefore their services are hereby terminated with immediate effect.
Dated Chandigarh,  K.S.
Sandhu,  Executive Director" 1171997 16.
Thus, according to him, termination order in the case in hand is totally innocuous and does not cast any stigma on the petitioners.
He also referred to the observations of the Apex Court in VP Ahuja's case (supra) where, in para-9, their Lordships have observed that the entire case law with respect to a probationer had been reviewed by the Supreme Court in Dipti Prakash Banerjee's case (supra).
Accordingly he straightaway referred to the law laid down in that case in respect of termination of services of a probationer.
Learned counsel contended that as per this decision, an order of termination of services of a probationer can be said to be punitive only if it is "founded" on certain allegations leading to such termination.
As against this, where such allegations are merely the "motive" for termination, the order cannot be said to be punitive.
Thus, the question is whether the allegations made in the written statement are the "motive" or the "foundation" of the termination order.
He referred to para-22 of the judgment to contend that where the findings are arrived at in an inquiry as to misconduct behind the back of an employee or without a regular departmental inquiry, even a simple order of a termination is to be treated as "founded" on the allegations and will be bad.
But if no enquiry was held, no finding was arrived at and the employer was not inclined to conduct an enquiry but at the same time he did not want to continue the employee against whom there were some complaints, it would be a case of motive and the order would not be bad.
In the present case, admittedly, the order of termination passed during the period of probation was innocuous.
The allegations of wilful absence on 1071997 in order to avoid taking of the typing test was merely a motive for such termination and not a foundation.
17.
Mr. Sethi also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in The State of Punjab and another v. Sukh Raj Bahadur, AIR 1968 SC 1089, where a simple order of termination in case of a petitioner was upheld even though it had been passed after a memo for a regular inquiry had been served and reply thereto filed by the employee.
It was at that stage that the proceedings were dropped and a simple termination order was passed as it was felt the departmental proceedings were likely to take a much longer time.
It was, therefore, contended that the case in hand was on a much better footing as no memo for any inquiry had been served on the petitioners about the allegations mentioned in the written statement.
18.
The learned counsel also contended that the allegation of an order being stigmatic has to be decided on the facts and circumstances of each case keeping in view the language or the words employed in the order of termination.
Applying this test as laid down by the Supreme Court in VP Ahuja's case (supra), the impugned order could not be said to be punitive or stigmatic.
Further, the termination order does not refer to any document or proceedings nor is accompanied by any enclosures from which any stigma can be gathered.
19.
Mr. Sethi also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36 wherein the position of a probationer has been explained.
He referred to the observations of the Apex Court in para-11 wherein it has been explained that appointment to a permanent post in Government service on probation means, as in the case of a person appointed by a private employer, that the servant so appointed is taken on trial.
The period of probation may in some cases be for a fixed period while in others such period may not be specified.
However, such an employment on probation under the ordinary law of master and servant, comes to an end if during or at the end of the probation the servant to appointed on trial is found unsuitable and his service is terminated by a notice.
The point sought to be made by the learned counsel was that even in the case of a permanent post in Government service, a probationer was merely held to be on trial and could be discharged during the period of probation if not found suitable.
Thus, even if the work of an employee may be satisfactory, yet if the employer comes to the conclusion that the person is not suitable, he can terminate the services of such an employee during the period of probation.
In the present case, the petitioners had been appointed against purely temporary posts and it had not been considered necessary to keep them in service by the employer.
The petitioners could not claim any right to post.
He further relied on the decision of in Dr. T C M Pillai v. The Indian Institute of Technology, Guindy, Madras, 1971 SLR 679 to contend that the petitioners can derive no benefit from the fact that there was no complaint against their work which had been found to be satisfactory or that they had been given good report in the A.C.Rs.
Suitability does not depend merely on the excellence or proficiency in work.
There are many factors which enter into consideration for confirming a person who is on probation.
A particular attitude or tendency displayed by an employee can well influence the decision of the confirming authority while judging his suitability of fitness for confirmation.
20.
Learned counsel for the respondent distinguished the authorities cited by the counsel for the petitioners.
He pointed out that in Samsher Singh's case (supra), the termination was founded on an enquiry report of the Director of Vigilance who had recorded the statements of witnesses behind the back of the concerned employee.
Neither the report nor the statements recorded by the Inquiry Officer had reached the employee and the order of termination of his services was based on the recommendations in the report.
Similar was the position in Harbans Singh's case (supra), wherein the order of termination was based on the recommendation of the Inquiry Officer that the charges had been proved against the employee.
He had proceeded ex-parte against the employee without disposing of his application for transfer of the matter to another Inquiry Officer.
Similarly in the cases of Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd (supra), Ambala Central Cooperative Bank Ltd (supra) and Rakesh Kumar (supra), the termination orders were based on some reports.
21.
Mr. Sethi also pointed out that the reliance placed on DK Yadav's case (supra) was mis-placed as the Supreme Court was not dealing with the case of a probationer.
Similarly, the case of Santosh Kumar Sharma (supra) was also distinguished on facts as in that case this Court had found that the reversion order was passed on complaints made by the field staff against the petitioner.
22.
It was, then, contended by the counsel for the respondent that the case of the petitioners is based on alleged violation of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution.
He pointed out that the requirement of holding an inquiry after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to an employee as provided in this provision is only applicable qua the civil servants.
He referred to Article 311(1) to show that this provision applied only in the case of a member of a civil service of the Union or an All India Service or a civil service of a State or holder of a civil post under the Union or a State.
He distinguished the authorities cited by the counsel for the petitioners on this score as well.
According to him, all those cases were dealing with termination of services of a civil servant.
He drew my attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in State Bank of India v. Vijaya Kumar, AIR 1991 SC 79, where it had been held that the employees of State Bank of India could not seek any protection under Articles 311 of the Constitution since they did not fall under any one of the categories of civil servants mentioned in Article 311(1).
They could claim their rights conferred under the general guide-lines of the Bank.
He also referred to the judgment of a Division Bank of this Court in Kishori Lal Batra v. The Punjab State and another, AIR 1958 Punjab 402, wherein it had been held that an Executive Officer appointed under the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, is neither a servant of the Government nor a municipal servant appointed under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, but is a creature of the Statute under which he had bee appointed.
It was, therefore, held that it was not permissible to go outside that Statute or the rules famed thereunder for any matter governing his appointment, punishment, suspension or removal.
The counsel, therefore, contended that the petitioners were strictly governed by the terms of the appointment letter dated 30121996 (Annexure P-4) in which there is no provision corresponding to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The petitioners have also not pointed out any regulation of the Corporation requiring any mandatory enquiry or issuance of a show cause notice before termination of the services of a probationer.
23.
The counsel for the respondent next contended that the petitioners could not be allowed to challenge the impugned order on grounds not raised in the written statement.
He referred to para-14 of the writ petition to show that the order of termination had been challenged on two ground only viz. (i) absence of one month notice in accordance with the terms of the appointment letter dated and (ii) the work and conduct of both the petitioners having been found to be good.
According to him, neither of the objections were tenable as already discussed above.
A bare perusal of condition No. 2 of the appointment letter (Annexure P-4) shows that the services of a probationer could be terminated without giving any notice or pay in lieu thereof if his/her work/conduct is found to be unsatisfactory.
In the present case, since the conduct of the petitioners had been fond to be unsatisfactory, the respondent was justified in terminating their services without issuing one months notice.
Further, the petitioners had worked for less than three months in the financial year 1996-97 and no A.C.Rs.
had been filled-up regarding their work.
It was further stated that at any rate, even if it is assumed that their work was good it did not necessarily follow that they were suitable.
The suitability of a person depends upon various other factors including his or her conduct.
24.
He also referred to the affidavit filed by petitioner No. 1 dated 1391997 wherein it had been conceded that the order of termination was termination simpliciter.
In para-5 of this affidavit, it had been averred that "the services of the petitioners were terminated simpliciter and in violation to the principles of natural justice."
In para-7 also it has again been stated that "The services have been terminated simpliciter by saying that it is not considered necessary to keep them in service".
It was, therefore, contended that the petitioners could not now contend that the order of termination is stigmatic or punitive.
It was also contended that when the services of a probationer are terminated during probation, it is implied that his/her work/conduct has not been found to be satisfactory or that the probationer was not found suitable.
If this implication was to be treated as a foundation to punish, then in no case, the services of a probationer can be terminated without holding an enquiry and granting him an opportunity of being heard.
Such is not the position in law.
25.
Learned counsel for the respondent also pointed out that the services of the petitioners had not been terminated because they had not taken the fresh typing test.
It was only the conduct of the petitioners in tying to act over- smart by slipping away from the office without permission on the pretext of illness to avoid taking the test which had motivated the termination order.
Thus, the allegation of discrimination on the ground that the services of some employees who had cleared the test had still been terminated whereas some of the employees who had failed in the test had been retained is of no significance.
In fact, this fortifies the case of the respondent that the fresh typing test was not a criteria for retention or termination of an employee.
26.
Mr. Sethi also controverted the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that in terms of condition No. 3 of their appointment letter, they could not be removed before two years.
It was contended that this condition only barred the petitioners from leaving the Corporation before completing two years service.
It did not place any restriction on the power of the Corporation to terminate their services at any time during the period of probation in terms of conditions No. 1 and 2.
The condition No. 1 specifically authorised the Corporation to terminate their services by giving them one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof.
Condition No. 2 further conferred power on the Corporation to terminate their services if their work and conduct was not found to be satisfactory and this could be done without giving any notice or pay in lieu thereof.
27.
The learned counsel for the respondent explained that the other employees namely Anju Prashar, Jagtar singh and Umesh, had made a representation to the respondent on the basis of which they have been given fresh appointments.
Their earlier orders of termination were not revoked.
This does not confer any right on the petitioners to be taken back in service.
He pointed out that there was no complaint about the conduct of the aforesaid three employees and their representations were considered on the basis of merits of their claim.
No such representation had been made by the petitioners.
28.
In reply, Mr. Arora has merely reiterated the arguments already advanced.
In addition, he also brought to my notice a decision of the Apex Court in Chander Prakash Shahi v. State of UP and others, 2000 SOL Case No. 282, decided on 2542000 to contend that even where a preliminary enquiry is held to find out involvement of an employee in an incident of quarrel and the order of termination is passed on the basis of the report of such an enquiry, the order would be punitive in nature.
He pointed out that the narration of the incident in the written statement shows that the conclusion of indiscipline drawn by the Corporation was nothing but a preliminary enquiry.
Thus, the order of termination based on such preliminary enquiry was liable to be struck down being punitive.
29.
I have heard the rival contentions and gone through the authorities cited before me.
At the outset, I would straight-away reject the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners towards the end of the proceedings that the narration of incident in the written statement should be treated as some sort of a preliminary enquiry against the petitioners.
The entire thrust of contentions raised in the writ petition as well as in the arguments initially advanced before me was that there had been no enquiry against the petitioners and no notice had ever been issued to them.
It is only after the learned counsel for the respondent had highlighted the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Dipti Prakash Banerjee (supra) that in reply to his arguments, a weak attempt has been made to show that a preliminary enquiry had in fact been held.
No such contention had been raised in the writ petition or while addressing the main arguments before me.
I would like to refer to the petitioners', own sworn testimony.
In para-15 of the writ petition, it has been stated as under :-  "........during the period of service, none of the petitioners has ever been issued any explanation or any show cause notice.
No enquiry has either been held and the services of the petitioners have been terminated as colourable exercise of powers ......." 30.
In reply to the written statement filed by the respondent, petitioner No. 1 had filed an affidavit dated 1391997 in which in para-5 it had been averred as under :-  ".......Neither any enquiry was held about the wilful absence nor an opportunity of hearing was afforded to them.
The services of the petitioners were terminated simpliciter and in violation to the principles of natural justice ........" 31.
While applying for stay vide CM No. 23754 of 1997, she filed yet another affidavit dated 8101997, in which in para-3 it had been averred as under :-  ".....Thus termination was by way of colourable exercise of power.
Neither any opportunity of hearing was afforded nor any explanation was called.
It was by way of non-speaking orders that the services of both the petitioners who were duly selected by the selection committee, were terminated by an order simpliciter Annexure P-7.
No charge sheet was issued and no enquiry was held.
There was no reason to terminate the services of the petitioners."
32.
Yet another application for stay was filed vide CM No. 7849 of 1998, which was accompanied by her affidavit dated 141998, wherein in para-1 it had been stated as under :-  "........
However, before passing this order of termination of the services of the petitioners, they were neither afforded an opportunity of hearing nor any explanation was called.
No charge sheet was issued and no enquiry was held and no reasons were given.
With a one stroke of the pen the services of the petitioners who are selected after due selection were terminated."
33.
Another application for stay was filed vide CM No. 4678 of 1999 and in para-2, petitioner No. 1 had stated as under :-  ".........The petitioners were not afforded an opportunity of hearing before this order was passed.
No show cause notice was issued.
No charge sheet was issued and no enquiry was held ..........." 34.
Again, in CM No. 15383 of 1999, praying for hearing the matter of out of turn, yet another affidavit dated 671999 was filed wherein in para-2 it had been stated as under :  "........They were not afforded an opportunity of hearing.
No enquiry was held and no charge sheet was given."
35.
Thus, from the above, it is crystal clear that as per the admission of the petitioners themselves, no enquiry had been held by the respondent.
It is also admitted by them that the impugned order was an order of termination simpliciter.
Even otherwise merely asking an employee why he or she was not present on the preceding day cannot be termed as a preliminary enquiry by any standards.
It could at best be a starting point for an inquiry and that too if the employer had chosen to test the correctness or otherwise of their explanation.
36.
The next question for consideration is whether the order of termination passed by the respondent is stigmatic or not.
The order which has been reproduced in the earlier part of this judgment clearly shows that the language or wording of the order is not stigmatic.
Further, it also does not refer to any document or proceedings nor is it accompanied by any enclosure from which any stigma can be inferred.
The termination order neither contains any express stigma nor does it refer to any proceedings or other documents from which any stigma can be gathered.
Thus, apparently the order is not stigmatic.
However, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that in the written statement it has clearly been admitted that the order has been prompted by the action of the petitioners in leaving the office without prior permission in order to avoid the fresh typing test on 1071999.
It is not doubt true that the termination order has been prompted by the aforesaid incident.
But the question is, does it make the impugned order punitive in nature ?
37.
The Supreme Court in VP Ahuja's case (supra) has observed that the entire case law with respect to probationers had been reviewed by the Apex Court in the case of Dipti Prakash Banerjee (supra).
Thus, according to me, the present case has to be judged within the para-meters of the law laid down in the case of Dipti Prakash Banerjee (supra).
The test for determining whether the termination of the services of a probationer on the basis of a misconduct is punitive or not has to be decided on the basis whether the misconduct is the `foundation' of the order or merely `motive'.
This question was specifically formulated by the Apex Court and answered in the following terms :-  "As to in what circumstances an order of termination of a probationer can be said to be punitive or not depends upon whether certain allegations which are the cause of the termination are the motive or foundation.
In this area, as pointed out by Shah, J (as he then was) in Madan Gupal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 531 there is no difference between cases where services of a temporary employee are terminated and where a probationer is discharged.
This very question was gone into recently RC Gupta v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. and another, JT 1998(8) SC 585 and reference was made to the development of the law from time to time starting from Purshottam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1958 SCR 828, to the concept of `purpose of inquiry' introduced by Shah, J (as he then was) in State of Orissa v. Ram Narayan Dass, 1961(1) SCR 606 and to the seven (Judge) Bench decision in Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 1974(2) SCC 831 and to post- Samsher Singh case-law.
This Court had occasion to make a detailed examination of what is the `motive' and what is the `foundation' on which innocuous order is based.
38.
20.
This Court in that connection referred to the principles laid down by Krishna Iyer, J in Gujarat Steel Tubes v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sangh, 1980(2) SCC 592.
As to `foundation', it was said by Krishna Iyer, J as follows :  "......a termination effected because the master is satisfied of the misconduct and of the desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, it is dismissal, even if he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order under the standing order or otherwise.
Whether, in such a case, the grounds are recorded in different proceedings from the formal order, does not detract from its nature.
Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the inquiry and proceeds to terminate.
Given an alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the termination of service, the conclusion is dismissal, even if full benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-injurious terminology is used."
and as to motive : "On the contrary, even if there is suspicion of misconduct, the master may say that he does not wish to bother about it and may not go into his guilt but may feel like not keeping a man he is not happy with.
He may not like to investigate nor take the risk of continuing a dubious servant.
Then it is not dismissal but termination simpliciter, if no injurious record of reasons or pecuniary cut-back on his full terminal benefits is found.
For, in fact, misconduct is not then the moving factor in the discharge."
As to motive one other example is the case of State of Punjab v. Sukh Raj Bahadur, 1968(3) SCR 234 where a charge memo for a regular inquiry was served, reply given and at that stage itself the proceedings were dropped and a simple termination order was issued.
It was held, the order of simple termination was not founded on any findings as to misconduct.
In that case, this Court referred to AS Benjamin v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 1341 of 1996 dated 13121996 (SC) where a charge memo was issued, explanation was received, an inquiry officer was also appointed but before the inquiry could be completed, the proceedings were dropped and a simple order of termination was passed, the reason for dropping the proceedings was that "departmental proceedings will take a much longer time and we are not sure whether after gong through all the foundations, we will be able to deal with the accused in the way he deserves".
The termination was upheld.
21.
If findings were arrived at in inquiry as to misconduct, behind the back of the officer or without a regular departmental enquiry, the simple order of termination is to be treated as `founded' on the allegations and will be bad.
But if the inquiry was not held, no findings were arrived at and the employer was not inclined to conduct an inquiry but, at the same time, he did not want to continue to employee against whom there were complaints, it would only be a case of motive and the order would not be bad.
Similar is the proposition if the employer did not want to inquire into the truth of the allegations because of delay in regular departmental proceedings or he was doubtful about securing adequate evidence.
In such a circumstance, the allegations would be a motive and not the foundation and the simple order of termination would be valid.
In the light of the above principles, laid down in RS Gupta's case we do not think anything more is to be added.
Point 1 is decided accordingly."
The law laid down as above was reiterated by the Apex Court in Santosh Kumar Sharma's case (supra)  39.
Applying the aforesaid test, it is clear that the alleged misconduct of the petitioners was merely a motive and not the foundation of the order of termination.
The petitioners were on probation and their employer was not happy with their conduct in leaving the office without taking prior permission.
The employer chose not to hold any enquiry or to investigate into their misconduct but terminated their services during the period of probation.
Thus, it is merely a case of termination simpliciter and the impugned order cannot be said to be punitive.
40.
The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of AP State Fed.
of Coop.
Spinning Mills Ltd does not advance the case of the petitioners either.
In that case it had been found from the assertion made in paras 13 and 14 of the counter affidavit that the order of termination was `founded' on a letter of the Commissioner for Handlooms and Director of Handlooms and Textiles.
The petitioners have not produced a copy of the said letter but it is evident from the judgment that the same contained findings about the misconduct of the concerned employee.
Such is not the position in the case in hand.
As already observed by me earlier, the incident referred to in the written statement was merely a motive and not the foundation of the impugned order.
41.
There is also no merit in the contention of the petitioners that their services could not have been terminated before the expiry of the period of two years in view of condition No. 3 of their letters of appointment.
It has correctly been pointed out by the counsel for the respondent that the said condition was only a bar on the petitioners from leaving the Corporation before completion of two years service.
It did not place any restriction on the power of the Corporation to terminate their services at any time during the period of probation in terms of condition No. 2.
In the present, case, the respondent has exercised its power of termination under condition No. 2 as it was not satisfied with the conduct of the petitioners.
42.
Similarly, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that they could not be made to appear in the typing test again when they had already taken the same before they were selected in also devoid of any merit.
It has correctly been explained on behalf of the respondent that the fresh typing test was not a criteria for retention or termination of the employees.
Their services have not been terminated on the ground that they had failed to take the test.
Their termination was prompted by their conduct in leaving the office without taking prior permission.
43.
The charge of the petitioners about discrimination qua three other employees namely, Anju Prashar, Jagtar Singh and Umesh, who were similarly situated is also without any merit.
The services of the aforesaid three employees had also been terminated during the period of probation.
Subsequently, they had made representation to the respondent which was considered on merits and they were taken back in service.
Admittedly no such representation has been made by the petitioners.
44.
In view of the foregoing discussion, I am of the aforesaid opinion that the impugned order of termination is a case of termination simpliciter.
The petitioners were probationers and the termination order has been passed during the period of probation in accordance with condition No. 2 of their letters of appointment.
The order is neither punitive nor does it cast any stigma on the petitioners.
Thus, no case has been made out for interference of this Court in exercise of its extra ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
45.
Since I have upheld the order of termination on the ground that it is neither punitive nor stigmatic, it is not necessary for me to go into the issue whether the protection under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India is available only to civil servants and not to other employees like the petitioners.
46.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that three other similarly situated employees namely Anju Prashar, Jagtar singh and Umesh whose services had also been terminated during the period of probation have been taken back in service on representation made by them and, therefore, the petitioners also deserve to be taken back in service.
He pointed out that there are still vacancies existing in the respondent- Corporation.
The petitioners are at liberty to approach the Corporation for this purpose.
Needless to say that in case any such representation is made by the petitioners, the respondents shall consider the same sympathetically in accordance with law.
The decision shall not be influenced by the alleged misconduct which has admittedly not been enquired into.
No other point has been raised.
47.
With these observations, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.