BS Chauhan, J - The instant writ petition has been filed for quashing the order dated 2871997 (Annx.
9), by which petitioner's services have been terminated.
2.
The facts and circumstances giving rise to this case are that petitioner had been appointed temporarily as lecturer in Botany Department in the respondent University vide order dated 27.10.1969.
She stood confirmed on 14121972 and later on promoted as Associate Professor on 24.12.1987.
She proceeded on leave for doing the Post Doctoral Research in the United States of America and stayed there from 29890 to 15.10.96.
Petitioner came to India on 16.10.1996 and went back to USA again after applying for leave on 24121996.
Petitioner sent several applications and FAX messages from there seeking extension of her leave on medical ground.
She also sent a letter dated 19.3.1997 stating that if her leave could not be extended, she may be given voluntary retirement.
However, her services stood terminated vide order dated 2871997.
Hence this petition.
3.
Mr. BD Purohit, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that petitioner was a permanent and confirmed employee who had served for more than twenty-five years in the university and she could not have been terminated so unceremoniously.
His entire case is that under no circumstances, the service of a confirmed employee can be terminated without holding an enquiry.
Moreso, an agreement between the parties had been entered into at the time of appointment, which provided a detailed procedure of termination in case of misconduct etc. which has not been followed.
4.
Mr. JP Joshi, learned Counsel for respondent University, has raised the preliminary objection regarding maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the petition has been filed by petitioner through the Power of Attorney-holder, which is not permissible and it is also liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches as the termination order dated 2871997 has been challenged by filing the petition on 1351998.
Moreso, full-fledged enquiry was not required to be held for the reason that the petitioner was never sanctioned the leave and she was informed, vide telegram on 791997 (Annexure R/2) that the learned Vice Chancellor had refused to grant the leave and a notice dated 2221997 (Annexure R/3) was also served upon her to show cause why her services be not terminated being wilfully absent from duty.
Petitioner did not file any reply to the said show cause, hence the order has been passed terminating her services in view of the provisions of Clause (5) of the Ordinance 327 of the University.
5.
The issue of filing a writ petition through Power of Attorney-holder is not more res-integra as it has been considered by the Hon'ble Apex Court time and again.
In Charanjit Lal Chaudhary v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that the legal rights that can be enforced in writ jurisdiction must ordinarily be the rights of the petitioner himself/herself, who complains of infraction of such right and approaches the court for relief.
"The right that can be enforced under Article 226 shall ordinarily be the personal or individual right of the petitioner himself, though in the case of the some of the writs like habeas corpus or qua warranto, this rule may have to be relaxed or modified."
6.
In the State of Orissa v. Madan Gopal, AIR 1952 SC 12, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that the language of the Article itself shows that the issue of writs or directions by the Court is found only on its decision that a right of the aggrieved party has been infringed.
7.
Again, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered this issue in Calcutta Gas Co (Proprietary) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1962 SC 1044, and held that except in a writ of habeas carpus or quo warranto, the person can approach the Court only for redressal of his personal grievances.
8.
In State of Punjab v. Suraj Prakash Kapur, AIR 1963 SC 507, the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:  "The existence of a right and the infringement thereof are the foundation of the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The right that can be enforced under Article 226 of the Constitution shall ordinarily be the personal or individual right of the applicant."
9.
In State of Orissa v. Ramchandra Dev, AIR 1964 SC 685, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that the concluding words of Article 226 indicate that before a writ or appropriate order can be issued in favour of a party, it must be established that the party has a right and the said right is illegally invaded or threatened.
10.
Thus, it becomes quite clear that a party can enforce its individual right through writ jurisdiction.
While seeking issuance of writ like habeas corpus and quo warranto, there may be an exception.
11.
In Gudde Venketaswara Rao v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1968 SC 828, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :  "....That 'ordinarily' the petitioner who seeks the filing of an application under Article 226 of the Constitution should be one who has a personal or individual right in the subject matter of the petition."
12.
In Jasbhai Motibhai Desai v. Roshan Kumar Hazi Bashir Ahmed, AIR 1976 SC 578, a Constitution of Bench of the Supreme Court, while explaining the scope of the writ jurisdiction, emphasised that it can be restricted to only by an aggrieved person.
The Court observed as under :  "Its scope and meaning depends on diverse variable factors such as the contents and intent of the state of which contravention is alleged, the specific circumstances of the case, the nature and extent of the petitioner's interest and the nature and extent of the prejudice or injury suffered by him.
English Courts have sometime put a restriction and sometime a wide construction on the expression 'aggrieved person'.
However, some general tests have been devised to ascertain whether an applicant is eligible for this category so as to have the necessary locus standi or 'standing' to invoke certiorari jurisdiction."
13.
In Cyril E Fernandes v. Sr. Myria Lydia, AIR 1977 SC 2145, the Apex Court held that a person who is "directly concerned" with the grievance can maintain the writ petition.
14.
In Municipal Waraseoni v. Satish Chandra Jain, 1996(7) SCC 29, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that writ is maintainable only by the aggrieved party and not by some one else and a person cannot be permitted to maintain a writ only by stealing the language of any person who was in real sense aggrieved  15.
In the instant case, it has been submitted by Mr. Purohit that writ petition has been preferred by the aggrieved party Dr. Daksha Sankhla for redressal of her grievances through the power of attorney-holder.
Therefore, the principle laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgments referred to above, is not applicable.
The submission seems to be attractive but hollow in substance, for the reason that the law prohibits to do something indirectly which is prohibited to be done directly.
It is settled proposition of law that what cannot be done "per directum is not permissible to be done per obliqum", meaning thereby, whatever is prohibited by law to be done, cannot legally be effected by an indirect or circuitous contrivance on the principles of "quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur omne per quod devenitur and illud".
16.
In Jagir Singh v. Ranbir Singh, AIR 1979 SC 381, the Apex Court observed that an Authority cannot be permitted to evade a law by "shift or contrivance".
While deciding the said case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court placed reliance on the judgment in Fox v. Biship of Chester, 1874(2) B&C 635, wherein it has been observed as under :  "To carry out effectually the object of a Statute, it must be construed as to defeat all attempts to do, or avoid doing in an indirect or circuitous manner that which it has prohibited or enjoined."
17.
Thus, it is crystal clear that law prohibits to do something indirectly which is prohibited to be done directly.
18.
In a case like this, it becomes immaterial whether the power of attorney- holder files a case in his name for the person aggrieved or person aggrieved files a case through the power of attorney-holder.
Therefore, the petition is not maintainable.
19.
Even if for the sake of argument it is issued that the writ petition is maintainable, it does not have any merit.
The undisputed facts are that petitioner left for USA without prior sanction of leave, her leave application was not accepted; she was informed telegraphically on 711997 that her leave-application had been rejected and she should come back and join; a show cause notice dated 2271997 had also been served upon her but she did not submit any reply to it, rather sent the application dated 19.3.1997 seeking voluntary retirement and her services stood terminated on 2871997.
20.
Admittedly, petitioner remained absent without leave for more than seven months.
In spite of the fact that she had been informed that her leave had not been sanctioned and a show cause notice, as to why her services be not terminated for being wilful absent, she did not file any reply to the same.
In such a situation, the question does arise whether it was necessary for the University to hold a full-fledged enquiry.
21.
The principles of natural justice require to be considered in its correct perspective.
In fact, the said principles are ingrained in the mind of every- body, thus, known as principles of natural justice and require observance.
22.
One of the fundamental principles of natural justice is audi alteram partem, i.e. no man should be condemned unheard.
In Dr. Bentley's case i.e. R v. University of Cambridge, 1723(1) Str.
775, the King's Bench traced the history of principles of natural justice and observed that the first hearing in human history was given in the Garden of Eden and even "God himself did not pass sentence upon Adam, before he was called upon to make his defense".
23.
In Painter v. Liverpool Oil Gas Light Co, 1836(3) A&E 433, it was held that "a party is not to suffer in person or in purse without an opportunity of being heard."
24.
Even if there is no provision in the statute above giving of notice, if the order in question adversely affects the rights of an individual, the notice must be given (Vide East India Commercial Co v. Collector of Customs, AIR 1962 SC 1893).
The notice must be clear, specific and unambiguous and the charges should not be vague and uncertain.
(Vide Management of the N.R Cooperative Credit Society Ltd. v. Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1967 SC 1182.)
The object of notice is to give an opportunity to the individual concerned to present his case and therefore, if the party is aware of the charges or allegations, a formal defect would not invalidate the notice, unless the prejudice is caused to the individual.
(Vide Bhagwan Datta Shastri v. Ram Ratanji Gupta, AIR 1960 SC 200; and Fazal Bhai Dhala v. Custodian General, Evacuee Property, AIR SC 1397).
The party should also be given a reasonable time to file reply to the charges.
(Vide State of J&K v. Haji Wali Mahammad, AIR 1972 SC 2538.)
25.
Where a notice regarding one charge has been given, the person cannot be punished for a different charge for which no notice or opportunity of being heard was given to him.
(Vide Annamuthado v. Oil fields Workers, 1961(3) All ER 621., and Govindsinh v. G Subharao, 1970(11) GLR 897).
26.
In Ridge v. Baldwin, 1963(2) All ER 66, it was held that "the power of dismissal could not be exercised without giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard and without observing the principles of natural justice.
27.
A similar view was reiterated in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269.
28.
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597, the passport of the petitioner was impugned (impounded ?)
by the Government of India "in public interest", without according an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before taking the impugned action.
The order was found to be violative of the principles of natural justice.
29.
In Malik Ram v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1575 the scope of hearing was confined by the enquiry officer only to the hearing of arguments and rejected the application of the appellant to lead oral or documentary evidence.
The Supreme Court disapproved it observing that the delinquent should have been given an opportunity to lead evidence.
30.
In Bishambhar Nath Kohli v. State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 573, revision proceedings, the Custodian General accepted new evidence produced by one party, but no opportunity was given to the other side to meet with the same.
The Supreme Court held that the order stood vitiated for non-observance of the principles of natural justice.
31.
In State of Kerala v. KT Shaduli Grocery Dealer, AIR 1977 SC 1627, right to cross-examination of witnesses was held to be necessary.
32.
Thus, settled legal proposition remain that principles of natural justice are in-built in the statutory rules and require observance unless the same stand excluded by the rules itself.
The adjudicating authority must be impartial and without any interest or bias of any type; where the adjudicating authority is exercising judicial or quasi-judicial power, the order must be made by that authority and that power cannot be delegated or sub-delegated to any other officer, the adjudicating authority must disclose all material placed before it in the course of the proceedings and cannot utilize any material unless the opportunity is given to the party against whom it is sought to be utilised; the adjudicating authority must given an opportunity to the party concerned to rebut the evidence and material placed by the other side and in disciplinary proceedings under Article 311 of the Constitution of India against the civil servants and in cases of domestic inquiries by employers against their employees under the factory laws.
33.
However, the principles of natural justice had to be considered in the context of fact situation and in view of the Scheme, the rules applicable in a particular case.
If an employee remains absent for more than a stipulated period and the statutory rules or standing orders provide for automatic termination of his services in such an eventuality, without holding inquiry or giving opportunity of being heard, observance of principle of natural justice is mandatory proposition.
Hon'ble Supreme Court has categorically held in a catena of decisions that a statutory rule is void if its stipulates for automatic termination of services of an absenting employee after expiry of a stipulated period.
(Vide Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1990(3) SCC 682; Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation v. Mulu Amra, AIR 1994 SC 112; DK Yadav v. JMA Industries Ltd, 1993(3) SCC 259 : 1993(3) SCT 537 (SC), Scooters India Ltd v. Vijay EV Eldered, 1998(6) SCC 549; Uptron India Ltd v. Smt. Shammi Bhan, AIR 1998 SC 1681 : 1998(2) SCT 169 (SC) and Scooters India Ltd v. M Mohammad Yaqub, 2001(1) SCC 67 : 2001(1) SCT 212 (SC).)
34.
However, there may be circumstances where absence from duty, at the start, may not be a misconduct but when absence of the employee stretches abnormally giving rise to a presumption that the employee is no more interested to continue in service or has voluntarily abandoned the job.
Whether in such a case, before termination a notice or inquiry is required ?
In M/s. Jeevan Lal (1920) Ltd. Calcutta v. Its Workmen, AIR 1961 SC 1567 and Shahoordul Haque v. The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Bihar AIR 1974 SC 1896, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that in such a case "long unauthorised absence may reasonably give rise to an inference that such service is intended to be abandoned by the employee".
Being a case of abandonment of service, no notice/inquiry is required.
In State of Haryana v. Om Prakash, 1998(8) SCC 733, the Hon'ble Apex Court explained the distinction between 'retrenchment' and 'abandonment' from service, observing that termination contemplates an act on the part of the employer which puts an end to service to fall within the definition of the expression 'retrenchment' and in case the workman does not report for duty, it would amount to abandonment of service by the employee of his free will and the employer would have done nothing whatsoever, to put an end to his employment and, therefore, the case does not fall within the meaning of 'retrenchment'.
35.
A similar view has been taken by this Court in Vijay Singh Charan v. Management, Shri Swetamber Nakoda Parshwnath Tirth Mewa Nagar and another, 1999(1) RLW 314.
36.
In Chairman, Board of Mining Examination & Chief Inspector of Mines v. Ramjee, AIR 1977 SC 965, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-  "Natural justice is no unruly horse, no lurking land link, nor a judicial cure all.
If fairness is shown by the decision/maker to the man proceeded fundamentals of such essential process, properly being conditioned by facts and circumstances of each situation, no breach of natural justice can be complained of.
Unnatural expansion of natural justice, without reference to the administrative realities and other factors of a given case, can be exasperating.
We can be flexible yet firm in this jurisdiction.
No man shall be hit below the belt - that is the conscience of the matter."
37.
The Apex Court has reiterated time and again that the doctrine of natural justice cannot be imprisoned within the strait-jacket of a rigid formula and its application would depend upon the scheme and policy of the statute and relevant circumstances involved in a particular case.
(Vide Union of India v. PK Roy and others, AIR 1968 SC 850; Channabasappa Basappa Happaii v. State of Mysore, AIR 1972 SC 32 and Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd v. Girja Shankar Pant, 2001(1) SCT 607 (SC) : 2001(1) SCC 182.)
38.
In SL Kapoor v. Jag Mohan, AIR 1981 SC 136, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that where on admitted or undisputed facts, only one conclusion is possible and under the law only one penalty is permissible, the Court may not issued the writ to compel the observance of the principles of natural justice as it would amount to issuing a futile writ.
Similarly in State of UP v. OP Gupta, AIR 1970 SC 679, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that the Courts have to see whether non-observance of any of the principles enshrined in statutory rules or principles of natural justice have resulted in deflecting the course of justice.
Thus, it can be held that even if in a given case there has been some deviation from the principles of natural justice but which has not resulted in grave injustice or has not prejudiced the cause of the delinquent, the Court is not bound to interfere.
This Court does not function as a Court of Appeal over the findings of the Disciplinary Authority rather it has limited power of judicial review to the departmental proceedings in which appreciation of evidence is not permissible.
The Court can review only to correct the error of law or fundamental procedural requirements which lead to manifest injustice or court can interfere with the impugned order if the same has been passed in flagrant violation of the principles of natural justice.
(Vide Rae Bareli Kshetriya Gramin Bank v. Bhola Nath Singh, 1997(3) SCT 358 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1908).
39.
In Syndicate Bank v. General Secretary, Syndicate Bank Staff Association, 2000(5) SCC 65 : 2000(2) SCT 765 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court dealt with a similar case and held that where a show cause notice is served upon the delinquent employee and the employee choose not to respond to the said notice even after expiry of the notice period, the employer has a right to presume that the employee does not want to say anything and he is no more interested in the services of the employer.
The Court observed as under :  "It is no point lying strength on the principles of natural justice without understanding their scope or real manner.
There are two essential elements of natural justice which are; (a) no man shall be a judge in his own cause: and (b) no man shall be condemned either civil or criminally without being afforded an opportunity of being heard in answer to the charge made against him.
In course of time by various judicial pronouncements....... the bank had followed the requirement (of law)....
Under these circumstances it was not necessary for the bank to hold an enquiry before passing the order.
An enquiry would have been necessary if Dayananda has submitted his explanation which was not acceptable to the bank or contend that he did report for duty but was not allowed to join by the bank.
Nothing of the like has happened here.
Assuming for a moment that enquiry was initiated, evidence led before the Tribunal clearly showed that notice was given to Dayananda and it is he who defaulted and offered no explanation for his absence from duty and did not report on duty within thirty days of the notice...
It is undoubtedly relevant on the principles of natural justice by the Tribunal and even by the High Court has certainly led to a miscarriage of justice as far as the bank is concerned.
The conduct of Dayananda, as an employee of the bank, had been astounding."
40.
In Punjab and Sind Bank v. Sakattar Singh, 2001(1) SCT 265 (SC) : 2001(1) SCC 214, the Hon'ble Supreme Court impliedly approved the law in Syndicate Bank (supra) and held that if the employee has no intention to join duty and does not turn up inspite of notice, nor gives an explanation for his absence satisfying the Management that he has not taken up another employment or avocation and that he has no intention of joining the duty, the employee will be deemed to have retired from service on expiry of the time fixed in the notice.
If the employee furnishes satisfactory explanation and comes after expiry of the notice, he may be allowed to work without prejudice to the right of the employer to take action against him under the law.
In such a case, termination of service will not amount to punishment but would be a discharge simplicitor from the service.
The Court observed as under :  "Thus, there is no punishment for misconduct but only to notice the realities of the situation resulting from long absence of an employee from work with no satisfactory explanation thereto.
The principles of natural justice cannot be examined in vacuum without reference to the fact-situation arising in the case.
It also realises the futility of continuation with a situation when an employee, without appropriate intimation to the Management, is playing taunt (truant ?).
If the respondents had submitted an explanation regarding his unauthorised absence or placed any material before the Court that he did report for duty but was not allowed to join the duty, enquiry may have been initiated but not otherwise.
41.
In Dharmarathamakara Raibahadur Arcot Ramaswamy Mudaliar Educational Institution v. Educational Appellate Tribunal, 1999(7) SCC 332 : 1999(4) SCT 198 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :  "Giving an opportunity or an enquiry is a check and balanced concept that no one's right be taken away without giving him/her opportunity or when, enquiry in a given case or where the statute requires.
But this cannot be in a case where allegations and charges are admitted and on possible defence is placed before the Authority concerned.
What enquiry is to be made when one admits violations....
In a case where the facts are almost apparent on the face of the record, and inspite of opportunity no worthwhile explanation is forthcoming as in the present case, it would not be a fit case to interfere with the termination order."
42.
In Aligarh Muslim University v. Mansoor Ali Khan, 2000(7) SCC 529 : 2000(4) SCT 313 (SC), the Apex Court held that holding enquiry in a case where there can be no answer to the charges, would be a useless formality.
Similar view has been reiterated in Union of India v. Mustafa and Najibai Trading Co, 1998(6) SCC 79 : Dr. J Shashidhara Prasad v. Government of Karnataka, 1999(1) SCC 422 : 1999(1) SCT 198 (SC); MC Mehta v. Union of India, 1999(6) SCC 237 : 1999(1) SCT 561 (SC); and Designated Authority (Anti-Dumping Directorate) Ministry of Commerce v. Haldor Topsoe A/S, 2000(6) SCC 626.
43.
In HC Sarin v Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1686, the Hon'ble Supreme Court placed reliance upon the judgment of Lord Denning in R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ex-parte Mugal, 1973(3) All ER 796, wherein it has been observed as under :-  "The rule of natural justice must not be stretched too far.
Only too often the people who have done wrong seek to invoke "the rule of justice" so as to avoid the consequences."
44.
Thus, in view of the above, it cannot be held that in each and every case, non-observance of principles of natural justice would vitiate the order.
It has to be understood in the context and facts-station of each case and requirement of statutory Rules applicable therein.
45.
It is settled legal proposition that every action complained of is to be tested on the touch-stone of doctrine of prejudice.
(vide Maj. GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCC 382; Managing Director ECIL, Hyderabad and others v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1993(4) SCC 727, State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) : 1996(3) SCC 364; SK Singh v. Central Bank of India, 1996(6) SCC 415; Rajendra Singh v. State of MP, AIR 1996 SC 2736; Mansoor Ali Khan (supra) and Monika Jain v. State of Rajasthan, 1998(1) RLW 71).
46.
In KL Tripathi v. State Bank of India, AIR 1984 SC 273, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :-  "It is not possible to lay down rigid rules as to when the principles of natural justice are to apply, nor as to their scope and extent.... there must also have been some real prejudice to the complainant; there is no such thing as a merely technical infringement of natural justice.
The requirement of natural justice must depend on the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the enquiry, the rules under which the Tribunal is acting, the subject matter to be dealt with, and so on so forth."
47.
The instant case requires to be considered in the light of the aforesaid legal proposition.
The impugned order dated 2871997 reveals the following :  (i) Petitioner availed the leave for doing Post Doctoral Research Work but did not submit any result/progress of the so-called research work in spite of being asked; (ii) Staying away from work creates an impression that the employees are scrupulously serving the university; (iii) Petitioner had already been granted more than five years leave, therefore, it was not possible to grant further leave; (iv) Petitioner proceeded on leave without getting the leave sanctioned in advance and without taking permission to leave the Headquarters; (v) Petitioner did not join the service even after refusing the sanction of leave applied for; (vi) Petitioner did not submit any reply to the notice to show cause why her services be not terminated; and (vii) Petitioner's conduct made it explicit that she was no more interested in the university's service.
In addition to that, it is evident that petitioner did not turn up to the date of termination of her services.
She was knowing what was the case against her.
She had been given an opportunity to defend herself.
She did not place any medical certificate, on the basis of which her leave applications could have been considered.
One fails to understand even if enquiry was held against her, what stand she could have taken in such a fact-situation.
48.
It has been submitted on behalf of the respondents that petitioner's services stood terminated in terms of the Ordinance No. 327/5 for remaining absent from duty without leave.
The said ordinance reads as under :  "The leave could be sanctioned by the Vice Chancellor on merit, considering the facts and circumstances of each application, provided it is supported by relevant document."
49.
Clause 5 of the said Ordinance read as under :  "An employee who remains absent after the expiry of his leave, is not entitled to leave salary during the period of such absence.
Wilful absence from the duty involves forfeiture of appointment.
The Vice Chancellor may condone such period of wilful absence treating it as extraordinary leave (without pay)".
50.
Ordinance 320 read with Appendix-B and Schedule II provides for a procedure for imposing the punishment on delinquent.
The punishment can be imposed on the ground of grave misconduct and/or persistent negligence on duty and the same provides for issuing the charge-sheet, giving an opportunity to the delinquent to defend himself and lead evidence in support of his case.
Such term has also been incorporated in the agreement entered into by the parties at the time of employment.
51.
If both these ordinances are read together and it is presumed that there was an agreement between the parties which provided for holding a full-fledged inquiry in case of wilful absence or any other misconduct or persistent negligence, the question does arise; whether not holding such an inquiry has vitiated the order of termination ?
52.
Petitioner left India without prior sanction of her leave and without permission from the learned Vice Chancellor to leave the Headquarters.
She was informed telegraphically that her leave application had been rejected, Petitioner failed to produce any kind of Progress Report regarding her Post- doctoral Research Work before the respondent University.
She was given this facility for betterment of the students of the University and to serve the institution in a better way.
In absence of any proof of such Research work, the purpose of granting leave stood defeated.
She did not produce any medical certificate before the respondent University to satisfy the Authorities concerned that she was not able to join the institution.
Thus, in such a fact-situation, the law does not require any interference with the impugned order of termination.
53.
In absence of allegations of mala fide against any individual or impleading him by name, the issue whether her application for voluntary retirement ought to have been accepted, is not worth consideration.
If the petitioner herself had behaved in such a casual and irresponsible manner, there was no obligation on the part of the University to accept her application for voluntary retirement.
54.
It has further been submitted by Mr. Purohit that in large number of cases, the respondent-University has granted the leave exceeding the period provided under the Rules and petitioner has been refused this concession, thus, it violates the mandate of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution of India and the impugned order is liable to be quashed.
The submission made by Mr. Purohit is devoid of any merit for the reason that it is settled law that Article 14 of the Constitution is not meant to perpetuate an illegality or give benefit of a wrong order, nor illegality once committed can be pleaded to legalise other illegal act.
(vide Harpal Kaur Chahal v. Director, Punjab Instructions, 1995 (Supp) 4 SCC 706, Sneh Prabha v. State of UP, AIR 1996 SC 540, Jaipur Development Authority v. Daulat Ram Jain, 1996(8) JT SC 387, State of Haryana v. Ram Kumar Maan, 1997(3) SCC 321 : 1997(3) SCT 135 (SC), M/s Faridabad Ct. Scan Centre v. Director General, Health Services, 1997(7) SCC 752 : 1997(4) SCT 463 (SC) and Jalandhar Improvement Trust v. Sampuran Singh, 1999(2) RCR(Civil) 568 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1347)  55.
In view of the above, it remains undisputed that petitioner had availed the maximum permissible extraordinary leave for a period of five years.
Over and above, she remained on leave for a further period of one year and after completing six years, when she applied for further extension, her application was rejected.
Petitioner was informed that her leave application had been rejected and was asked to join the institution.
Petitioner did not pay any heed to it.
She was issued a notice to show cause, which she considered, for the reasons best known to her, not to reply at all.
Thus, in a case like this, there was no occasion for the respondent University to hold a full-fledged inquiry to prove the delinquency.
Moreso, provisions of clause 5 of Ordinance 327 does not require such a course.
Even if it is so required, holding such an inquiry could have been a useless formality.
I find no ground to interfere with the impugned order.
56.
Petition does not present any feature warranting interference in equitable jurisdiction.
Petition is devoid of merit and accordingly dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.