RN Prasad, J - In this writ petition, an intervention application has been filed on behalf of one Satyendra Kumar son of Sri Surendra Singh of village Beri, PS Naubatpur, District Patna to oppose the writ petition.
Another intervention application has been filed on behalf of another Satyendra Kumar claiming to be son of Surendra Singh of village Beri, PS Vikram, District Patna, bringing the fact to the notice of this Court that intervention petition has been filed in his name by somebody in this Court in the present writ petition i.e. C.W.J.C.
No. 1355 of 2001.
According to him, the said Intervention is a mischievous person who has filed the intervention application in the name of this intervenor.
It is stated that he ever filed any intervention application earlier nor he has leveled any allegation against the petitioner.
2.
Learned Counsel for the first Intervenor has submitted that the petitioner is not entitled for withdrawal of application filed by him seeking voluntary retirement in view of his misdeeds for which several persons had approached by filing application to the Chairman and the Managing Director of the respondent-Bank.
Learned counsel for the first Intervenor, however, has failed to show as to how the right of the first so-called Intervenor shall be adversely affected in case of success of the writ petitioner.
3.
This Court fails to appreciate as to how on such plea application for intervention can be entertained and the Intervenor be heard without any of his right being adversely affected.
Moreover, this court finds that there is dispute in regard to genuineness of the first Intervenor.
Under such circumstances, this Court does not feel persuaded to allow the intervention application.
Both the intervention applications are accordingly rejected.
4.
Petitioner is aggrieved by the order, contained in Annexure-7, which has been filed along with the supplementary affidavit filed on his behalf.
The said order has been issued by the Zonal Manager of the respondent-Bank of India refusing to acceed to the request of the petitioner for withdrawal of the application seeking voluntary retirement.
It appears that the respondent-Bank introduced voluntary retirement scheme on Ist November, 2000 vide Annexure-1 and in pursuance to that the petitioner filed an application seeking voluntary retirement.
However, later he filed an application for withdrawal of the said application seeking voluntary retirement before acceptance of the same which has been refused by the impugned Annexure-7.
It appears from the impugned Annexure-7 that the request for withdrawal of the application seeking voluntary retirement has been declined in view of the provisions contained in para `J' of the scheme which provides that the applications made under the scheme will be irrevocable and the employee has no right to withdraw the application once submitted.
5.
According to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, withdrawal of such application before its acceptance is a substantive legal right and the respondent-Bank, thus, is not legally justified in declining the request of the petitioner for the said withdrawal of his application seeking voluntary retirement.
In support of this, learned Counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of Power Finance Corporation Ltd v. Pramod Kumar Bhatia, reported in 1997(4) SCC 280 : 1997(2) SCT 321 (SC) and Union of India and another v. Wing Commander T Parthasarathy, reported in 2001(1) P.L.J.R.
(SC) 197 : 2001(1) SCT 282 (SC).
6.
Mr. J Krishna, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent-Bank, on the other hand, has submitted that in view of the fact that the petitioner knowing about the aforementioned condition, contained in para `J' submitted application seeking voluntary retirement and was such, he cannot be allowed to withdraw the same specially when no plausible ground has been made out.
In support of this, he has placed reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Balram Gupta v Union of India and another, reported in AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2354 (2358) (paras 11 and 12).
This Court is unable to accept the submission of the learned Counsel for the Bank.
In fact, the decision in the case of Balram Gupta has been discussed by the Apex Court in the case of Union of India v. Wing Commander T Parthasarathy (supra) and on consideration the points in issue held as follows :-  "The reliance placed upon the so-called policy decision which obligated the respondent to furnish a certificate to the extent that he was fully aware of the fact that he cannot later seek for cancellation of the applicant once made for premature retirement cannot, in our view, be destructive of the right of the respondents, in law, to withdraw his request for premature retirement before it ever became operative and effective and effected termination not his status and relation with the Department.
When the legal position is that much clear it would be futile for the appellants to base their rights on some policy decision of the Department or a mere certificate of the respondent being aware of a particular position which has no sanctity or basis in law to destroy such rights which otherwise inhered in him and available in law.
No such deprivation of the substantive right of a person can be denied exception the basis of any statutory provision or rule or regulation.
There being none brought to our notice in this case, the claim of the appellants cannot be countenanced in our hands.
Even that apart, the reasoning of the High Court that the case of the respondent will not be covered by the type of nature of the mischief sought to be curbed by the so- called policy decision also cannot be said to suffer any conformity in law to warrant or interference."
7.
Thus, the law is now settled by the Apex Court that right of withdrawal of application is a substantive legal right, which cannot be denied in absence of any Rule merely on the basis of some policy decision of the Department, or even any certificate submitted at the time of filling of application for premature retirement.
In the present case, it is not in dispute that the application of the petitioner seeking voluntary retirement was not accepted till he filed application for withdrawal of the same.
Under such circumstances, in my opinion, the impugned order (Annexure-7) cannot be sustained.
8.
Writ application is, thus, allowed and the order contained in Annexure-7 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to withdraw his application seeking voluntary retirement and allow him to continue in service till he attains the normal age of superannuation.
Petition allowed.