SS Sudhalkar, J - In both these petitions bearing Nos. C.W.P.
No. 14176 of 1999 and CWP 2944 of 2000 common question of law and similar question on facts are to be decided and hence they are heard together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
For reference we shall refer to the facts in C.W.P.
14176 of 1999.
2.
The petitioner in CWP 14176 of 1999 has prayed for a direction to the respondents to regularise his service in accordance with the policies of the Government dated 731996 (annexure P/2) and dated 1831996 (annexure P/2-A) and the arrears and consequential benefits with retrospective effect.
The petitioner was appointed as Baledar by respondents No. 2 and 3.
In the year 1992 his services were illegally terminated without compliance of provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the "Act").
The petitioner raised industrial dispute against the illegal termination of his service.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 221996 ordered reinstatement of the petitioner with full back wages and continuity of service.
The petitioner was thereafter taken back on duty and he contends that thereafter he is continuously working with the respondent-department.
He claims regularisation of his service in view of the regularisation policy of the respondent-Government.
3.
The respondents have filed written statement.
They contend that the petitioner was engaged on temporary muster roll on daily wages basis in the year 1988.
His work was of temporary nature and since then he is working with breaks from time to time.
They further contend that he was engaged as per requirement of the work and his service had automatically come to an end on the completion of work.
However, the passing of the award of the Labour Court in favour of the petitioner as mentioned in the petition, is not disputed.
The respondents have relied on the reasons given in their memo dated 1951997 (copy annexure R/1) for not regularisation of the petitioner.
It is contended that as per the policy the daily wagers who has completed five years of service on 3131993 and have completed 240 days of service per year during these five years and having breaks not more than 30 days, were only to be regularised and that the petitioner did not fulfil the above conditions.
It is also contended that on 1931996 instructions were issued that the daily wagers who have completed three years of service on 3111996 and were in service on 3111996 shall be regularised provided by they have worked for a minimum period of 240 days in each year and break in service in any year is not more than one month at a time.
It is contended that the petitioner has not completed the working period of 240 days each in 1993, 1994 and 1995 and there is break in service for more than one month at a time.
The respondents have, therefore, contended that the petitioner is not entitled to regularisation.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find that the stand taken by the respondents cannot be accepted.
According to regularisation policy as amended by the memo dated 1831996 (Annexure P/2-A), the time required is completion of three years service on 3111996.
Admittedly the service of the petitioner was terminated in the year 1992 and the petitioner was ordered to be instated by the Labour Court.
It may be noted that the Labour Court award directed reinstatement with continuity of service and when it is so it cannot lie in the mouth of the respondents that the petitioner was not in service during the period of three years prior to 3111996.
Admittedly he has been taken back on duty and as per award, copy annexure P/1 dated 221996, he was held entitled to reinstatement with benefits including the one of continuity of service.
Therefore, the period of termination of the service of the petitioner is to be treated on duty and a continuous service.
The period between the date of termination and the date of award covers the period as required under the policy for regularisation.
It thus does not lie in the mouth of the respondents that the petitioner was not on duty.
The petitioner's absence was the forced absence which has been ordered to be treated as on duty in view of the order of continuity of service (and full back wages) passed by the Labour Court.
Similar view has been taken by us in Civil Writ Petition No. 13298 of 1999, decided on 472001, titled Rakesh Kumar v. State of Haryana etc. and by another Division Bench of this court in CWP No. 809 of 1998 decided on 1251998 (Bikham and others v. State of Haryana and others).
5.
It may be noted that the petitioner had made a representation to the respondents for regularisation in pursuant to the order of this court in CWP 3372 of 1997.
A Division Bench of this court on 1131997 had ordered that if any representation is made within 15 days, it should be decided by passing a speaking order within six months.
The petitioner thereafter served a notice dated 2231997 on the respondents (copy Annexure P/4).
The petitioner also sent a reminder to the respondents on 911998 (copy Annexure P/5).
Annexure R/1 is the decision regarding denial of regularisation.
We find that inspite of having approached this court earlier and this court having directed the respondents to decide the representation/notice by passing speaking order, the prayer in the notice was also rejected for the sake of being rejected.
The notice did mention about the Labour Court award and continuity of service.
It is a very unhappy thing that for the relief which the department themselves can give, their servants are required to knock door of this court resulting in lot of agony to the servants and unnecessary increase of litigation in this court.
Such a litigation can easily be avoided.
It is not the case of the respondents that they are not having facility of the best legal advice.
Still it is not understood as to why the same is not sought.
It appears that the respondent-department and similar other departments just close their ears to the prayers of their servants, though they are worth considering.
We deprecate this policy.
We direct that the copies of this judgment be given to learned Advocates General of Punjab and Haryana to circulate the same in their departments.
This we are doing with the hope that those who are required to take decisions would realise sanctity of the direction of the High Court to decide the representations and otherwise also to decide the representations in accordance with law by giving all the necessary reliefs as are permissible under law even if they have not obtained directions from this court to decide the representations.
6.
With the above observations these writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to consider of the petitioners for regularisation.
Needful be done within period of one month from today.
7.
Copies of this judgment be given to learned Advocates General of Punjab and Haryana.
Petitions allowed.