GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal against order 1071991 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 3404 of 1990 vide which he directed the appellant to review the confidential reports of the respondent in accordance with the averments made in C.W.P.
No. 10222 of 1988 and then consider him for promotion on every such occasion when persons junior to him were considered and grant him promotion w.e.f.
the date he is found suitable.
2.
Respondent-Krishan Gopal Puri was commissioned in the Indian Army on 30.6.1963.
He was promoted as Lieutenant w.e.f.
30.6.1965, as Captain w.e.f.
30.6.1966 and as Major w.e.f.
3061971.
Vide letter dated 1351983 (Annexure PS with the writ petition), he was informed that his case for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel had been considered by the appropriate Selection Board but he had not been placed in the acceptable grade for such promotion and, therefore, he was no longer eligible for further consideration for promotion.
The statutory complaint filed by him was rejected by the Central Government vide order dated 1041987 (Annexure P6 in the writ petition).
3.
The respondent challenged communication dated 1351983 and order dated 1041987 in C.W.P.
No. 10222 of 1988 which was disposed of by the Division Bench on 351989.
The relevant extract of the order passed by the Division Bench is reproduced below :-  "Nobody appears for the respondents.
However, before lunch, Mr. PS Saini, Advocate, appeared for Mr. Chahar and requested for more time to file the written statement.
But we were not agreeable to adjourn the case because we found that inspite of repeated adjournments granted since November, 1988, no written statement has been filed by the respondents, and the very purpose of issuing the notice of motion stands frustrated.
Thereupon, Mr. Saini promised to send Mr. Chahar, the learned counsel who had been appearing for the respondents on the earlier dates, for putting in appearance after lunch.
It is already 230 P.M. Mr. Chahar is not available.
In the circumstances, we see no justification in adjourning the case for the filing of the written statement.
The mater is fully covered by 08, Rule 10, Code of Civil Procedure, read with rule 32 of the Writ (Jurisdiction) Rules and, therefore, we strike off the defence of the respondents.
As a necessary consequence, the averments made in this petition are taken to be correct for the purpose of this order.
Relying on the same, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to reconsider the claim of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law.
It is further directed that this process of consideration should be completed within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
The petitioner is also held entitled to the costs of this limitation (litigation ?)
which we determine at Rs. 500/-.
This petition stands disposed of as indicated above.
In compliance of the direction given by the Court, the respondent's case was again considered by the Selection Board held on 2571989, but he was not found in the acceptable category.
This was conveyed to him vide letter dated 181989 (Annexure P8 in the writ petition).
4.
The respondent challenged the second rejection of his claim for promotion by filing writ petition which was registered as C.W.P.
No. 3404 of 1990.
The learned Single Judge allowed his petition by making the following observations :-  "A perusal of the record shows that while deciding CWP No. 10222 of 1988, the Division Bench had clearly struck off the defence of the respondents.
As a consequence the averments made in the petition were taken to be correct for the purpose of the order.
It followed that the contentions raised by the petitioner with regard to the validity of his confidential reports as also with regard to his right to be considered for promotion ever after he had been considered thrice were upheld.
Once these contentions were upheld and the writ petition allowed with the direction that the petitioner's claim shall be reconsidered, it was not claim on the basis of the record of service as it existed prior to the order of this Court.
In fact they had to review his confidential reports and then reconsider his claim for further promotion.
Furthermore, even the restriction of three chances was not applicable in his case.
This has not been done.
Mr. Ashutoh Mohunta, learned counsel for the respondents contends that there is no specific direction by this Court in pursuance to which his confidential reports may have to be reviewed or his claim may be required to be considered after the three chances had been exhausted.
I cannot uphold this contention.
As observed above, the defence which could have been raised on behalf of the respondents at the relevant time, was not raised.
the Court had proceeded on the assumption that all the averments made in the petition were correct.
It has consequently allowed the writ petition.
In this situation it is implicit that the claim of the petitioner had been sustained by this court.
All the prayers made by the petitioner and deemed to have been accepted.
Once this was so, the orders passed by the respondents are clearly untenable in law.
In fact, it appears anomalous that on one hand the petitioner has been declared as unsuitable for promotion and on the other he has actually been granted rank of Lt.
Colonel at a subsequent date.
Accordingly the orders at Annexures P-8 and P-9 are quashed.
It is held that the respondents shall review the confidential reports of the petitioner in accordance with the averments made in the writ petition No. 10222 of 1988.
After finalising the reports, his claim for promotion on every such occasion when persons junior to him were considered shall be considered.
The petitioner shall be granted promotion w.e.f.
the date he is found suitable.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs.
3000/-."
5.
Shri Gurpreet Singh argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for review of the confidential reports of the respondent in accordance with the averments contained in C.W.P.
No. 10222 of 1988 is per se illegal because while disposing of C.W.P.
No. 10222 of 1988, the Division Bench had not given any such direction.
He further argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for further review of the case of the respondent for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel should be set aside because it is contrary to the law laid down by the Division Benches in L.P.A. No. 900 of 1990, Union of India and another v. Lt.
Colonel SP Kapoor, decided on 2671991 and L.P.A. No. 1266 of 1991, Union of India and another v. Lt. Col. BS Randhawa, decided on 321988.
He also relied on the judgment of a Single Bench in Lt.
Colonel SP Kapoor (Retd.)
v. Union of India, 1994(7) S.L.R.
98 and argued that the Court cannot interfere with the recommendations made by the Selection Board constituted for promotion of the men in uniform.
6.
Shri RS Randhawa and Shri GS Chahal, Advocates supported the impugned order and argued that re-consideration of the respondent's case for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel in pursuance of the direction given by the Division Bench on 351989 was an empty formality and rejection of his candidature was vitiated by arbitrariness and non-application of mind and, therefore, the learned Single Judge did not commit any illegality by directing fresh review of his case for promotion after review of his A.C.Rs.
of the years 1975 to 1977.
7.
At this stage, we may mention that after conclusion of the arguments on 592001, counsel for the parties jointly requested that the Division Bench may examine the A.C.Rs.
of the respondent for the years 1975 to 1977 for the purpose of deciding whether any further review of his case for promotion is warranted.
We had accepted their request and adjuorned the case with the direction to the counsel for the appellant to produce the entire confidential dossier of the respondent.
In compliance of the Court's direction, Shri Gurpreet Singh produced the A.C.R.
dossier of the respondent together with the proceedings of the Selection Boards which had considered/re-considered the respondent's case for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
The record produced by Shri Gurpreet Singh was also shown to the counsel for the respondent.
8.
A perusal of the confidential dossier and the record of the Selection Boards shows that in compliance of the direction given by the Court, the case of the respondent was considered by excluding the A.C.Rs.
of the year 1975 to 1977, but he was not found fit for promotion because he was placed in `Z' category.
Learned counsel for the respondent could not point out any infirmity in the proceedings of the last Selection Board.
Therefore, we do not find any valid ground to entertain the request of the respondent for further review of his case.
9.
De hors the aforementioned conclusion, we are of the considered opinion that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for re-consideration of the case of the respondent by reviewing the A.C.Rs.
of the years 1975 to 1977 in accordance with the averments contained in C.W.P.
No. 10222 of 1988 is legally unsustainable and is liable to be set aside because the only direction given by the Division Bench was to reconsider the claim of the petitioner (respondent herein) for promotion in accordance with law and in compliance of that direction, his case was duly considered by the Selection Board held on 2571989.
Moreover, as the respondent has not levelled any allegation of mala fide against the members of the Selection Board, the learned Single Judge was not justified in directing further review of his case for promotion.
In Lt. Col. SP Kapoor v. Union of India (supra), one of us (GS Singhvi, J) had the occasion to consider a prayer similar to the one made by the respondent.
While rejecting the plea of the writ petitioner, the Court held as under:-  "In a challenge involving recommendations made by a duly constituted Board under a special statute, interference by the Courts warranted only when it is shown that consideration made by the Selection Board is vitiated by mala fide or there is a patent violation of the statutory provisions."
10.
In L.P.A. No. 990 of 1990, Union of India and another v. Lt. Col. SP Kapoor, decided on 2671991, the Division Bench reversed the order of the learned Single Judge and upheld the instructions issued by the Government of India for restricting the review of the cases of Army officers for promotion to three chances.
Some of the observations made in that decision are extracted below :-  "We are, therefore, of the view that the instructions which have been referred to above, restricting the review to three chances have statutory and therefore binding force and further that the aforesaid instruction is not contradictory to Regulation 69, but has to be regarded as supplemental to it.
We are also of the view that three considerations for promotions in the higher echelons of the Army are not only adequate but also equitable.
It may once again be highlighted that the Regulations framed under Section 192 have not been published in the official gazette as provided by Section 193, and, as such, those Regulations can in no way have precedence over the instructions issued by the Army.
We therefore hold that the judgment of the learned Single Judge that the review cannot be confined to three chances only is wrong and needs to be upset.
We are also of the view that the assessment of the record was to be done in the manner provided by the amended criteria, as this was being uniformly applied.
xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, We have also considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties in the connected writ petitions mentioned above.
The submissions regarding the number of chances for review for purposes of promotion have already been dealt with by us.
On merits, it has been argued that the cases of the petitioners were considered for promotion ignoring their service record and not fully appreciating their outstanding careers.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on this matter as well and have also examined the record minutely.
We find that the cases of the petitioners were fully considered by various selection committees consisting of officers of very high rank.
We also find that a correct appreciation seems to have been made in each case.
Undoubtedly, an officer beyond the rank of Lt.
Colonel must seek his promotion through selection and there is no time-scale promotion.
The selection is to be made by a Selection Board and this Court would be hesitant to interfere in the proceedings of the Board until some glaring shortcoming is pointed out.
We find no such infirmity in the proceedings of the various Selection Boards in which the cases of the petitioners were considered for promotion."
(Underlining is ours) The law laid down by the Division Bench in Lt. Col. SP Kapoor's case (supra) was reiterated by another Division Bench in L.P.A. No. 1266 of 1991, Union of India and another v. Lt. Col. BS Randhawa, decided on 321998.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for further review of the case of the respondent is liable to be set aside.
Hence, the appeal is allowed.
Order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition filed by the respondent is dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs throughout.
Appeal allowed.