Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioner-Sadhu Singh was reverted to Class-IV post by the Director Administration, Department of Education, Punjab, Chandigarh, vide order dated 1782001.
The relevant extract of the said order reads as under :-  "Shri Sadhu Singh, SLA was given a show cause notice about this unauthorised promotion vide then office order No. 3/2-95 DA (2) dated 281999 so that he could explain his position.
On receipt of reply from official he was given opportunity of personal hearing.
Seniority of the official is at Sr. No. 676 whereas the class IV officials were given promotion as SLA/Library Restorer upto Sr. No. 253.
It is clear that officials senior to him were not given promotion as SLA/Library Restorer.
Therefore, promotion given to Shri Sadhu Singh SLA, Govt. High School, Lodhi Majra (Ropar) on 22121978 is District Education Officer (S) unauthorizedly is cancelled and he is reappointed to his original Class IV post.
Name of this official will be considered for promotion in accordance with his seniority per Rules/instructions."
2.
The petitioner contends that the afore-stated order is violative of principle of natural justice, contrary to constitutional protection available to the petitioner under Article 311 of the Constitution of India and has been passed after lapse of 22 years.
By that time, the petitioner has acquired substantive right to the said post.
The action of the respondents is stated to be arbitrary and without any reasonable basis.
3.
These contention of the petitioner are refuted by the respondents, who, upon notice, detailed reply.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was wrongly promoted by the District Education Officer, who was not the competent authority to promote any person of Class-IV employee in the department.
A show cause notice was given to the petitioner and thereafter the impugned order has been passed in consonance with the rules and as, such, the action is neither arbitrary nor violative of any principle.
4.
The order to appreciate the above rival contentions, it will be necessary to refer to the basic facts.
5.
The petitioner was appointed as Peon on 1381976.
The district Education Officer, vide his order dated 16th December, 1978 promoted the petitioner to the post of Clerk on probation basis against leave vacancy.
As regular incumbent of the post joined, the petitioner, vide order dated 22nd of December, 1978 was promoted from Class-IV.
The petitioner was given appointment of Lab Attendant on provisional basis, which at that time was a Class-IV post.
The work of the petitioner was found to be satisfactory.
His services were regularised on the post of Lab Attendant, vide order dated May 30, 1983, which reads as under :-  "Shri Sadhu Singh Peon was promoted as Lab Attendant vide this office letter No. A-2/78/DA/78-740-42 dated 221278 at GHSS Purkhali.
The employee has been working against the vacant post since 221278.
The work of the employee is satisfactory.
The services of the employee as Lab.
Attendant are regularised."
6.
In furtherance to the above order, the post of Senior Lab Attendant was made Class-III post and order dated 22nd of February, 1993 was passed, where the Director, Education, Punjab, while exercising his power under notification dated 16111992 confirmed the petitioner as Senior Lab Attendant in the subordinate office cadre of Education Department.
This order was passed by the District Education Officer in furtherance to the instructions issued by the department of Education dated 16111992 and 841991.
7.
The respondents issued a show cause notice dated 281999 to the petitioner as to why he should not be reverted to Class IV post, as he was wrongly and unauthorizedly prompted to Class III post.
The petitioner submitted his reply dated 31st May, 2000, whereby the petitioner pleaded that he was appointed after he had cleared the required test prescribed for the post and on the basis of reserved quota for the Scheduled Caste and thereafter that he was regularised as Senior Lab Attendant as back as on 3051983 by the competent authority.
Despite this explanation, the services of the petitioner were reverted by passing impugned order giving rise to the present petition.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the case of Din Dayal Gaba v. State of Haryana and another, 2000(2) SCT 387 (P&H) : 2000(1) R.S.J.
710 and judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dr. MS Mudhol and another v. SD Halegkar and others, 1993(4) SCT 226 (SC) : 1993(4) Recent Services Judgments 68 to contend that even if it is assumed that there was some irregularity in the promotion of the petitioner as back as in the year 22nd December, 1978, and the subsequent order of confirmation, now after lapse of nearly 20 years, the petitioner cannot be reverted.
9.
We find substance in the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner.
Firstly, it is difficult to say as to how the appointment of the petitioner to the said post by way of promotion was irregular much less illegal or unauthorised.
The post of Lab Attendant was included or converted into Class- III post only by notification dated 1711984 and the District Education Officer was admittedly competent authority to appoint the petitioner.
The petitioner was appointed on promotion as Lab Attendant firstly on 22nd of December, 1978.
Services of the petitioner in that post were regularised by the District Education Officer on 30th May, 1983, Annexure P/6 to the writ petition.
Thus, the orders were duly acted upon right from 1978 and the petitioner was given pay scale and the benefit of the post.
Once the petitioner was already working as Lab Attendant, the notification merely converted the post, and the holder of that post from Class IV to Class III.
This was consequential and inevitable result of the said notification.
The petitioner obviously would continue to hold the post which he was holding prior to the commencement of the notification of 1984.
The respondents themselves treated the petitioner as Class-III employee prior to 1984 as otherwise there would be no justification that the respondents permit the petitioner to continue to draw the salary and benefits or Class-III post till passing of the impugned order.
A definite and substantive right has accrued in favour of the petitioner.
Even after issuance of the notification a person duly delegated with power and in terms of the instructions dated 16111992 and 8.4.1992 (as mentioned in Annexure P/7), while exercising its authority confirmed the petitioner as Senior Lab Attendant with effect from 841991.
10.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it is nowhere averred that instruction dated 16111992 and 8.4.1992 did not empower the District Education Officer to pass such order.
In any case, in the year 1978 and even till 1983, the post of Lab Attendant was Class IV post and the District Education Officer admittedly was competent authority to make appointment.
11.
At this stage, we must make reference to the conduct of the respondents who have passed the orders time and again appointing and confirming the petitioner to the said post.
The seniority of the petitioner is sought to be varied in furtherance to the judgment of this court passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 7904 of 1997 where the court had directed the State to prepare upto date seniority list at the State level of class IV employees and to consider their cases for promotion etc.
The order was passed by the Division Bench of this court on 1211998 in no way adversely effect the interest of the petitioner because the petitioner ceased to be class IV employee and had been appointed as Lab Attendant in the year 1993 and his services in that post were subsequently confirmed.
The competent authority having issued order dated 22nd February, 1993, which confirmed the petitioner and his services rendered by him as Class-III employee for all that period, now the State cannot be permitted to take stand completely in contradiction to its record.
12.
At this stage now the respondents cannot be permitted to alter their stand on such flimsy ground that too after the lapse of more than 20 years and more so where it prejudices seriously the right of the petitioner.
The petitioner had never made any mis-representation in regard to his service career and qualification.
The respondents have acted of their own and pre-supposedly in accordance with law.
At this stage, we refer to the observations of this court in the case of Dr. MS Mudhol's case (supra), where the court held as under :-  "Where may be the reasons which were responsible for the non- discovery of the want of qualifications of the Ist respondent for a long time, the fact remains that the Court was moved in the matter after a long lapse of about 9 years.
The post of the Principal in a private school though aided, is not of such sensitive public importance that the Court should find itself impelled to interfere with the appointment by a writ of quo warrant.
To even assuming that such a writ is maintainable.
This is particularly so when the incumbent has been discharging his functions continuously for over a long period of 9 years when the court was moved and today about 13 years have elapsed.
The infraction of the statutory rule regarding the qualifications of the incumbent pointed out in the present case is also not that grave taking into consideration all other relevant facts."
13.
Even if for the sake of arguments, it is assumed that the plea of the respondents has some merit, still it will be dysfunctional to sustain the impugned order, as inevitable result thereof is setting the clock back by 22 years which would be unjust, inequitable and unfair in the facts and circumstances of the case.
On the basis of the record before us, we are unable to sustain the stand taken by the respondent-State of Punjab.
The orders issued in favour of the petitioner are neither unauthorised nor are illegal.
Mayhap it is the misconception or mis-interpretation of the respondents of their own instructions which led to the present situation.
The respondents' own conduct over the years nullify the stand taken before the court now.
The petitioner had made no misrepresentation at any point of time to respondents who acted at their own and in accordance with the rules and instructions enforce.
We are not in a position to accept the plea of the respondents as it is bound to have serious ramifications to the right of the petitioner and would result in unsettling the settled right.
14.
Ergo for the reasons afore-noticed, we accept this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 1782001.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.