Amitava Lala, J - The contention of the writ petitioner is that the selection process in selecting him holding limited departmental competition under Rule 72 of the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 has not been duly complied with by the authority in rating appropriate marks as against his candidature.
As per Rule 7160 marks are allotted for the purpose of written examination where 20 marks are allotted for the purpose of personality comprehension, oral expression, temperament and responsibility, social consciousness etc. and further 20 marks are on the basis of the record of service.
According to the writ petitioner, as per Rule 239 rewards, awards in the service records are to be taken in the consideration in any question affecting his placement and promotion.
Therefore, since the act of holding limited departmental commission appears to be an appropriate procedure for purpose of promotion and Rule 71 prescribes rating of marks within the maximum limit of 20 for record of service, the same will be given much more emphasis for the purpose of drawing an inference as to the selection.
Incidentally, it is also submitted before this Court that the petitioner's rating of his previous service record has to be considered as per Rule 108 as to whether he is given the overall ratings as "outstanding", "very good", "good", "average" or "below average."
2.
Mr. Sen, learned advocate appearing on behalf of the Railway authority particularly joined issue in respect of the applicability of the Rule 108 in the instant case for not taking on the ground by relying upon a Single Bench judgment of this Court dated 27798 in CO 8710(W) of 1992.
On the other hand, Mr. Majumder, learned advocate in support of the petitioner contended before this Court that each and every question similarly placed with the situation has been considered by another Single Bench of this Court in C.O.
9835(W) of 1996, whereunder a judgment was delivered on 12101999, under which all the points were exhaustively considered by this Court and the authority concerned was directed to form a fresh Selection Committee and follow strictly the rule 108(4) of the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957.
He has placed a judgment reported in 1996(2) SCT 227 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1661, UP Jal Nigam and others v. Prabhat Chandra Jain and others, where the Supreme Court of India was pleased to hold that whenever an candidate is going to be downgraded in respect of the performance, he should be informed.
Therefore, a peculiar situation arose before this Court.
Under such circumstances, I am of the view that the matter first of all will be placed before the Chief Security Commissioner, R.P.F., South Eastern Railway Garden Reach to give a thought of re-consideration of the matter on the basis of the record of service as per Rule 71 read with Rule 239 and Rule 108 of the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 about the overall rating, since the nature of work is much more physical than mental process on which normally viva-voce stands.
Under such circumstances, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction upon such authority to consider all the aspects in the light of the judgment of this court within a period of one month from the date of the communication of this order to come to an appropriate finding in this respect.
However, in the midst of proceeding for consideration by the authority, if it appears to them that a fresh Selection Committee or the erstwhile Selection Committee will take a fresh viva-voice test to avoid all complications and marks will be re- allotted on the basis of such viva-voca and on record of service, the same cannot be ignored and proceeded with the same as early as possible irrespective of passing of any reasoned ordered as directed by the Court hereunder.
In any event, at the time of finallisation, the parties will be given a full length hearing in this respect because the controversy as arose before this Court appears to be specially a communication gap in between the master and servant as regards their services which can raise an unhealthy situation in the service of the protection force, is not desirable.
Thus, the writ petition is disposed of.
This order will govern the order three matters, namely, C.O.
6174 (W) of 1992, CO 8540 (W) of 1992 and CO 8711 (W) of 1992.
3.
Let xerox certified copy of this order be given to the learned advocate for both parties within 15 days from the date of putting in of requisites.
Orders accordingly.