Amitava Lala, J - These two writ petitions have been directed to be placed in the list for analogous hearing.
In WP 18504(W)/1999, the petitioner wanted to get approval of the panel as first empanelled candidate with the intervention of the court.
The other writ petition being WP 9604(W)/99 has been made by an unsuccessful candidate challenging the selection process.
Therefore, the embargo of not approving the panel is lying due to pendency of the litigation before this court in which the selection process has been challenged.
Under such circumstances, it is the duty incumbent upon the court to call upon the learned Counsel appearing for the unsuccessful candidate in WP 9604(W)/99 as to why the panel will not be approved in the given situation.
According to him, his client has obtained B.Ed.
Degree from the Government Teachers' Training College, Deoghar in Siddhu Kanhu University Dumka in the year 1998.
His client got 1st Class in B.Ed.
Examination.
Had it been the position that the mark of his client is added, she would have been in a better position than the first three empanelled candidates.
2.
So far as the selection process by an unsuccessful candidate and also the challenge of the Selection process either the views of the Supreme Court or the High Courts till this date are very rigid.
The clarification has been given by different courts on numerous occasions that the selection process of an expert body of education cannot be interfered with by the writ court by adopting a fact finding process.
I am concerned with the situation but even then when one has come forward before a court of equity it is the duty incumbent upon such court to verify the position on the basis of the available records to come to an appropriate finding.
3.
The learned counsel in support of his client in WP 9604(W)/99 has not made any case in the writ petition that in spite of producing the records as regards B.Ed.
Examination certificate the Selection Committee ignored the same and added marks in favour of the empanelled candidates.
On the contrary, she had taken a point that no marks can be awarded in respect of the candidate on the basis of B.Ed.
Degree since the names have not been forwarded by the Employment Exchange on the basis of such qualification.
I have taken the appropriate Recruitment Rules prevailing at the material point of time, i.e., under Memo No. 2066-GA dated 27101995 with effect from 1121995.
From Rule 6 of the Recruitment Rules it appears that no marks shall be awarded to the candidate for any academic or training/professional qualification above the qualification mentioned by the District Inspector of Schools (SE) in the prior permission.
No claim or evidence regarding qualification/age of any candidate shall be accepted after the interview.
Therefore, Rule 6 has two parts; one is as regard prior permission and other is with regard to availability of the documents at the time of interview.
Had it been the position that the petitioner produced the records for obtained marks in B.Ed.
Examination at the time of interview, there would be any embargo in accepting the post even on the basis of the Rule 6 as above.
Therefore it is the acceptable position that such documents were not produced at the relevant point of time and no such point has also been taken.
On the other hand, it is very difficult to come to a conclusion on the case of the petitioner in the writ petition being WP 9604(W) of 1999 that her candidature was ignored by a body of Selection Committee including an expert who is coming from outside of the School.
4.
Moreover, Rule 6(b) of the Recruitment Rules provides that the Selection Committee will assess the marks as regards training, i.e., BT, B.Ed, and P.G.BT If for any reason whatsoever such certificates or marks obtained are ignored by the Selection Committee, it would have been the violation of the Recruitment Rules by the Selection Committee.
Therefore, there is no violation in giving preferential value in adding marks of the available certificates of B.Ed.
towards the candidates.
Moreover, all the three candidates are MA in English while the unsuccessful candidates is BA (Hons.)
in Bengali at the relevant point of time.
Although a separate allotment is given for the Post Graduate Degree but definitely the Selection Committee has discretion to verify the truth of the fact that a post Graduate candidate must be on a better footing than a Honours Graduate.
Neither the law nor the equity can ignore having such qualification in placing them in a better footing then a BA (Hons.)
Graduate.
5.
The petitioner in the second writ petition as above has also produced a consolidated assessment chart before this Court.
But I am not questioning the custody although I am apprehensive about the same from an unsuccessful candidate because the law is now well settled that even if a document is stolen the evidential value of such document cannot be ignored.
It appears from the chart as shown before this court that I have no doubt in coming to a conclusion that the mark as allotted to the empanelled candidate is better than the unsuccessful candidate to even without adding the marks obtained in BA/B.Ed./P.G.BT  Therefore, taking into totality of the matter I am of the view that the writ petition of the unsuccessful candidate being WP 9604(W)/99 cannot be sustained.
The writ petition stands dismissed.
Interim order, if any, stands vacated.
There will be no order as to costs.
Therefore, in WP 1850 (W)/99 there cannot be any embargo upon the authority concerned, i.e., the District Inspector of Schools (SE) Purulia, to approve the panel as prepared and forwarded by the school authority within a period and one month from the date of communication of this order.
6.
Therefore, the writ petition being WP 18504 (W)/99 stands allowed with the above order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let photo copy of the evaluation sheet dt. 14599, order of the DI dt. 932000 in WP 1567(W)/99, Memo dt. 1922001 and sponsored list No. OA/58- 97 dt 22.6.97 filed in court today as kept with the record.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of the judgment and order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within a period of fortnight from the date of submitting of the requisites.
Orders accordingly.