Syed Bashir-ud-din, J - Applicant Gh.
Mohd.
Lone filed OWP No. 495/87 for pension as legislature of the J&K Assembly.
The writ petition was disposed of on 16101998 up-holding the applicant's claim for pension.
The court observed :-  "The position in this case thought not exactly similar, is somewhat similar.
The fact remains that Ghulam Qadir Mir was unable to complete his tenure and he was elected in a bye-election.
The petitioner in this case was also elected in a bye-elections.
The circumstances under which this bye- election was caused are different.
But this difference would be totally irrelevant for the legal results.
The bye-election did occur.
The petitioner was elected.
To this extent there is similarity.
Independently of the above Act has been amended.
Any member who have completed two years become eligible for pension.
Thus looking from any point of view this petition deserves to be allowed.
This petition is accordingly allowed and the petitioner is held entitled to the pension."
2.
As follow up to the judgment applicant was granted pension from the date the amendment Act 13 of 1997 of J&K State Legislature Member Pension Act of 1984 came into force.
The applicant feeling that the judgment of the court was not given full effect and the petitioner was not given pension from due date has filed this contempt petition against the Chairman, J&K Legislature Council, Srinagar.
3.
The statement of facts on behalf of the respondent has been filed.
In terms thereof it is alleged that the applicant was given benefit of the judgment w.e.f.
2.6.1997 the date from which the amending Act 13 of 1997 came into force.
This is so because prior to amendment Act of 1997, the eligibility to get the pension under J&K State Legislatures Members Pension Act, 1984 was five years minimum tenure as such member of the Legislature and after 2.6.97 the period was reduced to two years to get the pension under the Act and Rules framed thereunder.
Since applicant writ petitioner had only two years tenure as member of the Legislature, therefore, he was given pension w.e.f.
2.6.97, the date on which above amendment Act came into force.
In the Judgment of the court no date is specified for the applicant to earn pension.
Petitioner has been awarded pension both on the strength of judgment of the High Court in earlier writ petition of one Gh.
Qadir Mir and the above Amending Act 13 of 1997.
Respondents while interpreting the judgment understood to be conveyed that the applicant was entitled to pension on the basis of two years tenure the period of his membership of Legislature.
Therefore he earned the pension subject to other conditions only from 2.6.97.
As Judgment has been implemented in letter and spirit, the respondents have not committed contempt.
4.
Counsel for the parties have advanced arguments in line with the above stand taken by the parties, while Mr. Qayoom submits that this court judgment up-holds the writ petitioner's entitlement to pension from the date he became the Member of Legislature, the counsel for respondents submits that the claim of the applicant to pension is granted by the judgment but not from the date he became Member of Legislature.
5.
Applicant filed writ petition to claim the pensionary benefits as member of the Legislature.
The writ court while taking note of J&K State Legislature Members Pension Act of 1984, as amended by Act 13 of 1997 and the rules framed thereunder, found that the applicant is entitled to pension and allowed the petition.
The decision of the court appears based on observations made in earlier judgment of Gh.
Qadir Mir v. State of J&K decided on 29121986 and the said Amendment Act 13 of 1997.
The court noted that though two cases were not exactly similar but however differences in the two cases in the matter of by-elections wherein both were elected to the Legislature did not matter as far as the legal consequences are concerned.
Gh.
Qadir Mir's Judgment though noted but applicant appears to have succeeded in the writ on the basis of Amendment Act 13 of 1997 reducing the period of 5 years to two years as eligibility for pension.
The respondent on the advice of Law Department of the Govt. while interpreting the judgment has granted the pension as follow-up of the judgment from the date of above Amending Act came into force.
Obviously it cannot be said that the judgment of the court is wilfully or deliberately or contemptuously disobeyed.
The judgment is capable of interpretation as placed on the judgment by the respondents.
In such circumstances can the respondents be said to have flouted the judgment and committed contempt.
6.
In Ashok Kumar Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1992 SC 407 : 1992(2) SCT 613 (SC), the Apex court observed :  "From the material on record and after hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are not satisfied that it is a case in which it can conclusively be said that the respondents have wilfully or deliberately or contemptuously flouted or disobeyed the order of this Court dated 7.2.1991.
It appears to us to be a case of misinterpretation of the executive directions and order of this court dated 7.2.1991 and is, therefore, not a fit case in which contempt proceedings need to proceed any further.
We, accordingly, drop the contempt proceedings and discharge the Rule issued against the respondents."
7.
In Jiwani Kumari Parekh v. Satyabrata Chakravorty, AIR 1991 SC 326 : 1990(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 693 : 1991(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 24 : 1990(2) R.R.R.
590., the Apex Court held that unless wilful or deliberate, disobedience of the order of the court is committed, the charge of contempt cannot be brought whom.
Even bonafide misinterpretation of the court judgment/order cannot attract contempt.
A party can be held guilty in case disobedience of the judgment or order is wilful or deliberate, (see also Saraf Investigators v. Shri SK Dhar, 1999 SLJ 170).
8.
In Indian Airports Employees Union v. Ranjan Chatterjee, AIR 1999 SC 880 : 1999(1) SCT 858 (SC), the court observed :-  "In our view, these rival contentions involve an interpretation of the order of this court, the notification and other relevant documents.
We are not deciding in this contempt case whether the interpretation put forward by the respondents or the petitioners is correct.
The question has to be decided in appropriate proceedings.
For the purpose of this contempt case, it is sufficient to say that the non-absorption of these six sweepers was bonafide and was based on an interpretation of the above order and notification etc. and cannot be said to amount to `wilful disobedience' of the orders of this court."
9.
In result the contempt proceedings are dropped and rule issued against respondent is discharged.
The applicant can pursue his remedy if advised regarding the date from which he has to get the pension.
Observations made hereunder are for purposes and targeted towards contempt as put-forth here before the court.
Matter closed.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.