Amitava Lala, J - According to the petitioner a prior permission for appointment of Assistant Teacher was granted by the appropriate authority on 20th June, 1989 to the concerned School.
On 21st October, 1989 Employment Exchange Officer sponsored the names of the candidates for apointment to the post of Assistant Teacher.
On 5th November, 1990 interviw letter was issued to the petitioner.
On 18th November, 1990 the interview was held and on the same date the panel was prepared and accepted by the then Managing Committe.
The panel was approved by the concerned District Inspector of Schools on 4th February, 1991.
The resolution was taken by the Managing Committe for the appointment of the petitioner on 11th February, 1991 and appointment was given on 12th Feburary, 1991 when the petitioner joined in the service as aforesaid, on 14th February, 1991.
Secretary of the West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education duly approved the appointment dated 25th November, 1991.
2.
According further to the petitioner that petitioner was terminated from the service in view of the letter dated 19th January, 1995 under Annexure `H' to the writ petition.
It appears from the Anexure `H' that the Secretary of the Institution terminated the service of the petitioner with immediate effect in terms of the judgment and order dated 11th January, 1995 by a Division Bench of this Court in FMAT No. 104 of 1995 on which the appointment of the petitioner an Assistant Teacher dated 12th February, 1991 stands invalidated.
3.
Under this writ petition, the petitioner wanted relief or reliefs in the nature of restoration of the appointment and/or employment of the petitioner and also further order to absorb the petitioner as an Assistant Teacher of the concerned Madrasah on usual salary and other benefits treating him as if his service has been continuing with efffect from 14th February, 1991 when he joined the said Madrasah pursuant to the appointment letter dated 12th February, 1991 amongst others.
4.
From the records, I find that on 18th December, 1989 under a Civil Order No. 10850(W) of 1989 a writ petition was moved making various grievances specially in connection with delay in holding election of the office-bearers of the Managing Committee of the institution.
At that juncture the Headmaster of the institution had shown his readiness and willingness to hold the election.
Considering such aspects the writ petition was disposed of with certain directions for holding election of office-bearers.
Under such order it is categorically specified that there will be no appointment to the teaching and non-teaching staff of the Madrasah till the election of the office-bearers and the reconstitution of the Managing Committee.
Subsequently another writ petition was moved being Civil Order No. 35(W) of 1990 whereunder by another order dated 10th January of 1990 interim order was passed as to the election of the appropriate Managing Committee or office-bearers in respect of such school.
On 27th July, 1990 another Single Bench passed on order as follows :-  "During the pendency of the writ application, the respondents would be free to initiate steps for interview and selection with regard to the post of the Assistant Teacher and one clerk, but no finalisation of the selected candidates would be made without leave of this Court.
This interim permission is without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties and will abide by the result of the writ petition."
5.
Such writ petition was finally heard by another Single Bench of this court and an order was passed on 20th January, 1991.
From such longish order I find that the writ petition was allowed to the extent of the selection of the life membership of the Managing Committee.
It appears that by a further order dated 15th March, 1991 the self-same Single Bench passed an order by incorporating thereunder that "In the meantime the parties are directed to act in terms of the order passed by Susanta Chatterjee, J All the parties are directed to take note of the order passed by Susanta Chatterjee, J to the following effect.
There will be no appointment to the teaching and non-teaching staff of the said Madrasah till the election of the office- bearers and the reconstitution of the Managing Committee thereof and it was further directed that they should act on the basis of the said order.
Any decision taken on the contrary to the said order shall be dealt with in accordance with law."
6.
It appears to this Court that an appal was preferred under FMAT No. 104 of 1995 under Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act when a Division Bench of this Court by an order dated 11th January, 1995 contended "That the appointment made on 12th February, 1991 of Md Golam Rabbani Jamadar is invalidated.
It is settled law that any order passed for the breach of the Court's order is a nullity and could not be given effect to".
The petitioner hereunder made a review application before such Division Bench which was dismissed on the ground as follows :-  "Not being satisfied that the review application raised any question of law or any mistake apparent on the face of judgment, we reject it."
Such order was passed on 10th May, 1995.
Accordingly petitioner's service was terminated with immediate effect by an order dated 19th January, 1995.
The petitioner hereunder also made special leave petition before the Supreme Court of India which was also dismissed.
7.
Against this background this writ petition was moved basically taking the plea that although the appointment was cancelled by the intervention of the various Court's order, but the selection and approval of the panel is still valid because the same was never interfered with.
Thereby the interim order of Single Bench of this Court as passed on 27th July, 1990 under CO No. 35(W) of 1990 dated 27th July, 1990 as regards fairness of the respondents authority to initiate steps for review and selection of the post of Assistant Teacher and Clerk remained valid without being interfered with by Court at any point of time.
Moreover, petitioner's appointment is one part and selection of office-bearers election or one become life member is other part.
Both cannot be decided at a time.
The right of the petitioner cannot be interfered with in such a way when he was not party to such proceedings.
8.
It has been opposed by the respondents saying that the interim order has already merged with the final order.
Therefore, the same cannot be said to be in existence.
Secondly, the petitioner cannot say that he was never being heard in the earlier proceeding because of the reason that he made the review petition and proceeded with the special leave petition before the Supreme Court of India and lost in both the places.
Therefore, this writ petition is hit by the principles of constructive res judicata.
On these two accounts various judgements were cited before this Court and the same were considered.
9.
Firstly, a judgement was cited before this Court reported in 1997(1) SCT 790 (SC) : 1997(2) S.C.C.
556 (N Mohanan v. State of Kerala & Ors).
By showing the paragraphs 2 and 3 thereunder the Learned Counsel appearing for the respondents contended before this Court that  "The interim order is subject to the result of outcome of the final adjudication.
If the petitioner is not successful in the final decision, the interim order would stand set aside.
So appointment by interim order does not create any right nor does the petitioner get any right to regularisation on that basis."
In the instant case the question of appointment was not there but the question of initiation of steps for interview and selection was there but position is more or less identical.
10.
The second cited judgement is reported in 1998(8) S.C.C.
529 (State of UP and Ors v. Raj Karan Singh) wherunder Supreme Court of India was pleased to set aside the interim order of the Division Bench of this Court whereunder he was allowed to continue to function by observing that  "..... merely because a person continues under the interim order of the Court, such continuance on the post cannot and, in this case, does not confer on him any right for continuance, it does not enhance his case for regularisation.
It is only an interim arrangement pending decision by the Court and cannot distrub the position in law or equities, as on the date of the petition" 11.
Thirdly, another judgement was cited being reported in 1997(1) S.C.C.
156 (State of M.P. and Ors v. MV Vyavsaya and Co.).
By referring the paragraphs 18 and 19 therien Learned Counsel contended that  "..... the interim orders passed are always subject to the final orders in the matter.
The interim orders can always be corrected or revised at the final stage."
12.
So far as the other part being the constructive res judicata is concerned, Learned Counsel appearing for the respondents put this case in the way that under Section 11 Explanation IV of the Code of Civil Procedure any matter which might or ought to have been made ground of defence or attack in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue of such suit.
Therefore, applying such principle herein, the case of the petitioner cannot be reopened now under this writ petition.
He referred a judgment reported in 1997(9) S.C.C.
66 (State of Punjab and Ors v. Surinder Kumar and Co. and Ors) whereunder it was held that  "....... it is the settled legal position that the High Court could not have gone into the mala fides and it would not decide the matter on merit on the question of mala fides.
In such a situation can the Division Bench direct the Appellate Authority to go into the question of mala fides.
It is seen that in the first round of litigation when Minister was impleaded as a party, it has remitted the matter for disposal on merits.
Obviously, the words, "might and ought" used in Section 11 of the CPC stand in the way and, therefore, it operates as res judicata for raising the same question in the present writ petitions."
13.
He also cited another judgement reported in 1988(2) CLJ 20 (Smt. Molina Ghosh v. State of WB & Ors).
By citing paragraphs 39 and 47 of the same it has contended before the Court that  "......Explanation IV it could not be said that the earlier judgement would not operate as res judicata as one of the grounds taken in the subsequent petition was conspicuous by its absence in the earlier petition.
As adjudication is conclusive and final not only as to the actual matter determined but as to every other matter which the parties might and ought to have litigated and have had it decided as incidental to or essentially connected with the subject-matter of the litigation and every matter coming within the legitimate purview of the original action both in respect of the matters of claim or defence, that this case is really hit by Rules of res judicata or principles analogous thereto."
14.
In reply therto Learned Counsel appearing in support of the petition contended before this Court that the principles of res judicata cannot be applicable in this case since the scope of earlier order of review restricted under Order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure concerning the question of review.
Moreover, equitable principle has to be applied in the instant case in view of the facts and circumstances of the same.
Thirdly, the petitioner being a life member or donor member of a Managing Committee did not have any locus standi to oppose this application.
It is to be taken note by this Court that he is the only person concerned opposing the petitioner's contentions hereunder by filing this affidavit-in-opposition.
Nobody else is neither appearing nor opposiong the petitioner's contention.
15.
I find that when the initial order was passed on 18th December, 1989 prior permission was already given by the concerned District Inspector of Schools and names were called upon from the Employment Exchange.
Therefore, if such order is intervened by way of an injunction or so the same will be operative from such period.
Accordingly issuance of letter of interview, the selection, preparation of panel and approval of panel etc. cannot be made effective.
The interim order on which the petitioner is harping more and more is not very much favouring the petitioner's case but giving a total interim protection without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties and subject to abide by the writ petition only in respect of interview and selection by the third important order.
The writ petition was allowed and by fourth (4th) order the first interim order as passed on 18th December, 1989 was revived specially.
Possibly, nobody mentioned about existence of the interim order to be adjudicated finally but by virtue of the subsequent order it affects adversely against the petitioner.
The present case has to be interpreted under this aspect.
The interim order which is totally without prejudice, as discussed by the Supreme Court only to keep protection during the pendency of the matter has lost its force being merged with the final order either way.
It is more so due to the revival of the earlier order by subsequent order subsequent to passing such interim order.
The position was confirmed by the Division Bench of this Court nullifying the service of the petitioner in view of the fact that there was no existence of the Managing Committee of the School.
Therefore, there cannot be any existence of the master to take one as servant under him.
It is far more practical to say that the petitioner was rightly or wrongly made a review application and lost even thereafter proceeded with a speical leave petition and also lost.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the cause of the petitioner was not tested and adjudicated by the Court at any point of time.
This being the position principles of constructive res judicata cannot be thrown out in the subsequent writ petition which has been moved before this single Bench.
A question may arise that there are various processes of selection such as (a) prior permission; (b) sending of name by the employment exchange; (c) selection; (d) preparation to panel; (e) approval of panel; (f) appointment and approval of appointment.
Although it was argued before this Court that since the appointment has been invalidated it cannot automatically invalidate the entire selection process but according to me, such submission has no much of importance not only because of merger of the interim order by the final order but also determination of the cause by the earstwhile Single Benches as well as Division Bench and Supreme Court.
Therefore, when the appointment was invalidated as a result of all earlier actions cannot be said to be existable.
This being the position, considering all pros and cons, I am of the view the writ petitiion cannot succeed.
Therefore, the same is dismissed.
Interim order, if any, stands vacated.
No order as to costs.
Xerox certified copy, if any, be supplied to the petitioner within a period of fortnight from the date of putting requisites.
Petition dismissed.