Amitava Lala, J - The writ petitioners were given casual employment upon being recommended through the Employment Exchange and after interview in the year 1983.
The nature of the works were of the watchman/Durwan, Messenger and Sweeper etc.
The recruitment was made following the statutory rules available at that point of time.
Such statutory recruitment and promotional rules were accepted by way of agreement in between the Unions i.e. All India Coordination Committee of HSL (Hindustan Steel Limited) Sales and Transport Employees' Union (AICC) and the management duly signed by the Conciliation Officer or the Additional Labour Commissioner, West Bengal on 10th March, 1979.
The said rules were prevailing at the time of initiation of the writ petition in 1991.
Under Annexure `III' of the rules for the category of the posts as aforesaid minimum qualification of VI pass was required for Watchman/Durwan and Messenger and no academic qualification was prescribed for the Sweeper.
As for experience, previous experience in security was preferred.
As for the method of selection they were recruited by way of interview by the Selection Committee.
Hence, in all, I want to clarify the position that the petitioners were recruited as per the then prevailing statutory rules by following the method of recruitment.
But such recruitment was made casually without giving any permanent shape to the respective services.
2.
A long battle between the respective petitioners and respondents herein started just after disallowing them from doing their respective duties by the verbal order of the departmental officers on 30th November, 1986 and 31st December, 1986 respectively.
In December, 1987 the authority concerned engaged other persons as daily rated workers allegedly following unfair labour practice without engaging them.
The respondent has taken a plea for the disengagement that the petitioners are surplus.
But as per the periodical organisation and methods study undertaken on behalf of the Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) for determining the manpower requirement for the Central Marketing Organisation at Calcutta as on 1st January, 1985 published in May, 1985 that in the Transport and the Shipping Department, the required strength was 48 in category of Head Messenger/Messengers and 86 in the category of Head Durwan/Durwans.
It will appear from the said report that in that department the number of Messengers were only 41 instead of 48 and 62 Durwans instead of 86.
In the process, in spite of several correspondences for a decision showing flexibility or relaxation for regularisation of services the matter resulted in this writ petition in the year 1991 when all doors were closed to them.
Such writ petition which was initiated in 1991 also resulted in a final decision now in the year, 2001.
However, we have to go by the well known maxim of actus curiae neminem gravabit meaning thereby the act of the Court harms no one.
3.
According to me, the true import would be to take a decision on the basis of the then prevailing acts or rules and structure for giving service for the purpose of coming to an appropriate conclusion.
Hence, I have no other alternative but to hold that the present policy, present statutory rules, present vacancy system may not be applicable in such circumstances even if so much defences are taken by the respondents in the present case.
4.
Before coming to the actual defences of the respondents I have to state hereunder that the petitioners have stated categorically through the Learned Counsel that in the similar circumstances this High Court was pleased to hold that the authority concerned should prepare the scheme for absorption of the petitioners in a phased manner which was upheld by the Division Bench of this Court under FMA No. 860 of 1991 (FMAT No. 1379 of 1991) (Steel Authority of India and others v. Swapan Kumar Das and others).
Further according to the petitioners, such services were regularised subsequently.
An example was given for eighteen candidates in one matter and two candidates in other matter for such regularisation.
5.
According to the petitioners, their case will be governed by certain well known decisions of the Supreme Court of India.
He cited AIR 1987 SC 2342 (SC)] (Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P&T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar Mazdoor Manch v. Union of India and others).
Relying upon the earlier Supreme Court judgment it was held that the authorities should prepared a scheme on a rational basis for absorbing as far as possible the casual labourers who have been continuously working for more than one year in the posts.
6.
He further cited a judgment reported in 1991(1) SCT 627 (SC) : AIR 1990 SC 2228 (SC) (Jacob M Puthuparambil and others v. Kerala Water Authority and others with other matters) which is also similarly placed as other and it was observed by the Supreme Court that the precious period of life devoted in the service of the establishment will be wholly wasted and the incumbent may be rendered age barred for getting a job elsewhere.
It is indeed unfair to generate hope and a feeling of security in him, attune his family to live within his earnings and then suddenly to throw him out of job.
Such behaviour would be on affront to the concept of job of security and would run counter to the Constitutional philosophy, particularly the concept of right to work in Article 41 of the Constitution  7.
He further cited 1997(2) Supreme 680 : 1997(1) SCT 833 (SC) (UP State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd and another v. Vijay Kumar Upadhyay and another etc.) whereunder a University was directed to regularise service of the employees in terms of the award passed by the Labour Court to entitle the employees of the Cafeteria to obtain the monthly wages at par with the employees of the University as directed by the Labour court.
The case so referred was cited for the purpose of establishing the employment to be equal in addition to the regularisation.
8.
The Learned Counsel appearing for the respondent contended before this Court that we have crossed certain phases.
There is a phase when the Law Courts were directed to regularise their services.
So many blanket orders for regularisation of services were also seen.
But we are crossing a different phase now when no such orders are available.
In any event, regularisation of the service is dependent upon the posts, vacancies and available statutory rules.
9.
He has categorically stated that there is no scope for the respondents to engage the petitioners either casually or on regular basis since there is no available vacancy of the posts and there are existing serving employees in the categories that the petitioners were engaged on daily rated basis in leave vacancy which cropped up because of regular employees going on leave.
10.
However, such part has been strongly objected to by the petitioners herein when the Learned Counsel appearing for the respondents brought to the notice of the Court that even there is no disputed question of the fact and the Writ Court should not interfere with the same for the purpose of coming to a conclusion in this respect.
A further plea is taken by the respondent concerned to uphold the order of the Trial Court in the other writ petition since no affidavit in opposition was filed.
But in the instant case an affidavit in opposition has been filed by them.
In any event the learned Counsel appearing on the part of the petitioners contended that although an affidavit in opposition was not filed in the earlier matter but since they have used the affidavit in opposition in this case the case of the respondent was proceeded on the basis of the affidavit in opposition filed herein.
So, there is not much difference between filing or not filing the affidavit in one matter and filing the affidavit in other matter since both the cases are similarly placed.
11.
Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that although the status of recruitment of the petitioners was made casually in all respects they were given facilities of payment of basic and other benefits including all types of bonus.
Their names were recommended by the Employment Exchange and interview was taken.
Services were given but have not been regularised.
It will appear from page 7 of the affidavit in reply that the respondent authority has deployed them against perennial nature of coolie in MM Building at 2, Fairlie Place, Calcutta which is an office being controlled by the Central Marketing Organisation of Steel Authority of India Limited.
12.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents ultimately, cited various decisions to establish his case.
Firstly, he has cited AIR 1997 SC 975 : 1997(1) SCT 832 (SC) (Santosh Kr.
Verma and others v. The State of Bihar through Secretary, Department of Urban Development, Govt. of Bihar, New Secretariat, Patna and others).
The Rule of Mandamus cannot be issued in contravention of law for regularisation of the services of the employees who are given appointments temporarily.
13.
He next cited a decision reported in 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 630 (SC) (J & K Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others) to establish that continuance of service for some years does not entitle ad hoc appointees to get regularisation de hors the statutory requirements.
14.
He further cited 1995(2) CLJ 255 (Ashok Kr.
Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal and others) to give further emphasis on the point that the executive instructions cannot overwrite the statutory recruitment rules.
He has further taken two technical points but very faintly.
Firstly, he has stated that there is no averment of discrimination and secondly there is a delay in making this writ petition.
15.
So far as the second point is concerned by showing AIR 1997 SC 2249 : 1997(3) SCT 23 (SC) (Sudhir Vishnu Panvalkar v. Bank of India) he is taking a plea that there should not be any delay in making the writ petition.
In the instant case the services were continued till 1987 but in 1991 the writ petition was moved.
Although he is not very eager to take this point considering the illiteracy and status of the petitioners but for the sake of law he has firmly cited such decision.
The decision prescribes that the writ petition in the Writ Court against termination after three and half years when criminal proceedings ended in acquittal is declared belated.
16.
Taking into totality of the circumstances, I do not find such type of dilatory tactics in the instant case which might have been read as intentional as alleged on the part of the petitioners.
There is no fixed time limit for the purpose of making this application.
Moreover, such point must have been taken at the threshold when the writ petition was made for the purpose of entertaining the same.
When the parties have submitted to the jurisdiction in merit in respect of all points and other matters also decided in similarly placed situation which ended to an appeal I should not go beyond the scope of the four corners of the factual aspects at this stage.
We should remember the well known maxim that in consimili casu, consimile debte esse remedium meaning thereby that when the cases are similar, remedies are similar.
17.
Therefore, according to me, when the names were called upon from the Employment Exchange for the purpose of filling up the vacancies on the basis of the prevailing statutory rules which were followed for the same excepting the regularisation of the service, and when a scheme was formulated by the order of the Division Bench of this Court for the purpose of regularisation in respect of the services and when such scheme was prepared and services were regularised in case of others, the petitioners' case have to be considered by following the latest observations of the Supreme Court.
In this respect two very important judgments have been delivered by the Apex Court.
One is reported in AIR 1998 SC 1477 (SC) (Arun Kr.
Rauth and others v. The State of Bihar and others) and also in 1998(9) SCC 78 (Keshab Narayan Gupta and others) where it has been held that the persons who are working as casually or temporarily they deserve sympathy for consideration even if they could not claim regularisation as a matter of course.
This was considered as an equitable justice since such incumbents are not guilty of fraud or sharp practice and they did not lack any requisite qualification.
The case of the petitioner also considered along with others by waiving the age bar, if necessary.
18.
By a further judgment reported in 1999(2) SCT 600 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1160 (SC) (Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Suresh and others etc.) the Supreme Court has taken a very wide outlook to give a shape and offer reality to the Part III and Part IV of the Constitution by the Law Courts.
Such case is specially important in this respect on the ground that the same is related to contract labour.
The view of the Supreme Court is as follows :  "The equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal equality before the law but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality which strikes at the inequities arising on account of vast social and economic differentiation and is thus consequently an essential ingredient of social and economic justice.
The security clause in the Constitution has been equated to mean that the people of the country ought to be secured of socio- economic justice by way of a fusion of Fundamental Right of Directive Principles of State Policy.
Socialism ought not be treated as a mere concept or an ideal but the same ought to be practised in every sphere of life and be treated by the Law Courts as a Constitutional mandate since the Law Courts exist for the society and required to act as a guardian angel of the society.
As a matter of fact, the socialistic concept of society is very well laid in Part III and Part IV of the Constitution and the Constitution being supreme, it is a bounden duty of the Law Courts to shape and offer reality to such a concept."
(Emphasis supplied) 19.
Aforesaid cases were also considered by this Court in various unreported judgments such as WP No. 476 (Purna Kumar Rai and others) as well as CR No. 10303 (W) of 1993 (Pradip Kumar Biswas and others v. The State of West Bengal and others) in coming to a conclusion.
20.
Therefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction upon the authority concerned to formulate the scheme according to the then prevailing statutory rules for the purpose of absorbing the petitioners in the light of the order and judgment passed by this Court but not on the basis of the present Rule, if any, within a period of six months from the date of communication of this order.
21.
In view of the unreported Division Bench judgment being FMA 860 of 1991 (FMAT No. 1379 of 1991) (Steel Authority of India and others v. Swapan Kumar Das and others) (supra) the petitioners will be entitled to payment for the number of days they have worked at the similar rate to the regular employees who worked for the whole month till the date of their purported disengagement.
The arrears if any shall be paid to the petitioners within a period of two months from the date of communication of this order.
However, no order is passed as to costs.
Let an urgent xeroxed certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the Learned Advocates for the parties within a period of two weeks from the date of putting the requisites.
Orders accordingly.