Satya Brata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 20th April, 2000 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Writ Petition No. 18063(W) of 1999 (A.S.T.
No. 332 of 2000) whereby and whereunder the appellant's writ petition was dismissed.
2.
The appellant's husband Late Ratneswar Samanta was said to be freedom fighter.
He filed an application for grant of freedom fighters' pension in terms of a scheme framed by the Central Government.
The said policy decision of the Central Government was modified from time to time.
It appears that the District Magistrate, Midnapore, earlier gave a certificate to the following effect :-  "I do hereby certify that Sri Ratneswar Samanta Son of Late Srinath Ch.
Samanta of Vill.
Gourangapur PS Tamluk, Dist.
Midnapur, is a bona fide Freedom Fighter, who - (a) remained underground for 1 year 9 months 23 days from 2nd October, 1942 to 25th July, 1944 and was  (i) a proclaimed offender;" The certificate is contained in Annexure P4.
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said certificate the State of West Bengal recommended to the Central Government for grant of pension.
As no such pension was granted, a writ application was filed before this Court which was marked as WP No. 12202(W)/1999.
Ghosh, J by a judgment and order dated 30th July, 1999 directed the respondent to consider the case of the petitioner in the light of the judgment passed in WP No. 1067 of 1998, Gokul Ch.
Panja v. Union of India and others, since reported in C.L.T.
1999(1) 241 (HC), as also an unreported Division Bench decision passed in F.M.A.T.
No. 2823 of 1993, Union of India v. Haripada Samanta and others.
3.
By reason of the order impugned in the writ application dated 14121999 the Under Secretary to the Govt. of India held that Gokul Chandra's case (supra) being in relation to certain Mouzas specified therein in relation whereto it was found that no records of political sufference in respect of those villages were available but the same being in relation to village Gourangapur, PO Kakgachhia, the said decision is not applicable.
It was held :-  "As per the provisions of the scheme, you are required to produce evidence from official records of jail, Court and police etc. in support of your late husband's claimed suffering.
Only in those cases where such records are not forthcoming, certificates from eligible certifiers are accepted.
Mere submission of such certificates from eligible certifiers without supporting evidence from official records or a certificate from the State Government that the official records of the relevant time are not available with the State Government (including all State agencies) cannot make you entitled for grant of pension."
As regard the personal knowledge certificate which had been issued by a Freedom Fighter in terms of the aforementioned scheme, it was held that the same could be considered provided that the records were not available but it was held that such records are available as would appear from the report of the State of West Bengal.
It was further held :-  "Your writ application supported by P.K.C.
from Sri RN Giri for grant of SSS pension has been considered in this Ministry as per the direction of the Hon'ble Court and keeping in view the provisions of the scheme and findings of the State Government contained in their letter dated 291997 mentioned above, the Government has not found it feasible to grant you SSS pension for the following reasons :- In the P.K.C.
submitted by you from Sri RN Giri, it has been mentioned that your late husband was declared a proclaimed offender but in this regard you have not submitted the documentary evidence as to : (a) Copy of FIR (b) Record of the jurisdictional trying court to whom the FIR was sent up and whether the court was in existence in the year the suffering has been claimed.
(c) Copy of the order of court.
(d) Copy of proclamation/extract of notification/copies of contemporary newspapers wherein the proclamation was notified.
It is also pertinent to mention here that Sh. Nagendra Nath Bishai in his Writ Petition No. 12148(W) of 1998 before the Hon'ble Calcutta High Court has mentioned that in Midnapur "Tanralipta Jatiya Sarkar" functioning from 17121942 to 191944 and, therefore, when there was no British Government to execute warrant of arrest if issued, there was no necessity to remain underground.
Assuming and not admitted that warrant of arrest was issued against you still the period of that Government i.e. British Government works out to four months ie 1581942 to 16.12.1942 and the period of claimed suffering of your late husband amounts to two and half months i.e. 2101942 to 16.12.1942 and thus falls short of the minimum requirement of six months under the SSS pension scheme.
Thus your case lacks supporting documentary evidence.
Hence your case is considered as not eligible for SSS pension."
The learned trial Judge dismissed the writ application, inter alia, holding that the principles of res judicata have no application in the instant case.
It was further held that if any fresh materials was available, the State is entitled to consider the matter afresh.
As regards the judgment of a Division Bench of this court in FMAT No. 660 of 1994, the learned Judge while quoting the said judgment observed :-  "With great respect to the learned Judges, I am unable to accept the aforesaid judgment as correct proposition of law.
In my view, the State Government has the right to reconsider the recommendation on the basis of fresh materials if it appears that previous recommendation was wrongly given due to fraud practised or suppression on fact.
However, in such a case the applicant should be given opportunity to explain the additional materials on the basis of which the State Government was going to recall the recommendation."
The learned trial Judge as regard the contention that in the event he intended to differ with the Division Bench, should refer the matter to a larger Bench, observed that having regard to the decision of the Apex Court in SP Chengal Varaya Naidu v. Jagganth, reported in 1994(1) RRR 253 (SC) : 1994(1) SCC 1, if an order had been passed suppressing some material consideration of the matter fresh is permissible and for that purpose it is not necessary to refer the matter to a larger Bench.
4.
The learned Judge distinguished the decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Surbinder Kumar and Co and others, reported in 1997(9) SCC 66, on the ground that the same was in relation to a grant of liquor license.
It was opined :-  "Therefore if a person comes forward with an absurd case supported by an evasive certificate not in conformity with the scheme claiming pension and such defects in the application or the certificate escaped the notice of the Government at the earlier stage, the applicant cannot take advantage of the mistake of the Government by raising the plea of res judicata.
An applicant's material time be answerable to any legitimate query of the Government justifying his claim, if occasion so arises.
As pointed out earlier, inspite of giving opportunity to explain the statements as regards plea of absence which is absurd according to law and the deficiency in the accompanying certificate, the learned Counsel for the petitioner found no reply and raised the aforesaid technical objections."
Mr. Biswas, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that the learned trial Judge went wrong in not considering the decisions of this Court in Gokul Chandra Panja (supra) as also the unreported Division Bench decision passed in FMAT 282 of 1983.
The learned Counsel pointed out that whereas a recommendation had been made by the State Government earlier in terms of a letter dated 281989, the same could not have been recalled without any justifiable reason.
According to the learned Counsel the learned trial Judge went wrong in holding that the appellant's husband was not entitled to grant of Freedom Fighters' pension although he remained underground from 2101942 to 25.7.1944 which was supported by a Freedom Fighter `Sri RN Giri'.
The learned Counsel pointed out that even one of us in Chaitanya Charan Das v. State, reported in AIR 1995 Cal.
336 has laid down the procedures.
5.
Mr. Misra, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent on the other hand submitted that in appellant's husband was not entitled to grant of Freedom Fighters' pension at all on the basis of his own application.
According to the learned Counsel, the reasons assigned by the appropriate authority of the Central Government in its orders dated 14121999 are self- explanatory.
It has been submitted that an offender can be declared to be a proclaimed offender only in terms of the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure and not otherwise.
6.
The law in this regard has been considered by one of us (SB Sinha, J) in Smt. Kishori Bala Jana v. Union of India and others, WP 3759 (W) of 1998, disposed of on 16121998.
The Personal Knowledge Certificate is a secondary evidence.
Such evidence can be considered in absence of any official records.
It was noticed :-  "In fact it was concerned (conceded ?)
by the District Magistrate in his report that the relevant record would have been the Warrant Register.
The Register is required to be maintained under Regulation 378 of the PRB.
Regulation 378 provides for the maintenance of a register of inter alia absconded offenders whose usual residence is within the police station in which the register is required to be kept.
There is no dispute that these Registers are not available."
Considering the effect of the documents forming the basis of the report of the SP, DIB, Midnapore namely sheet index of the weekly confidential reports, it was held :-  "However, in this case the said exercise had not been taken.
The petitioner claims herself to be a `proclaimed offender'.
An offender could be proclaimed in terms of the provisions of the Code of Criminal procedure.
This court in Chaitanya Charan Das v. State of West Bengal and others (supra) observed that in certain cases fake certificates have been produced and in that situation, held that the State Government and the Central Government would be entitled to verify the genuineness of the said certificate.
The said observations are not applicable in the instant case, inasmuch as the State Government satisfied itself about genuineness of the certificate and as such made the recommendations.
As indicated hereinbefore the Central Government had also accepted the said recommendations and decided to grant pension."
This Court clearly held :-  "It, therefore, cannot be said that only because the District Magistrate had stated so that the State Government should have acted in terms whereof and sought to withdraw their recommendations upon which the Central Government had acted upon.
Such action on the part of the respondent clearly contravene the principles of natural justice.
If a mistake is sought to be rectified, such rectification must be based on the actual records and not on a ipse dixit on the part of an officer of the State.
Such a mistake can also be rectified upon complying with the principles of natural justice.
Such is not the case of the State Government as it had failed to make out a case before this Court so that in fact relevant records are available for the purpose of showing that non-availability certificate issued earlier by the officer-in-charge of the police station was incorrect."
It is, therefore, obligatory on the part of the respondents to produce the actual records of some evidence showing that the Personal Knowledge Certificate issued by a Freedom Fighter could not be accepted as relevant records in relation to the claim of the applicant for grant of Freedom Fighters' pension was available.
We do not, therefore, subscribe to the views of the learned trial Judge to the contrary.
The learned trial Judge also, with due respect was not correct in not following the earlier decisions of this court which were binding on him.
7.
However, in the instant case, as noticed hereinbefore, the appellant's husband himself merely stated that he had gone underground from 2101942 to 25.7.1944.
He did not claim himself to be a proclaimed offender but despite the same in the certificate granted by Sri RN Giri, it was stated that he was a proclaimed offender.
Only the blanks had been filled up wherein the aforementioned fact that he was a proclaimed offender had been mentioned.
As the appellant's husband did not claim himself to be a proclaimed offender, the question of grant of any certificate to that effect does not arise.
It is now trite that personal knowledge certificate is a secondary evidence which would be admissible only if a claim in regard is made by the applicant.
The application is required to be verified.
The certificate to which reference has been made in the application, could not have affirmed to be correct by the appellant's husband.
8.
In Chaitnya Charan Das v. State of West Bengal and others (supra), it is noticed :-  "Thus, a person who has merely filed an application only on the ground that he was involved in Quit India Movement or had gone underground at the relevant time would not be entitled to such Samman Pension, unless his case falls within one or the other grounds mentioned in the scheme.
9.
The main question which arises for consideration is the mode of proof.
Clause 9 of the said scheme provides for filing of the actual proof in case of imprisonment or detention obtaining a certificate from the concerned Jail Authorities, District Magistrate or the State Government.
However, in case of non-availability of such certificate, a certificate by a co-pensioner specifying the jail period which has to be in accordance with Annexure I in the application form.
So far as those persons who claimed that they had remained underground are required to file documentary evidences by way of Government/Court's order proclaiming him as an offender announcing an award on his head or for his arrest or an order of his detention.
If the official records are not forthcoming due to their non-availability, a certificate from the freedom fighters may be taken into consideration.
Such certificate must be -  (a) Veteran Freedom Fighter, (b) Belongs to the administrative Unit before reorganisation of the States, (c) Their area of operation must be same.
The said scheme was not framed under any statute.
It was framed under the executive power of the Central Government as contained in Article 73 of the Constitution of India.
The Central Government, therefore, had the necessary jurisdiction to make amendments in the said scheme and/or to issue guidelines from time to time.
On perusal of the guidelines dated 12th April, 1983 it appears :-  (1) Voluntary abscondance does not make a person eligible for Samman Pension.
(2) The liberalised pension scheme provides that with effect from 181980 in the absence of official records because of their non-availability, a certificate from a prominent freedom fighter would be acceptable.
Such a certificate has been stated to be an alternative mode of proof but the Government is required to satisfy itself that the certificate was from a genuine Freedom Fighter and the official records of that period are not available.
Genuineness of such certificates is also required to be verified.
It is further necessary for the Central Government to consider that there is no complaint about indiscriminate certification against him.
It further provides that in case of underground sufferings, internment/externment which are not based on official records the matter should invariably by placed before the State Advisory Committee and the recommendation on the State Government along with the extract of the proceeding of the State Advisory Committee should be forwarded to the Ministry for further consideration.
A bare perusal of the said scheme and/or the guidelines issued by the Central Government, in my opinion, do not leave any manner of doubt whatsoever that the Central Government is the ultimate authority in the matter of grant of pension and it is entitled to satisfy itself about the genuineness of claim of the concerned applications.
In other words, the Central Government is not bound to act mechanically only on the basis of recommendations of the State and/or the Advisory Committee.
Ordinarily we could have allowed the writ application as the stands taken by the Central Government and the State ex facie appear to be not correct.
But having regard to the admitted fact we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge cannot be said to have erred in arriving at the aforementioned conclusion although we do not agree, with respect, with the learned Judge that there had been any suppression or commission of fraud on the part of the appellant's husband and, thus, the decision of the Apex Court in SP Chengal Varaya Naidu v. Jagganath (supra) would be applicable.
10.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in the appeal which is dismissed accordingly.
But there cannot be any doubt that it may be open to the petitioner to act in terms of paragraph 9 of the order passed by the Central Government.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.