Basudeva Panigrahi, J - This writ petition has been filed by one of the panel candidates to the post of a physical instructer challenging the order passed by the District Training Inspector of Schools dated 23.2.1999 and 1731999.
The essential facts leading to the writ petition are as follows :  That the petitioner after having been qualified for the post of Physical Instructor had applied for the same through the Employment Exchange who sponsored his name along with others to Golapganj High School, Post Golapganj, District Malda.
The school authority, receiving the list from the Exchange issued interview letters to the petitioner as well as respondent No. 8 fixing that the interview was to be held on 22nd May, 1977 at 12.30 P.M. All the candidates were asked to bring the certificates, marksheets and testimonials in original.
2.
The interview was held on 2251997 in the school premises by the properly constituted selection committee.
The petitioner has, inter alia, claimed that his performance was better than the other candidates and, therefore, normally he expected to be placed against serials No. 1.
The panel's name was said to have been communicated by the school authority but the District Inspector of Schools (SC) Malda did not take any decision on such panel.
Therefore, the petitioner filed a writ petition in his Court challenging inaction of the District Inspector of Schools as to the matter of approval of the said panel.
The writ petition filed by the petitioner appeared before justice NK Mitra (as he then was) who disposed of the writ petition by directing the D.I.
of Schools to approve the panel positively by 30th September, 1997.
3.
Pursuant to the direction issued by this Court it has appeared that the Secretary was asked to recast the panel in terms of the Memo No. 1303 (20) G.A.
dated 1791996 issued by Director of School Education.
It may be noted that in the recruitment rules the candidates possessing diploma/degree in physical education approved by the State Government shall be allotted 20 marks.
The District Inspector of Schools therefore pursuant to the above Memo issued instruction to the School Authority to follow the recruitment rules.
The School Authority, however, appears to have indiscriminately given 20 marks to each and every candidate appearing for the post.
The panel was accordingly recast and the petitioner had allegedly stood first in the examination.
Accordingly he was allowed to join in service and has been performing his duty as physical instructor till date.
4.
In the meanwhile the respondent No. 8 filed a writ petition before this court praying for a direction upon the District Inspector of Schools to dispose of his representation dated 2111997 and to take decision as regards the panel prepared for appointment of the assistant teacher in physical education.
The said case was heard by Justice R Bhattacharjee, J (as he then was) and by an order dated 9121997 directed the District Inspector of Schools to consider the respondent No. 8's objection along with writ petition within six weeks of the date of receipt of the order.
5.
The District Inspector of Schools after hearing all the parties purportedly passed an order filed Memo.
No. 185(4) dated 731999 by directing the Managing Committee to recast the panel and submit the same before him.
It has further appeared that memo No. 924 dated 2991997 and memo No. 265-G dated 1071998 were withdrawn under which the appointment of the writ petitioner was approved.
6.
It has been, inter alia, claimed by the petitioner that the order passed by District Inspector of Schools suffers from several vices inasmuch as he had not applied his mind before withdrawal of the appointment of the writ petitioner.
Once a substantive right of appointment is created to the petitioner, the District Inspector of Schools, was, therefore, obliged to pass a reasonable and legally sustainable order before scraping the petitioner's appointment.
The documents upon which the District Inspector of Schools is said to have been relied upon were not authenticated.
Therefore, it was unfair for the District Inspector of Schools to take up such hasty, unreasonable and biased opinion.
7.
The respondent No. 8 who was also one of the empanelled candidates filed his affidavit-in-opposition by inter alia stating that apart from the writ petitioner, himself, 16 other candidates were called for interview.
The 4 members of the Selection Committee had maintained their individual scoresheet and awarded marks to the candidates in the interview.
In the said Selection Committee Jitendranath Mondal (teacher's representative), Mihir Chandra Misra (External expert), Chhedunath Ghosh (Panchayat nominee) and S Mondal (Secretary of School and President of Selection Committee) were present.
Out of the individual scoresheets two score-sheets recording average marks scored by the candidates in class administration and oral interview were prepared by the Selection Committee on the date of interview i.e. May 22, 1997.
In those two scoresheets all the members of the Selection Committee had signed vide Annexure `D' to the AO filed by the respondent No. 8.
The said Selection Committee on the basis of the marksheet scored by the candidates prepared a panel in which the writ petitioner was shown to have scored first position whereas this respondent in 2nd position.
The respondent No. 8 has claimed there was malpractices, interpolation and also forgery alleged to have been committed by the Secretary of the School.
It is further claimed that although the respondent No. 8 secured the first position but the Secretary with an oblique motive to provide unfair advantage to the writ petitioner inflated the marks of the oral interview and also class demonstration test.
Since the petitioner secured the first position by committing fraud upon the authority, therefore, District Inspector of Schools on though scrutiny directed the School Authority to provide employment to the respondent No. 8 in the post of physical education teacher.
8.
The respondent No. 8 lodged a complaint on July 21, 1997 before the District Inspector of Schools by inter alia stating that he came to learn that marks for educational qualification had not been properly allotted to the panel candidates.
9.
The respondent No. 3 has filed an affidavit-in-opposition in which it has been stated that at the beginning stage the marks in the academic qualification was wrongly awarded.
The Committee had committed serious mistakes in awarding uniform marks to all the candidates.
The Secretary of the School who was the President of the Selection Committe had changed the individual scoresheet of the candidates in demonstration and oral test.
He has also found that there were many corrections noted in the resolution book under which the panel was said to have been considered.
If the original scoresheet with the signature of all the selection Committee members were produced before the District Inspector of Schools, he would not have approved the appointment of the writ petitioner.
So far as the allegations of non- application of mind of the District Inspector of Schools is concerned, it was emphatically denied by him.
The District Inspector of Schools after going through the anomalies and also the discrepancies between the scoresheet supplied to him and also the scoresheet maintained by the school authority, he has found prima facie satisfied that the award of marks to the writ petitioner was improper, motivated and without any basis of legal support.
Therefore, he did not find any other way but to declare the writ petitioner's appointment illegal.
10.
The respondent No. 4 and 7 filled an affidavit-in-opposition wherein it has been stated that the Selection Committee presided by the President who is the Secretary of the Managing Committee, finalised the panel on the same day and sent the panel to the Managing Committee.
What all corrections that has been made was done in concurrence of all the members of the Selection Committee.
Therefore, the conduct of the President of the Selection Committee was above board.
An explanation has been given by the Secretary of the Managing Committee, respondent No. 4 that rough calculation sheet was made before the final list was prepared and thereafter it was noted in the final sheet which was communicated to the District Inspector of Schools.
Pursuant to the order passed by Mr. NK Mitra, J (as he then was) a panel was prepared by placing the writ petitioner in first position and accordingly the order of appointment was given to him after it was approved by the District Inspector of Schools.
But, subsequently, in order to give effect to the orders of Mr. Bhattacharjee, J (as he then was) the earlier panel was withdrawn whereunder the petitioner was given appointment.
It has been further stated that it would amount a traversty of justice and fairplay if the candidates approached the individual members in order to get their moral support challenging the method of selection to which they were parties earlier.
11.
Mr. Pratap Roy, the learned Advocate appearing for the writ petitioner has advanced an inexorable plea that his client filed a writ petition in WP No. 27547/97 when there was total inaction either by the Managing Committee or by the District Inspector of Schools.
This Court by an order dated 2691997 directed the District Inspector of Schools to consider the grievance of the petitioner as a reason thereof, the panel was approved with effect from 29.7.1997 and the order of appointment was issued on 3111997.
The petitioner pursuant to the appointment order joined on 6111997.
12.
It be noted here that in WP No. 27547 of 1997 filed by the petitioner, the respondent No. 8 was not made a party so also the writ petition filed by the respondent No. 8 in WP No. 17368 of 1997 the petitioner was not a party.
Had the petitioner as well as the respondent No. 8 been made parties in both the writ petitions filed in this Court, the Court could not have passed such incongruous and contrary order.
Pursuant to the order in WP No. 17368 of 1997 the District Inspector of Schools, after going through so many anomalies and also discrepancies of awarding of marks and interpolation in the scoresheet directed the Managing Committee to give appointment to respondent No. 8.
Mr. Roy has seriously contended that when the rights and privilege of the writ petitioner has been crystalised by virtue of the Court's order, then the same matter cannot be reopened.
The District Inspector of Schools has no jurisdiction to decide contrary to the order of this Court.
Once the panel having been approved by the District Inspector of Schools, it appears he has no further jurisdiction to unsettle the same.
13.
Mr. Dey, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 4 has submitted that the Secretary has no special favour or disfavour either with the writ petitioner or with respondent No. 8.
Once the panel has been approved, either the writ petitioner or the respondent No. 8 whosoever may be, shall join as a teacher.
The respondent No. 8 has although challenged the selection on the ground of mala fide, fraud and misrepresentation but nothing turns out from their pleading by impugning the conduct of the Secretary.
14.
Mr. Dey further contended that the xerox scoresheet enclosed by the respondent No. 8 in his affidavit-in-opposition are not the true copy of the sheets which were communicated to the District Inspector of Schools.
Therefore, in such situation the xerox copy shall not raise any presumption as the copy of the original scoresheet.
He who has taken a ground of mala fide has to prove to the satisfaction of the human conscience that by such conduct the person had suffered serious prejudice.
Therefore, in such situation the respondent No. 8 having failed to bring in the required evidence, the selection made by the Managing Committee should not be upset.
15.
Mr. Biswas, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 8 has demonstrated the discrepancies alleged to have been made in the individual scoresheet of the selection committee members and also the scoresheet sent by the respondent No. 4.
The respondent No. 4 had purportedly changed the scoresheet while sending it to the District Inspector of Schools.
Had the scoresheet not been changed, the respondent No. 8 ought to have been favoured with an order of appointment.
Since the conduct of the respondent No. 4 was very much spurious, doubtful, and mala fide, the respondent No. 8 has, therefore, lodged a criminal case against him which is pending in Court.
16.
Mr. Dey, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 4 has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Chancellor v. Bijayananda Kar, reported in 1994(1) SCT 524 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC page 579.
In the aforesaid judgment it has been held as follows :  "The sanctity of the process of selection has to be maintained.
It would be traversty of the selection process if the candidates are encouraged to meet members of the Selection Committee after the selection is over and to obtain letters from them attempting to renege the selection made.
Further, the decisions of the academic authorities should not ordinarily, be interfered with by the courts.
Whether a candidate fulfils the requisite qualifications or not is a matter which should be entirely left to be decided by the academic bodies and concerned selection committees which invariably consist of experts on the subjects relevant to the selection."
17.
So far as the above principle enunciated by the Supreme Court there cannot be any 2nd opinion nor there can be any quarrel with the legal position but the question shall arise in the instant case is whether the respondent No. 4 has in fact communicated the individual scoresheet which was prepared by the members separately or it was a different sheet.
In case it is held to be a different one, then the entire selection process will render illegal and invalid.
18.
On perusal of the duplicate copy of the scoresheet kept by the School Authority and also the copies which were sent to the District Inspector of Schools I found that both are discrepant.
In so far as the scoresheet of Sri Safijuddin Ahmed prepared by the external expert Sri Mihir Chandra Mishra for class demonstration test and viva-voce is concerned, I noticed that Sri Safijuddin Ahmed was awarded `2 and 250 marks'.
But, in the scoresheet prepared by the External Expert a copy of which was produced in course of argument and it was taken back by the School Authority, I noticed there was spectacular difference between them.
There were several corrections in the scoresheet which did not contain the signature of all members nor a neat copy of the scoresheet after those corrections being made was supplied to the District Inspector of Schools.
19.
Since there is a criminal case pending, any observation made in this case shall not treated as final and the Criminal Court is absolutely at liberty to arrive at independent conclusion irrespective of the observations made in this judgment.
20.
In the aforesaid situation I, therefore, direct the Director of School Education to decide the matter independently and express his own opinion.
He is at liberty to take his decision and pass necessary order in the above factual backdrop of the case.
With the above observation the writ petition is dismissed but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.