Satyabrata Sinha, J - The writ application is directed against an award dated 31st January, 2000 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Port Blair in ID (LC/IT) Case No. 9 of 1999 whereby and whereunder a reference made by the Lieutenant Governor, Andaman and Nicobar Islands was answered in favour of workmen and against the petitioner.
The respondent was working under the petitioner herein.
A disciplinary proceedings was initiated against her.
She was dismissed from service.
As regard the said action on the part of the petitioner, an industrial dispute was raised and the conciliation process having failed, the following dispute was referred before the learned Labour Court by the Lieutenant Governor.
2.
Whether the action of the Managing Director, A & N State Cooperative Bank, Port Blair in dismissing the services of Smt SA Sulekha the then Cashier-cum-Clerk is legal and justified, if not what relief the workman is entitled to.
Before the learned Labour Court, the petitioner herein had not appeared.
From the records of the learned Labour Court, it appears that notices were duly served upon the petitioner.
3.
Mr. HR Bahadur, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised two contentions in support of this application.
First, the reference being delayed was bad in law.
In support of the said the contention reliance was placed on 2000(1) SCT 1088 (SC) : 2000 SC 839, Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty.
4.
Second, the learned Labour Court misdirected itself in proceeding on the basis that Section 25(F) and Section 25(B) of the Industrial Disputes Act are attracted in the instant case.
The learned counsel points that the learned Labour Court must be held to have committed a gross illegality in so far as it arrived at a finding of fact that the action of the petitioner was in violation of rule 74, there was no mens rea therefor.
5.
Ms. Ganuguly, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the workman, on the other hand, submitted that the question which arose for consideration before the Labour Court was as to whether the employer in passing the order of dismissal acted fairly, reasonably and in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
The learned counsel contends that the order of the dismissal passed against the concerned workman must be held to be bad in law as even the enquiry report was not served to the delinquent employee and no opportunity of hearing was granted on the quantum of punishment by Disciplinary Authority.
6.
So far as the first contention of Mr. Bahadur is concerned, the same is clearly covered by a Division Bench decision of this Court in MAT 1535 of 2000 (The Central Agricultural Research Institute and another v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and others), which was disposed of today by a Division Bench of this Court wherein it has been held :  "It may be true that there has been a delay in making a reference but the same always is not fatal.
In Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty, reported in AIR 2000 SC 839, upon which Mr. Roy has placed reliance wherein unfortunately the learned counsel for the parties were remiss in not bringing to the notice of the Apex Court its earlier decisions.
In Guest Keen Williams Pvt. Ltd. v. PJ Sterling and Ors, reported in 1959 SC 1279, it has clearly been held that Limitation Act has no application in relation to the proceedings under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Yet again in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Services Society Ltd and Anr., reported in 1999 Lab.IC 1435, it has categorically been held that even where a delay of more than seven years had occurred, the Court only would mould the relief by refusing back wages or directing part of that wages.
The said decision has been followed by the Apex Court in Gurmail Singh v. Principal, Government College of Education and Ors, Reported in 2000(1) LLJ 1080 (SC), wherein it has been held :- "As laid down by this Court in the case of Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd. and Anr., reported in 1999(1) LLJ 1260 (SC), if the order of dismissal is challenged belatedly, the dispute would still continue for adjudication, the only question would be to deprive back wages for the period of delay in raising such a dispute if on merits it is to succeed."
The aforementioned decisions have been taken into consideration recently by a Division Bench of this Court in FMAT No. 729 of 1996, The Secretary (Policy) Regional Director (Food) Employees Association v. Food Corporation of India and Ors, disposed of on 482000.
Ajaib Singh (supra), has also recently been followed by a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in The Ambala Central Cooperative Bank Limited v. State of Haryana, reported in 2000(2) SCT 31 (P&H) : 2000(2) Administrative Tribunal Judgments 449.
The only relief, therefore, which could be granted to the appellant was that the concerned workmen would not be entitled to back wages, which was duly considered by the Labour Court and, thus, no illegality can be said to have been committed by it."
Delay in making reference therefore in the instant cause, may not be fatal particularly when neither the petitioner has not produced any document nor has taken such objection before the learned Labour Court.
The second contention of Mr. Bahadur, however, has some force.
It appears that the learned Labour Court completely misdirected itself in so far as it referred to the provision of Section 25(F) and 25(B) of the Industrial Disputes Act having regard to the fact that the service of the respondent was terminated upon initiation of disciplinary proceeding on the ground that she has committed misconduct and thus the question of invoking the provisions laid down under Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes Act does not arise.
7.
Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the delinquent officer has committed a misconduct and whether the petitioner herein has been able to establish the said charges or not were the only questions which fell for consideration by the learned Labour Court.
8.
The learned Labour Court could exercise its jurisdiction under Section 11A of the ID Act.
Although the power under the aforementioned provision is wide, it could not take into considerations irrelevant facts which were not germane for deciding the issue before it.
9.
It is manifest from the submission of Ms. S Ganguly that the main issue which was required to be considered by the learned Labour Court had not been taken into consideration as the learned Labour Court posed a wrong question namely applicability of the Chapter V of the ID Act and thus he must be held to have been misdirected himself in law.
Furthermore, it does not appear from the impugned award as to on what basis the learned Labour Court came to the conclusion that the concerned workman did not have any requisite men srea.
Furthermore in a given case, particularly having regard to the purport and object of constituting the Cooperative Banks, absence of men srea may not be relevant for arriving at a finding whether the delinquent workman committed misconduct or not.
10.
In this view of the matter, this Court is of the opinion, that the matter should be considered afresh by the learned Labour Court.
For the said purpose, it goes, without saying the parties shall be entitled to adduce fresh evidence.
It is placed on record that this Court has not gone into merit of the matter and all contentions of the parties shall remain open.
11.
For the reasons aforementioned this writ application is allowed and the impugned award dated 31st January, 2000 is set aside and the matter is remanded back to the learned Labour Court for considering the matter afresh.
Having regard to the facts of the case, the learned Labour Court is requested to dispose of the matter at an early date preferably within two months from the date of communication of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.