Kundan Singh, J - Being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 3041994 in Regular Civil Appeal No. 62 of 1988 by the Assistant Judge, Surat dismissing the appeal and confirming the judgment and decree dated 30.6.1988 in Regular Civil Appeal No. 282 of 1984, the appellant-original defendants have filed the present Second appeal.
2.
The respondent-plaintiff was born on 811932.
He was selected as Class-II Gazetted Officer in Bombay Forest Service and he joined on 2.4.1957 as Assistant Conservator of Forests.
He was promoted as Class-I Gazetted Officer on 1511962 in Gujarat Forest Service.
The Review Committee submitted its report on 571983 recommending the name of the respondent- plaintiff for premature retirement.
The recommendation was made to the Government accordingly.
The Chief Secretary to the Government, after perusing all the papers forthwith decided to give premature retirement to the plaintiff.
The notice of premature retirement was given on 21111983 by Bindu Gamit, Under Secretary to the Government, Agriculture and Forest Department wherein it is written as under :  "ORDER In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-clause (i) of Clause (aa) of Rule 161(1) of Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959, the Government is pleased to order the retirement of DH Oza, Deputy Conservator of Forests in GFC Class-I from Government service in public interest on the expiry of three months' notice from the date of service of the order on him, in accordance with the Government circular, General Administration Department No. CRA 1083-A dated 25101983 read with Government circular, General Administration Department No. CRA/1071/G dated 171971" 3.
The respondent filed Regular Civil Suit No. 282 of 1984 in the court of the Joint Civil Judge (S.D.)
and Chief Judicial Magistrate, Surat challenging the notice of premature retirement for a declaration and permanent injunction.
The trial Judge framed as many as 10 issues, after going through material and evidence held that the plaintiff has proved that Ms. Bindu Gamit, the then Under Secretary has no authority to send the impugned notice.
The trial Court also held that the plaintiff has failed to show that Khanchandani and Karamchandani were hostile to him and at their instance, premature retirement notice was issued to the plaintiff.
The trial Court also held that the plaintiff was not directly recruited as class-I Officer, hence he cannot be prematurely retired under the relevant rules.
It has also been held by the trial Court that before disposal of the departmental inquiry pending against the respondent-plaintiff, the defendants cannot issue notice of premature retirement of the plaintiff.
It has also been held that the respondent- plaintiff was not given option for voluntary retirement under Rule 161(aa)(ii).
It is a condition precedent for the Government to issue a confidential letter in which the plaintiff ought to have been informed that the Government has decided to retire him prematurely and whether the plaintiff wants to retire voluntarily or not and in absence of such notice, the impugned notices Exhs.
67 and 107 are illegal.
The suit was not bad for want of statutory notice under Section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code.
The Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
It was also held that the plaintiff failed to prove that the defendants have committed breach of injunction and thereby committed contempt of Court.
The trial Court also found that the decision take by the ReviewingCommittee on 571983 regarding premature retirement of the plaintiff suffers from having no material, without any cogent reasons and arbitrariness.
Hence, the impugned notice issued by the defendants is illegal, void, inoperative and unconstitutional and against principles of natural justice.
The plaintiff succeeded in proving that he should be deemed to be continued in service from 571984 onwards and he is entitled for all consequential reliefs, pay, admissible allowances etc.  4.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment and decree dated 30.6.1988 of the Joint Civil Judge (S.D.)
and Chief Judicial Magistrate, Surat, the appellant filed Regular Civil Appeal No. 62 of 1988 before the District court, Surat.
The lower appellate court, by its judgment and order dated 30th April, 1994 dismissed the appeal of the Government confirming the findings of the trial Court.
Hence, the appellant State of Gujarat has filed this Second appeal in this court.
5.
The lower appellate Court affirmed the finding of the trial Court that if the service of notice is already waived by the Court at the time of the institution of the suit, then such dispute can be entertained and that suit without notice under Section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code is maintainable.
The lower appellate Court confirmed the finding of the trial Court that by not giving option to the plaintiff for voluntary retirement under Rule 161(aa)(ii), which is a condition precedent, the defendants have violated the rules therefore and thus, the impugned notice Exh.
67 is illegal and void.
The appellate Court also confirmed the finding of the trial Court that before disposal of the departmental inquiry against the plaintiff, the defendants cannot issue notice of premature retirement of the plaintiff and for that reason, the impugned notice is void ab initio.
The lower appellate Court also confirmed the finding of the trial Court on point Nos. 2, 3 and 5.
The action for giving the impugned notice for premature retirement is illegal and the impugned notice is in violation of rules framed by the Government itself.
The lower appellate Court also observed that the trial Judge has rightly held that the decision taken by the Reviewing Committee on 571983 regarding premature retirement of the plaintiff is not proper, legal and valid as it was not based on relevant material and decision suffers from having no material, without any cogent reasons and arbitrariness.
Thus, the power appellate Court has confirmed the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
Hence, this appeal.
6.
In this appeal, the following substantial question of law has been raised.
"In the facts and circumstances of the case, whether the Courts below have committed substantial error of law in interpretation and application of Rule 161 of the Bombay Civil Service Rules, in view of the judgment in case of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, reported in AIR 1992 SC 1020 : 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) followed by the judgment delivered by Division Bench of this Court, consisting of M/s. Justice AP Ravani and YB Bhatt, JJ.
in Special Civil Application No. 935 of 1988 ?"
In the case of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another (supra), the Supreme Court has laid down guidelines regarding premature retirement.
Para 32 of the said judgment is reproduced as under :  "32.
The following principles emerge from the above discussion : (i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate Court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide, or (b) that it is based on no evidence, or (c) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Reviewing Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If a government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merits (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be basis for interference.
Interference is permissible only on ground mentioned in (iii) above.
This object has been discussed in paras 29 to 31 above."
The Reviewing Committee has recommended the name of the petitioner for premature retirement on 571983.
The recommendation of the Reviewing Committee reads as under :  In the case of Shri DH Oza, the Committee felt that his performance over the last 10 years was continuously poor.
In the year 1973 apart from the various adverse remarks recorded by the Reporting Officer, the Reviewing Officer stated "extremely individualistic and selfish.
Lacks in discipline.
Overlooks rules and regulations.
Tactless.
He was warned by Government for undignified behaviour during the year.
Grading : Below average".
In the year 1974-75, apart from the innumerable adverse remarks by the Reporting Officer the Reviewing Officer graded him "below average".
In the year 1975-76, among the adverse remarks were statements like "Lacks budgetary control.
Indigent, Uncourteous and indisciplined in correspondence with higher officers.
Unfit for holding charge at territorial divisions.
Refractory to administrative and fiscal discipline.
Remains in constant conflict with fellow officers and even with his superiors and makes working difficult."
He was again graded "Below Average".
In 1976-77, among the adverse remarks were commenced like : "He does not adhere to tour programmes and tries to camp in Bhavnagar often.
He has not been able to get details for working plans preparation from various divisions."
The Reviewing Officer added "Tactless and adamant.
He has shown little improvement during the year".
In 1977-78 apart from the continued complaint of camping in Bhavnagar without doing work, the Reporting Officer has added, "scant regard for instructions and orders from his officers."
The Reviewing Officer for this year has state, "An intelligent but a misguided officer".
In 1978-79 the Reviewing Officer found him "Not very cordial, very rude, in his language and while communicating with superiors, biased etc." In 1979-80, Reviewing Officer has found him "rather irrelevant, in his reporting and argumentative".
In 1980-81 the Reviewing Officer has stated, "was reprimanded for delay and non-compliance of instructions".
Other remarks included "appears to be slow in accepting responsibility, all decisions are not sound".
In 1981-82 the Reporting Officer has found, "his thinking is not clear.
Not ready for responsibility.
Full of irrelevant informations and tendency to over-utilise powers without proper authority."
In 1982-83 the Reporting Officer has found him "some time evasive, his subordinates rebelled against him, cannot organise, resorts to devious methods at times, anti-social and cannot be relied either for work or integrity."
The Reviewing Officer has accepted these remarks.
It can, therefore, be seen that without an exception Shri Oza has received extremely adverse remarks from a number of different senior Reporting and Reviewing Officers.
There are also departmental inquiries pending against him.
In view of his consistently poor performance the committee recommends that he may prematurely retired and not continued beyond 50 years."
7.
The learned AGP for the appellant contended that the impugned notice was issued by the Under Secretary who cannot be said to have no authority to issue such a notice.
The Courts below have committed an error in holding that the notice issued by the Under Secretary is illegal and not maintainable in the eyes of law as the Under Secretary has no authority to issue such notice.
8.
I have carefully considered the arguments advanced by the learned AGP and respondent, party-in-person, and perused the relevant tapes on record.
9.
This is a matter in which the Reviewing Committee has recommended for the premature retirement of the respondent-plaintiff on the basis of the reviewing the performance of the respondent continuously for the last 10 years in which the performance of the respondent-plaintiff for the last 10 years was found to be poor.
The conclusions arrived at by the Reviewing Committee was forwarded to the Government.
The Chief Secretary to the Government perused the papers and after verifying the record of the respondent-plaintiff it was decided to retire the respondent-plaintiff prematurely.
Thus, the matter was considered by the Secretary to the State Government (Administrative Head of the State).
Thereafter, the matter was forwarded to the Under Secretary to issue the notice.
As such, the Under Secretary has an authority to communicate the decision of the State Government to the respondent-plaintiff.
Thus, it cannot be said that the impugned notice was issued by the Under Secretary who has no authority.
The matter was to be considered as directed by the State Government and that has been done.
The Under Secretary is the communicating agency only.
Therefore, the impugned notice is not illegal or without authority of law.
10.
The respondent-plaintiff who appears as party in person contended that the proposal for retirement should have been initiated by the appointing authority as per Rule 161 of the Bombay Civil Service Rules.
I have considred the arguments of the respondent-plaintiff.
Rule 161(1)(aa)(i) of the Bombay Civil Service Rules requires that the appointing authority, if he is of the opinion that it is in the public interest so to do, has the absolute right to retire any Government servant to whom Clause (a) applies by giving him a notice of not less than three months in writing or three months pay and allowances in lieu of such notice.
Even the proposal for premature retirement was made by Mr. MS Shah who is not an appointing authority and as an appointing authority is required to satisfy that a particular Government servant should be required to be retired prematurely in the public interest.
In the present case, the Government has satisfied itself and formed an opinion on the basis of the report of Reviewing Committee and other materials in support thereof that the respondent-plaintiff should be required to be retired prematurely in the public interest.
So, the notice on the basis of which the proposal by a person not being an appointing authority was issued after forming the opinion by the Government that the respondent-plaintiff is required to be retired prematurely is not illegal on this ground and the contention of the respondent-plaintiff is not sustainable in the eye of law.
11.
The next contention of the learned AGP for the appellant State is that the Courts below have recorded erroneous findings that the respondent- plaintiff was not a directly recruited Class-I, Officer, hence Rule 161(1)(aa)(i) cannot come into play and he cannot be prematurely retired under the relevant Rules.
I have considered carefully the contention of the learned AGP that the Courts below have committed an error on this aspect also that the respondent-plaintiff was not directly recruited as Class-I Officer, hence the relevant rule would not be applicable.
In fact, the rule requires that if he is in class-I or class-II service or post or in any unclassified gazetted post, the age limit for the purpose of direct recruitment to which is below 35 years, on or after the date on which he attains the age of 50 years, any Government servant to whom Clause (a) applies may by giving notice of not less than three months, in writing to the Appointing Authority retire from service after he has attained the age of 50 years, if he in Class-I and Class-II service post or in any unclassified gazetted post, the age limit for the purpose of recruitment to which is below 35 years and in other case, after he has attained the age of 55 years.
Admittedly, the respondent- plaintiff was appointed directly as Class-II service.
A person of Class-I and Class-II service for whom the age limit for the purpose of direct recruitment is prescribed as below 35 years and the respondent-plaintiff was appointed as class-II officer for which the age below 35 years was prescribed.
As such, the rules would be applicable and the Courts below have committed an error on the face of the record and against statutory provisions of rules and those findings of the Lower Courts in this respect cannot stand affirmed by this Court.
12.
The next contention of the learned AGP is that the Courts below have committed an error in holding that when a departmental inquiry is pending against the respondent-plaintiff, the appellant-defendant cannot issue notice of premature retirement of the plaintiff.
I have considred this contention of the learned AGP for the appellant.
I come to the conclusion that the Courts below have committed an error on the face of the record in this respect also, inasmuch as once the Government forms as opinion that a particular person should not be retained in service, he can be retired after taking into consideration last 10 years' performance.
It is true that the proviso to Clause (a)(aa) of Rule 161(1) gives discretion to Appointing Authority to withhold permission to retire to a Government servant who is under suspension, or against whom departmental proceedings are pending, but this power is discretionary, not mandatory or obligatory.
In the present case also, the Reviewing Committee has considered last 10 years' performance of the respondent-plaintiff and recommended for premature retirement of the respondent-plaintiff.
That recommendation was forwarded to the Secretary to the Government Secretary to the Government who considered the same and formed an opinion that the respondent should be retired prematurely as his performance for the last 10 years was poor and not satisfactory.
For the consideration of this aspect, the authorities are required to consider the confidential reports regarding performance of the respondent-plaintiff.
In the instant case, the Reviewing Committee, after considering the performance of last 10 years has come to the conclusion that respondent-plaintiff should not be retained after completion of 50 years of age.
Hence, the recommendation was made for premature retirement.
Adverse remarks and pendency of a departmental inquiry have also been considered.
If such adverse remarks have been considered by the Reviewing Committee and on the basis of the those adverse remarks and pendency of the departmental inquiry, the State Government forms an opinion that the person concerned should be retired prematurely, the notice for premature retirement on the basis of satisfaction of the Government cannot be said illegal at all.
Thus, pendency of any departmental inquiry, does not affect the recommendation of the Reviewing Committee and/or forming of an opinion by the Appointing Authority or by the State Government.
As laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another (supra), the Government or Reviewing Committee, as the case may be, is required to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter and performance during the latter years.
The record will include the entries in the confidential reports and character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
As such, pendency of the departmental inquiry does not affect forming of the opinion by the State Government or by the appointing authority or the recommendation of the Reviewing Authority.
13.
On the other hand, the respondent-plaintiff contended that the authorities have not considered favourable remarks made in his favour.
But from the perusal of the report of the Reviewing Committee, it appears that all the good or adverse remarks made in favour of the plaintiff or against the plaintiff have been considered.
As such, it cannot be said that the authorities have not considered good remarks.
14.
The next contention of the learned AGP for the appellant-State is that both the Courts below have considered that the respondent-defendant was not given an option for voluntary retirement under Rule 161(aa)(ii) of the BCSRs, as also required by some circular issued by the department at Exh.
71.
In this connection, I have considered the guidelines laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another (supra), in which it has been mentioned that the principles of natural justice have no place in the context of order of compulsory retirement.
In the present case, for premature retirement, the Government is not required to give option for voluntary retirement as principles of natural justice are not applicable in the case of premature retirement, though there is a circular in this respect which requires the Government to give an option to the person concerned.
According to the learned AGP, the Government has a discretion to given an option to the person concerned.
If such option is not given by the Government in violation of the departmental circular, it would not vitiate the impugned notice/order.
According to him, rules of natural justice are not applicable in the case of premature retirement or compulsory retirement.
As such, in my opinion, not giving an opportunity for voluntary retirement to the person concerned will not vitiate the impugned order of retirement, more particularly where there is sufficient material for requiring the person concerned to retire prematurely.
In the present case, in my opinion, there is sufficient material to arrive at a conclusion at the person concerned should be retired prematurely and the option for voluntary retirement under Rule 161(aa)(ii) is not required under law to be given before issuing the impugned notice for premature retirement.
15.
It is further by the learned AGP that the findings recorded by the Courts below are erroneous to the effect that the decision of the Reviewing Authority taken on 571983 regarding premature retirement of the plaintiff suffers from having no material, without any cogent reasons and arbitrary.
Hence, the impugned notice issued by the appellant-defendant is illegal, void, inoperative, unconstitutional and against principles of natural justice.
I have considered the contention of the learned AGP.
The report of the Reviewing Committee clearly shows that there is sufficient and substantial material on record on the basis of the last 10 years performance of the respondent-plaintiff for the recommendation to retire the plaintiff prematurely.
The respondent-plaintiff contended that the proposal made by Mr. MS Khanchandani is a manipulated report.
The adverse remarks were also manipulated by him.
There is nothing on record to show that there were any adverse remarks in the confidential remarks (reports ?).
We cannot go behind the report of the Reviewing Committee which is based on the performance of the plaintiff for the last 10 years and there is nothing on record to show that adverse remarks mentioned and considered by the reviewing authority were not in the confidential report of the respondent-plaintiff and the observations and findings of the Courts below that the report of the Reviewing Committee suffers from having no material, without any cogent reasons and arbitrariness, are not sustainable in the eye of law.
16.
The learned AGP also pointed out that the courts below have recorded a finding that the plaintiff has succeeded in proving that he should be deemed to be in continuous service from 571984 onwards and he is also entitled for all consequential relief, pay, admissible allowances etc.
In this respect, if the report of the Reviewing Committee is accepted and it does not suffer from any illegality and the opinion formed by the State Government/Appointing Authority for retiring the respondent-plaintiff prematurely is good, then the respondent-plaintiff cannot be deemed to be in continuous service after 571984.
In this respect, the findings of the courts below are not sustainable in the eye of law.
17.
In the present case, the respondent-plaintiff made an attempt to submit that Mr. Khanchandani and Mr. SK Sinha were inimical to him and were behind him in getting the impugned order passed against him.
In this respect, the trial Court has recorded a finding that the respondent-plaintiff has failed to show that Mr. Khanchandani and Mr. Karamchandani were hostile to him and at their instance, the impugned premature retirement notice was issued to the plaintiff.
This finding has not been disturbed by the lower appellate Court.
As such, this Court cannot reassess and re-appreciate the evidence on record regarding enmity between the respondent-plaintiff on one hand and Mr. Karamchandani and Mr. Khanchandani on the other hand.
In the Second Appeal, it would not be possible for the Court to re-appreciate and reassess the evidence on record, where findings of fact have already been recorded by the Courts below.
18.
Thus, in my opinion, it cannot be accepted that the Reviewing Authority has recommended the plaintiff's premature retirement and the Government has formed the opinion for the same on the basis of the enmity or at the instance of Mr. Karamchandani or Mr. Khanchandani.
19.
The appellate Court has observed that the defendants have produced confidential reports at Exh.
295, that is, in respect of adverse remarks by the respondent-plaintiff from 111972 to 3131983.
By a letter dated 1121975, the adverse remarks from 111971 to 31.12.1972 were communicated to the plaintiff.
The remarks were communicate to the respondent-plaintiff after about 4 years.
In fact, it is about three years.
The adverse remarks of 111973 to 1741973 were communicated to the plaintiff on 1121975 and adverse remarks on the period from 18.5.1973 to 31.12.1973 were communicated to the plaintiff on 1121975 after about two years.
Actually this is also about one year and not two years.
The Reviewing Committee has relied on the adverse remarks of the plaintiff for the year 1973 and those remarks were communicated on 1121975 after about two years.
Actually, it is about one year and not two years.
20.
The lower appellate Court also relied on the resolution dated 751979 wherein it is stated that the communication of adverse remarks is required to be made to the Government servant within six weeks without fail.
This is not correct, that the remarks were communicated after two years.
It is about one year.
This, the appellant defendant committed breach of the circular Exh.
119.
The Reviewing Committee was not authorised to take into consideration the adverse remarks of 1973 at the time of taking the decision of premature retirement of the appellant-plaintiff.
Even then, the Reviewing Committee has considered the said adverse remarks of 1973.
The adverse remarks of 1974-75 have been conveyed to the respondent-plaintiff by a letter dated 15.5.1975.
The lower appellate Court made an observation that the conditional remarks of the plaintiff were written in 1976.
If the confidential remarks for the period form 19.5.1974 to 31.3.1975 was written by the reporting officer in 1976, they cannot be conveyed to the respondent-plaintiff on 19.5.1975 as on 19.5.1975 there was no existence of confidential report of the plaintiff for the year 1974-75.
The confidential remarks for the year 1974-75 according to the lower appellate Court give a reasonable shadow of doubt for its existence and then remarks of 1974-75 cannot be considered, even though the Reviewing Committee has considered the said remarks.
The adverse remarks for the period from 141975 to 31.3.1975 were communicated to the respondent-plaintiff by a letter dated 3111977, after about 10 months of the prescribed period which also communicates that the reporting officer has committed breach of the circular Exh.
119.
According to that circular, the adverse remarks should be communicated to the persons concerned within six weeks without fail.
Thus, the adverse remarks for the period from 141976 to 3131977 were communicate to the respondent-plaintiff on 14.6.1977.
Thus, there was a delay in communicating the said remarks to the respondent-plaintiff and breach of circular Exh.
119.
The adverse remarks of the plaintiff for the period from 141977 to 7.12.1977 and from 8121977 to 3131978 were communicated to the plaintiff by letter dated 381978.
Thus, the remarks were communicated to the plaintiff at a very late stage.
The adverse remarks for the period from 141978 to 3131979 were communicated to the plaintiff on 11.8.1979.
Thus, the Competent Authority has committed breach of the circular Exh.
119.
The communication of the adverse remarks for the period from 141979 to 3131980 was also made on 771980.
Thus, there was a delay of 3 to 4 months in communicating the said remarks to the plaintiff.
The adverse marks for the period from 141980 to 31.3.1981 were communicated to the plaintiff on 13.7.1981.
Thus, there was a delay of about three months in communicating the said remarks.
The adverse remarks for the period from 141981 to 3131982 were communicated to the plaintiff on 13.7.1981.
Thus, there was a delay of about three months in communicating said remarks.
The adverse by a letter dated 3151982.
Thus, there was a delay of about two months.
Thus, the appellate Court has considered the adverse marks made against the respondent-plaintiff to be illegal, not to be relied upon by the Reviewing Committee for recommendation to retire the plaintiff prematurely, mainly on the ground that these adverse remarks were communicated to the respondent- plaintiff after period prescribed therefor by the circular Exh.
119.
In some of the cases, this Court has held that the circular prescribing time of six weeks for communicant adverse marks to the person concerned, is only directory and not mandatory in the every of law.
As such, it cannot be said that the adverse remarks made against the respondent-plaintiff were not in existence or cannot be considered for premature retirement only on the ground that they were communicated after prescribed period of six weeks as mentioned in the circular Exh.
119.
Secondly, the Supreme Court in the case of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another (supra) has held that the order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by the Court merely on the ground that while passing (sic) uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration, meaning thereby that the Reviewing Authority can consider adverse marks which have not been communicated to the Government servant, meaning thereby that the Reviewing Authority can consider and rely on the uncommunicated adverse marks.
In this connection, the respondent-plaintiff contended that this Rule laid down by the Supreme Court would not be applicable to him on the ground that the observation has been made in Orissa case, whereas the plaintiff is resident of Gujarat State where communication of adverse marks is required under Rules.
In my opinion, the contention of the respondent-plaintiff is not sustainable in view of the fact that that Apex Court has considered the entire facts and circumstances for relying on and passing the order of premature retirement.
The material fact is only that there must be a subjective satisfaction of the authority concerned and there must be consideration of entire record of service of the person concerned before passing the impugned notice.
In the present case, the entire record in respect of the performance of the respondent-plaintiff for a period of last 10 years has been considered by the Reviewing Committee as well as the State/Reviewing Authority, on the basis of the subjective satisfaction or the consideration of the performance of the respondent-plaintiff for the last 10 years would be sufficient to pass the impugned notice/order of premature retirement.
And it cannot be said that there is no material on record to arrive at the conclusion for premature retirement.
21.
The impugned notice/order can be challenged only be on the ground of mala fides or if it is based on no evidence or arbitrariness in the sense that no reasonable person would form requisite opinion on the given material.
So far as mala fides is concerned, the respondent-plaintiff has failed to prove any enmity behind passing the impugned notice/order against him, meaning thereby that there was no enmity.
As such, the order cannot be said to be mala fide.
Secondly, it cannot be said that it is based on no evidence.
The Reviewing Authority has discussed the entire material of last 10 years regarding performance of the respondent-plaintiff for the last 10 years.
As such, it cannot be said that there is no material on record.
So far as arbitrariness is concerned, as there is nothing on record to show that the decision taken by the Government for retiring the respondent-plaintiff prematurely is arbitrary, as no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion.
22.
Therefore, the notice is based on satisfactory and subjective satisfaction of the Government/Reviewing Authority.
The findings recorded by the Courts below are contrary to the principle laid down by the Apex Court in this regard.
As such, the learned AGP has been able to prove that the case involves a substantial question of law regarding interpretation of application of Rule 161 of Bombay Civil Service Rules in view of the judgment in the case of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another (supra) followed by the judgment delivered by the Division Bench of this Court, consisting of M/s. Justice AP Ravani and YB Bhatt, JJ.
in Special Civil Application No. 935 of 1988.
23.
Considering the entire material on record and facts and circumstances of the case, this appeal is allowed.
The judgment and decree dated 3041994 in Regulator Civil Appeal No. 62 of 1988 passed by the learned Assistant Judge, Surat and the judgment and decree dated 30.6.1988 in Regular Civil Suit No. 282 of 1984 passed by the Joint Civil Judge (S.D.
), and Chief Judicial Magistrate, Surat is hereby quashed and set aside and Regular Civil Suit No. 282 of 1984 stands dismissed.
Decree be drawn accordingly.
Rule made absolute with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.