Gorachand De, J. - In this writ petition the only point for consideration is whether a mandate can be issued directing the respondents to give appointment to the petitioner on compassionate ground on his attaining majority which is after ten years of the death of his father who was a teacher in Hariharnagar Primary School of the district Nadia.
2.
The father was appointed as primary teacher of that school in the year 1976 and was also a political leader and was elected member of Hanskhali Panchayat Samity.
But on 28782 at the age of 50 years he was murdered leaving behind a widow and two sons aged 8 years and 4 years respectively.
It is claimed in paragraph 22 of the writ petition that immediately after the death, the widow mother of the present petitioner on 20982 prayed for an employment to one of the wards of the deceased on compassionate grounds but no action was taken.
3.
Subsequently the present petitioner passed Madhyamik (Secondary) Examination in first division in the year 1990 and Higher Secondary Examination in second division in the year 1993.
The petitioner also passed the Primary Teachers' Training Final Examination in 1994 and was placed in first division.
However, the petitioner on 25792 prayed for employment on compassionate ground and his application was forwarded by the Chairman/Secretary of the Ad hoc Committee, Nadia District Primary School Council to the Director of School Education (Primary Branch), West Bengal for favourable consideration.
But as no action was taken the petitioner moved this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India (CO No. 5059(W) of 1996) in which an order was passed on 23.4.96 in the said writ petition directing the Director of School Education (Primary Branch), West Bengal to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground in the died-in-harness category and to dispose of the same in accordance with law by passing a speaking order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the writ petitioner within a period of eight weeks.
However, the Director of School Education by a speaking order dated 19th December, 1996 rejected the representation of the present petitioner mainly on the ground that proposal for appointment on compassionate ground under died-in-harness category after 10 years is badly time barred for which no relief can be granted.
Being aggrieved by the said order the writ petitioner filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenging the said order of the District Inspector of Schools and also for a mandate for giving a regular employment on compassionate ground.
4.
Surprisingly enough none of the respondents appeared in spite of service of notices upon them and no affidavit was filed controverting the allegations made in the writ petition.
5.
It is clear from the materials on record that the father was murdered on 28782 while he was holding a permanent post of primary teacher in Hariharnagar Primary School and at the time of his death he was survived by his widow and two minor children aged 8 years and 4 years respectively.
It is already indicated above that in paragraph 22 of the writ petition there is an indication that immediately after the death of the primary school teacher, his widow on 20982 prayed for an employment to one of the wards of the deceased on compassionate ground.
But there is nothing on record to show or indicate that the said prayer was ever considered or taken care of by the respondents.
So there is indication that the respondents failed to act fairly in this regard.
6.
It further transpires that the eldest son of the deceased after attaining majority prayed for an appointment on compassionate ground and it is indicated hereinabove that the Director of Schools Education, West Bengal rejected the petition mainly on the ground that it was barred by limitation.
In the said order dated 19.12.96 (annexure `K' to the writ petition) it is indicated that application for appointment on compassionate ground should be made within two years from the date of death of the incumbents.
In course of hearing no such rule was produced before this Court.
On the other hand, the ld.
counsel for the present petitioner placed reliance on a Government Order No. 457-EDM(P)/4A-50/83 dated 121087 to show that the State Government for extending the benefit of the existing rules as regards appointment on compassionate ground issued the said order for bringing all such cases under a single umbrella and the manner in which such cases are to be dealt with are prescribed therein.
I deem it proper to reproduce the paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the said Government Order:  "4.
The claim for employment on compassionate ground of the wards of Primary/Secondary/Junior High /Higher Secondary School teachers and that of the wards of the non-teaching employees attached to such Educational Institutions as aforesaid shall be restricted to 10% of the total vacancies occurring in a particular year in a district as of the exempted category.
5.
The term "ward" shall mean a son/a dependent daughter/the widow/the husband of the deceased teacher or of the deceased non-teaching employee.
The ward shall apply for appointment on compassionate ground to the authority concerned immediately after the death of the teacher or of the non-teaching employee concerned.
6.
The appointment authority after satisfying itself that the ward fulfils all the prescribed conditions and also that the family is in distress and in immediate need of assistance may issue necessary appointment orders only with the prior approval of the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
7.
In all cases where it is proposed to relax the conditions mentioned in paras five and six above the appointing authority shall refer the matter to the government in the Education Department through the Director of School Education, West Bengal and the final decision in the matter will rest with the Government."
7.
So it is clear that the ward shall apply for appointment on compassionate ground immediately after the death of the teacher concerned.
The appointing authority thereafter satisfying itself that the ward fulfils all the prescribed conditions and that the family is in distress and in immediate need of assistance may issue necessary appointment order only with the approval of the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
In paragraph 7 quoted above, power of relaxation is also given and it was for the appointing authority to refer the matter to the Government in the Education Department through the Director of School Education, West Bengal for a final decision.
So the bar of two years as indicated in the order of the Director of School Education is not reflected in the above-mentioned Government Order; on the other hand, the power of relaxation of the conditions mentioned in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the said Government Order was prescribed.
There is nothing in the order of the Director of School Education, West Bengal to show that the case was considered in its proper perspective.
Similarly the forwarding letter of the Nadia District Primary School Council dated 19493 is also silent on this point though there was forwarding of the letter of the present writ petitioner for favour of kind action of the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
8.
All these facts are sufficient to indicate that the authorities did not act fairly.
Moreover, the order dated 19121996 of the Director of School Education indicates that there was non-application of mind also as he failed to take into his notice that the present petitioner passed the Madhyamik Examination in first division and "not in second division".
He also failed to indicate under what rule there was a bar of appointment on compassionate ground after two years.
Accordingly the order passed by the District Inspector of Schools is liable to be set aside.
9.
The ld.
counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on a judgment of this Court in Bimal Kumar Gyan v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1995(1) Calcutta Law Journal 393 argued that in a similar case the eldest son of the deceased who was a minor at the time of the death of his father was directed to be appointed on his attainment of majority.
In that case the widow of the deceased made an application for her appointment in her deceased husband's place within two months of the death of the husband and as no action was taken on that petition, a mandate was issued to give appointment to the eldest son who attained majority subsequently and acquired necessary educational qualification.
The present case is almost similar to that case.
10.
Of course the leading case on this point is the case of Smt. Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, reported in AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1976 in which Their Lordships of the Apex Court took the view:  "It can be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such case pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
11.
The same view was followed by the Apex Court in the case of Smt. Phoolwati v. Union of India and others reported in AIR 1991 Supreme Court 469 and direction was issued upon the Union of India to take immediate steps for giving employment to a son of the deceased in a suitable post commensurate with his educational qualification.
12.
On course of Apex Court in another case reported in 1994(1) Supreme Court Cases 192 : [1993(8) SLR 420 (SC)] (Auditor General of India and others v. G Ananta Rajeswara Rao took the view that the appointment on compassionate ground is not on the ground of the descent simplicitor and not violative of Article 16(2) of the Constitution of India so long such compassionate appointment is given to a son, daughter or widow to assist the family relieve economic distress by sudden demise unharness of government employee.
Such appointments are construed to be appointments on exceptional circumstances.
In the Government Order dated 121087 hereinabove mentioned, the government wanted to give certain relief of the distressed family on the sudden demise of the bread earned and undoubtedly, keeping in view the case of minor children the right to relax the rule is prescribed and such power is given to the Government in the Education Department.
In the present case the State failed to keep a school teacher alive to maintain his family as he was untimely murdered by miscreants.
So a duty has been cast upon the State Government to take care of the family specially when it is indicated that immediately after the killing of the bread earner the family had to leave the place after disposing of the property at the threat of the miscreants.
It is also indicated that neither the widow was given any appointment on compassionate ground though she applied for the same, nor any attempt was made to take into consideration the distressed condition of the family and how the widow managed to bring up the minor children.
It is already indicated above that the widow gave proper education to the present petitioner and also to her youngest son and all such activities on her part are sufficient to indicate that she spent a considerable amount for bringing up these two sons during the last few years and the petitioner has come up with a plea that the family in still in distress.
None of the respondents ever cared these aspects.
On the other hand, they opted not to appear before this Court nor to assist the court for a final decision.
13.
In view of the discussions hereinabove made and keeping in view the law on this point as well as the Government Order dated 121087, it is held that the respondents failed to act properly and fairly and no respect was shown to the family or to the Government order for which the order passed by the Director of School on 19.12.90 is liable to be set aside.
The Director of School Education (Primary Branch), West Bengal is directed to consider the case of the present petitioner in the light of the observations hereinabove made and thereafter clarifying all the aspects, he shall forward the representation of the present petitioner along with the forwarding letter of the District Primary School Council dated 19493 to the Secretary of the Education Department (Primary Education) Govt. of West Bengal for relaxation of the Rule within the meaning of paragraph 7 of the Government Order dated 121087 within six weeks from the date of communication of this order and the secretary of the Education Department.
Govt. of West Bengal thereafter to take into consideration all the aspects of this case and shall pass a reasoned order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the writ petitioner and such other person or persons as may be considered necessary by him within a period of eight weeks thereafter and shall communicate the said reasoned order to the writ petitioner within four weeks from the date of passing of the reasoned order.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
Let this order be communicated to the Director of School Education, West Bengal by the petitioner forthwith.
Urgent xerox certified copy, if applied for, may be supplied expeditiously on payment of usual charges.
Order accordingly.