Basudeva Panigrahi, J - This case has been filed against the orders passed by the Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act, so also the controlling authority directing the writ petitioner to grant gratuity by keeping in view the continuity of service of O.P. No. 3 from the date of his joining 11.2.1960 till the date of his superannuation on 311989.
2.
The factual matrix to filing of this writ petition is as follows :  That the private respondent had joined the service in M/s.
Original Machinery and Civil Construction Ltd (O.M.C.C.)
since 11.2.1960.
After sometime the Company had declared lock-out on and from 26.10.1978 and closure with effect from 111979.
The declaration of closure was just subsequent to the lock-out declared by O.M.C.C.
since there was no possibility of opening the Company wanted to purchase the company.
There was a tripartite agreement at the mediation of Labour Commissioner, Government of West Bengal amongst the erstwhile company OMCC, Texmaco, the writ petitioner and also the private respondent which was signed on 331983.
In a tripartite agreement these arrangement, however, were made after all the parties approved the same.
The important clauses of the tripartite agreement are described hereunder :  5(b) The Management of Texmaco Ltd, has agreed to take over OMCC's liability towards gratuity payable under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 due to its workmen upto the date of Closure Notice.
Accordingly, the workmen being employed by Texmaco Ltd, will be issued a certificate by Texmaco Ltd, of the amount of gratuity so payable on account of their service tenure with OMCC as stated above.
The said gratuity amount would be payable to the workmen as and when they retire from the service of Texmaco Ltd, along with the gratuity which would become due to them under Gratuity Act for the period of their fresh employment with Texmaco Ltd The gratuity under the Gratuity Act of the workmen who are not employed by Texmaco Ltd, on account of any reason whatsoever will be paid by Texmaco Ltd, on behalf of OMCC upto the date of the Lock-out/Closure of the said industrial undertaking.
Except gratuity no further amount will be payable on any other account.
5.
(c) It is declared and agreed that save and except gratuity lability as stated above, the workmen have no other claims whatsoever against Texmaco Ltd The liability of pending bonus, accumulated leave salary and overtime payment if any (as per the records of OMCC) upto the date of closure of the industrial undertaking will be discharged by OMCC.
It is declared and agreed that save and except for these outstanding payments of pending bonus, accumulated leave salary and over-time payment, if any, there are no other claims of the workmen against OMCC.
6(c) Texmaco Ltd has agreed to take over OMCC's liability towards gratuity payable under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 due to its workmen upto the date of closure notice.
Accordingly, the workmen being employed by Texmaco will be issued a certificate by Texmaco of the amount of gratuity so payable on account of their service tenure with OMCC as stated above.
The said gratuity amount would be payable to the workmen as and when they retire from the service of Texmaco along with the gratuity which would become due to them under the Gratuity Act for the period of their fresh employment with Texmaco.
The gratuity under the Gratuity Act of the workmen who are not employed by Texmaco on account of any reason whatsoever will be paid by Texmaco on behalf of OMCC upto the date of the lock-out/closure of the said factory.
Except gratuity no further amount will be payable on any other account by Texmaco.
3.
The writ petitioner on the eve of private respondent's retirement calculated his gratuity dues from the date of company's take over till date of superannuation and paid an amount of Rs. 4,923.
A different calculation was, however, made from 11.2.1960 to 26.10.1978 till the date of lock-out and fixed an amount of Rs. 4,748, both taken together was calculated at Rs. 9,671.
4.
The private respondent being aggrieved by such illegal, arbitrary and whimsical calculation filed an application before the controlling authority.
But the controlling authority after due consideration of the documentary and oral evidence was, however, inclined to hold that there was continuity of service from the date of private respondent's joining viz. from 11.2.1960 till the date of superannuation 3.8.1989 notwithstanding the interviewing lock- out/closure of the company.
The controlling authority has, however, mainly relied upon the provisions of Section 14 of the Act which provides overriding effect with other clauses of an agreement which is contrary to the said provision.
It is necessary to quote the said provision which reads as follows :  "The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument or contract having effect of any enactment other than this Act."
5.
The controlling authority has accepted the contention of the private respondent that there was continuity in the service from the date of appointment till his superannuation even though there was a break of his employment due to the lock-out followed by closure.
He mainly relied upon to arrive at such a conclusion was on the basis of the provisions of Section 2(A) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, which defines `continuous service' as follows :  "An employee shall be said to be in continuous service for the period if he has, for that period, been in uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness, accident, leave, absence from duty without leave (not being absence in respect of which an order treating the absence as break in service has been passed in accordance with the Standing Orders, rules or regulations governing the employees of the establishment), lay-off, strike or lock-out or cessation of work not due to any fault of the employee, whether such uninterrupted or interrupted service has (been) rendered or after the commencement of this Act."
6.
The Controlling Authority further laid stress upon the provisions of Section 25(FFF) to the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which is extracted here below :  "When an undertaking is closed down for any reason whatsoever, every workmen who has been in continuous service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such closure shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be entitled to notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of Section 25F, as if the workmen had been retrenched; as inserted by Industrial Disputes (West Bengal Second Amendment) Act, 1980 :-  "Provided that prior payment of compensation to the workmen shall be a condition precedent to the closure of any undertaking."
7.
According to the West Bengal Amendment the `closure' of any undertaking cannot be legal unless and until payment of compensation is made under the above provision.
Therefore, in such situation the competent authority keeping in view the facts situation of the case directed that since the private respondent was deemed to be in continuous service from the date of his joining till superannuation he is accordingly entitled to the gratuity amount to the tune of Rs. 23,80220.
Being aggrieved by such direction the company filed an appeal before the Appellate Authority but it did not yield any other result than with affirmance of the decision.
Therefore, the company being aggrieved by and affected with the orders passed by both the authorities has filed this writ petition.
8.
Mr. Sengupta, the learned advocate appearing for the company has strongly contended that Texmaco Ltd has inherited the limited liability to pay the gratuity of the workers working in the company from the date of their joining till it was declared `closed'.
It has further undertaken to pay the employees the Provident Fund from the date of fresh appointment till superannuation.
Accordingly, the company has rightly calculated two different rates of gratuity amount insofar as the private respondent was concerned.
Since there was break in service of private respondent who accepted the terms of such tripartite agreement, he, possibly could not have turned round and submit that payment of such gratuity was arbitrary and contrary to the provisions of the Act.
He submitted that under the provisions of Section 2A of the Gratuity Act it does not speak about closure.
Therefore, the Controlling Authority and the appellate authority did not consider this aspect and directed the petitioner to pay the gratuity from the date of his appointment till superannuation treating his service to be continuous.
The provision of Section 2A only refers to the same employer but does not contemplate the transfer of the establishment.
Section 25(FF) speaks about liability of the transferred employees.
9.
Mr. Sen, the learned advocate appearing for the private respondent has pointed out that there has been no allegations of perversity or illegality on the findings of both the authority and, therefore, the writ petitioner is not entitled to challenge the same.
Apart from it the case was filed after such an inordinate or inexplicable delay which would cause heavy prejudice to the private respondent in case the petition is allowed.
Another contention has been raised that `cessation' also amount to closure under Section 2A of the Gratuity Act.
The Gratuity Act is a complete procedure and, therefore, it is not necessary to invoke the provision of any other statute to supplement the procedure.
No compensation admittedly has been paid on account of closure of the company.
No letter of payment was issued, much less, produced by the petitioner's company.
There was no termination of the employment as required under Section 4(1) of the Act.
If the erstwhile employer had not given termination notice nor paid any gratuity then it is to be presumed that the employment remained under suspensation.
By contractual device of re-employment substantive right of gratuity cannot be taken away.
Section 14 of the Act speaks that contract even if agreed to shall not defeat the right of the private respondent.
10.
The incontrovertible facts leading to this writ petition my be summarised as follows :  "The opposite party No. 3 was appointed on February 11, 1960 by the erstwhile employer Oriental Machinery and Civil Construction Ltd (OMCC).
The said company declared `lock out' on 26th October, 1978.
On 1st January, 1979 pursuant to the notice given by the company the OMCC declared `closure' which came into force on and from that date.
There was a tripartite settlement among the erstwhile Company, the present writ petitioner and the employees' union on 3rd March, 1983 by reason whereof the `closure' order was lifted.
On December 6, 1998 the present petitioner Texmaco served a notice by stating inter alia that the respondent No. 3 has attained the age of superannuation with effect from 3rd January, 1989.
Accordingly he was allowed to take retirement on 4th January, 1989.
11.
The petitioner company offered gainful employment to the workmen.
Admittedly neither any retrenchment compensation nor statutory gratuity was paid upon closure of the industrial undertaking and upon withdrawal of closure the opposite party No. 3 resumed service.
The question is whether period for which the opposite party No. 3 was out of employment shall also be treated as continuous service or not.
In case it is held that notwithstanding the fact the respondent No. 3 had not worked but that period shall be included as continuous service, then the gratuity which was determined by the Controlling Authority as well as Appellate Authority shall be upheld.
12.
The strenuous argument was advanced by the learned advocate appearing for the opposite party No. 3 that since the clauses in the tripartite agreement were arrived at by coercion, fraud or misrepresentation, such clauses shall be declared void at the option of the party whose consent was so taken.
It has been further contended that the union has taken a decision unilaterally without consulting the respective workers.
In such background even if the decision was taken at the union level it does not, however, bind individual workers.
It has been submitted that since the clause is hit under Section 16 of the Contract Act, therefore, such clause in unsustainable.
I am at a loss to understand how such an argument has been advanced.
Inasmuch as the respondent No. 3 from the date of joining in service with the writ petitioner till the date of his retirement had on no occasion challenged the clause of the agreement.
Therefore, such argument for the first time in this writ petition seems to be without merits.
13.
The judgment which was cited by the learned advocate appearing for the opposite party No. 3 (1985) I-LLJ page 238 in the case of Siaji Mills v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, the interpretation of Section 16 of the Employees PF Act was considered where the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that since a factory was temporarily stopped, such stoppage will not, however, absolve the authorities from paying the Employees' Provident Fund.
Therefore, the above judgement also is not applicable to this case.
We are to find out whether the same employees who were in the employment of the previous employer continued, subsequently.
Mere investment of additional capital or effecting repairs to the existing machinery before it was restarted; the diversification of the lines of production or change of ownership would not amount to the establishment of a new factory.
14.
It is strange to note that the predecessors-in-interest of the petitioner have never cared to pay compensation or send notice as required under the provision of Section 25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act.
15.
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is undoubtedly a piece of social welfare legislation enacted with view to lay down uniform pattern to pay gratuity to different category of employees.
While considering the provisions of the Act, the Court shall bear in mind that a welfare legislation should receive liberal consideration in favour of the employees working in the establishment.
Therefore, where there are more than one interpretations, the interpretation which is beneficial to the employees shall be made applicable to suit the purpose of the Act.
16.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in AIR 1979 Supreme Court page 1981 in the case of State of Punjab v. Labour Court, Jullundur had held as follows :  "5.
Having regard to the definition of `superannuation' in Section 2(r) of the Act, it is clear that the case is not one under clause (a).
Nor, admittedly, it is a case which falls under clause (c).
As regards clause (b), it is not a case of resignation.
The only question is whether it can be regarded under clause (b) as a case of retirement.
The expression `retirement' has been defined by Section 2(q) to mean `termination of the service of an employee otherwise than on superannuation'.
The definition is framed in the widest terms.
Except for superannuation, any termination of service would amount to `retrenchment' for the purpose of the Act.
Retrenchment is a termination of service.
It is immaterial that the termination is occasioned by the need to discharge surplus labour.
This retrenchment implies the discharge of surplus labour was explained in Barsi Light Railway Co Ltd v. KN Joglekar, AIR 1957 SC 1221.
Nonetheless, it amounts to termination of service.
We are of opinion that the retrenchment of the employee respondents falls within the scope of Section 4(1) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, and the employee-respondents are, therefore, entitled to gratuity under that provision.
7.
It is apparent that the Payment of Gratuity Act is a complete code containing detailed provisions covering all the essential features of a scheme for payment of gratuity.
It creates the right to payment of gratuity, indicates when the right will accrue, and lays down the principles for quantification of the gratuity.
It provides further for recovery of the amount, and contains special provision that compound interest at nine per cent annum will be payable on delayed payment.
For the enforcement of its provisions, the Act provides for the appointment of a controlling authority, who is entrusted with the task of administering the Act.
The fulfilment of the rights and obligations of the parties are made his responsibility, and he has been invested with a amplitude of power for the full discharge of that responsibility.
Any error committed by him can be corrected in appeal by the appropriate Government or an appellate authority particularly constituted under the Act."
17.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kalinga Tubes Ltd v. Their Workmen reported in 1969(1) LLJ page 557, Section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, where it was held in the following manner :  18.
The burden is on the company to bring the case within the proviso and prove circumstances which are unavoidable and beyond the control of the company for closing down the undertaking.
After considering the facts and circumstances of the case the Supreme Court was not satisfied that the closure was due to unavoidable circumstances and beyond the control of the management.
The compensation would, therefore, be payable as if the undertaking was closed down `for any reason whatsoever' under Section 25FFF(1) of the Act.
19.
In this case peculiarly the compensation was not paid by the employer prior to the closure of the factory.
In case compensation remains unpaid, then the closure cannot be said to be valid so as to deprive the workers of the company who were allowed to continue in the same establishment even after the company was taken over.
Since the opposite party No. 3 and other employees were able-bodied workers of the company who had exploited their service till they were superannuated, their claim for gratuity on the ground of continuity of service cannot be denied.
The purpose of transfer of the undertaking has to be appreciated in this background.
In the instant case although there were some financial crisis of the erstwhile employer, for that reason, it was declared `closure' and, accordingly, the present petitioner came to the scene and had agreed to purchase the unit after exploitation of the labour forces.
Mere change of hand of employer when the employee remains the same, there was no question of any termination of service even though such matter was mentioned in the clause of the agreement.
There appears to be such a clause but actually such clause was not adhered to by either the employer nor the employee.
But assuming, up to the change of ownership the gratuity amount was agreed to be payable by the petitioner, it was not paid till the date of retirement.
There was no change of PF principle.
The same principle continued till the date of retirement of the employee.
It could have been assumed, had the petitioner calculated the amount of gratuity payable to the opposite party No. 3 till the change of ownership and/or either paid the same to him or kept separately which might have earned some interest to the credit of the worker.
But the petitioner had never taken such steps and always treated the employees to be in service except for temporary interruption due to unavoidable reasons `beyond the control' of the employee.
Continuous service postulates to continue the relationship of master and servant between the employers and his employees.
If the servant voluntarily rendered (tendered ?)
resignation, then, there shall be severance of relationship between the master and servant.
20.
If the employers terminate the service of the employees that again brings the continuity of service to an end.
If any discontinuance not due to any fault on the part of the employees concerned, notwithstanding such discontinuance the employees shall be deemed to be in continuous service.
21.
It is true that there was a tripartite settlement whereby the petitioner agreed only to pay the gratuity for the period while their employees worked under the previous management till the date of closure but on consideration of the interpretation of Section 2A of the Payment of Gratuity Act, such settlement ought not to have been arrived at between the petitioner and the opposite party No. 3 which shall act detrimental against his interest.
Notwithstanding such arrival of understanding the settlement, therefore, cannot be held valid.
In this connection reliance can be placed on a Division Bench Judgment of Gujarat High Court reported in 1985(1) LLJ page 263 in the case of DS Vasavada v. PF Commissioner, Ahmedabad.
In the aforesaid judgment it has been held as follows :  "Fourteen Mills in Ahmedabad closed down during the period between 8th March, 1982 and 14th March, 1984.
During the said period about 129 workmen working in different mills died.
Dependents of the deceased workmen applied to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner of Gujarat State for settlement of dues of the deceased workmen under the Employees Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme which was introduced as a result of an amendment to the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner refused to settle the claim on the ground that the mills had been under closure and therefore the service of the deceased workmen must have been taken as terminated.
It is also not in dispute that all the 14 mills were factually closed due to crisis in the Textile Industry.
Allowing the special civil application filed by Textile Labour Association, Ahmedabad held any person employed continues to be employed until the services are validly terminated by the employer or by mutual agreement the service come to be terminated or the employee resigns from such service.
The cessation of work by an employer by closing his mill may not by itself terminate the services of the employees.
Mere stoppage of work in the factory does not result in automatic termination of the services of the employees.
A valid closure alone will put an end to the service of the employees.
The provisions of Sections 25FFA and 25FFF(1) make it clear that closure may be for any reason and which only amounts to the employer drawing the shutters need not necessarily result in termination of the service of the workmen.
It is one thing to say that he has retrenched his employees.
He may close his business and may not choose to send away his employees.
It is only when closure is in accordance with the Industrial Disputes Act, there would be termination of service."
22.
In this particular case the `closure' as declared by the employer cannot be said valid and, therefore, such closure shall not render the service of the employees working therein automatic termination so as to deprive them from getting their benefits under the Payment of Gratuity Act.
23.
Mr. Sengupta, the learned advocate appearing for the petitioner has placed strong reliance on a judgment reported in 1998(2) CHN page 15 : 1998(4) SCT 109 (Calcutta)(DB) in the case of Bank of India and others v. Kalyan Kumar Sarkar.
On a careful reading of the judgment it appears that in the aforesaid case the employee rendered resignation and joined in a new establishment.
Therefore, the Division Bench has rightly come to the conclusion that the petitioner having accepted the new offer must be held to have waived his right and accordingly he could not have claimed continuity in service.
The reliance was placed on a judgment reported in 1993(2) LLJ page 1133 in the case of Prashanta Kumar Chatterjee v. The State of West Bengal and others.
The Learned Single Judge of this Court Mr. Susanta Chatterji, J has held that since the appellate authority had not considered the Standing Order, tripartite settlement and the impact of the list (lis ?)
and erroneously came to the conclusion that there was no continuity of service, therefore, accordingly the matter was remitted back.
In this case I find the competent authority as well as the appellate authority thought over the case of both the parties and held that the closure was not legal.
Therefore, the opposite party No. 3 shall be deemed to be in continuous service under Section 2A of the Act because such `cessation' was not at the fault of the employee.
Cessation of work also shall amount to closure of the unit, as envisaged under Section 2A of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 so as to give benefit to the workers who were out of employment for the transitional period not due to their fault.
24.
Upon cogitation of the facts and circumstances of the case and on careful consideration of the materials on record I, therefore, hold that the appellate authority as well as the controlling authority were justified in allowing the claim of the opposite Party No. 3 by accepting the services as `continuous'.
In the result the writ petition being bereft of merits, it is, accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.