SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 28 June, 1999 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court whereby and whereunder the writ-petition filed by the appellant herein was disposed of with a direction upon the Director of School Education to consider the representation as contained in Annexure `A' to the writ application within the time frame mentioned therein and further directed that the appointment would abide by the result of the said order, The Director of School Education was also directed to consider the judgment dated 23rd March, 1999 passed in M.A.T.
1198/98 (Muktipada Maity v. State of West Bengal and others) since reported in 1999 WBLR 252 (Cal.).
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
2.
The respondent No. 10 herein filed a writ application before this Court which was numbered as W.P. 1583(W) of 1997, inter alia, contending that although her name was duly registered in the local Employment Exchange in the year 1991, her name was not sponsored by the employment exchange when a vacancy was notified for the purpose of Class IV staff in Goghat Bhagabati Balika Vidyalaya.
A learned single judge of this Court by an order dated 881997 directed the School authority to allow the said respondent to appear at the interview.
Pursuant to the said order, the respondent No. 10 appeared at the interview and was empanelled.
Pursuant to such empanelment, allegedly she had been given appointment as Group `D' staff by the school authorities.
The writ-petitioner-appellant, inter alia, had questioned the said appointment on two grounds, viz. (a) the certificate filed by the respondent No. 10 was a forged one, and (b) her name having not been sponsored in terms of the directions issued by the Director of School Education in exercise of his power conferred upon him under Clauses (i) and (ii) of Sub-Rule (1) and Clause (i) of Sub-rule (4) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non- Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 (hereinafter referred to as "the Recruitment Rules").
3.
The learned trial Judge upon hearing the learned counsel for the parties passed the aforementioned order.
4.
Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that the learned Single Judge being bound by the decision of this Court in Muktipada Maity (supra) could not have asked an administrative authority to consider the correctness or otherwise of the said decision while considering the representation of the writ-petitioner as contained in annexure "E" to the writ application.
Such direction, contends Mr. Bhattacharjee, betrays judicial discipline.
5.
Mr. Nayel, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 10, on the other hand, submitted that the order dated 881997 passed by the learned Judge of this Court in W.P. No. 15839 (W) of 1997, having not been questioned, attained finality and despite the Special Bench decision of this Court in Debasis Dutta v. State of West Bengal reported in 1998(1) C.H.N.
544, no interference with the impugned order is warranted in this case.
The learned counsel further submitted that keeping in view the decision of the Apex Court in Excise Superintendent v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and others reported in 1996(3) S.C.C.
216 his client has derived a right and in that view of the matter, this appeal should be dismissed.
6.
The first and foremost question which warrants our consideration, is as to whether the Division Bench or for that matter a Single Bench is bound by a decision of the larger Bench or not.
The answer to the said question must be rendered in affirmative.
It is a well settled principle of rule of precedent that a decision of a larger Bench is binding on the smaller Bench.
In Debasis Dutta (supra) the Special Bench of this Court not only took into consideration the decision of the Apex Court in Excise Superintendent (supra) but has also taken into consideration the decisions of the Apex Court in Union of India v. N Hargopal and others, reported in 1987(3) SCC 308, Arun Kumar Tewari and others v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak Sangh and others, reported in 1998(1) SCT 533 : AIR 1998 SC 331 and Raj Kumar and others v. Shakti Raj and others, AIR 1997 SC 2210 : 1997(2) SCT 76 (SC) all of which touched the subject matter in question, namely, the scope effect and purport of the provisions of Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
The Special Bench took into consideration the fact that while in Excise Superintendent's case (supra) no statutory rule existed, in the instant case there exists a statutory rule.
A distinction was drawn between the cases where in terms of the statutory rules, the appointing authority have been cast with a statutory obligation to notify the employment exchange and consider the candidature of only those candidates whose names have been sponsored by it and not the case where there does not exist any statutory rule for recruitment.
It further took into consideration the decision in Arun Tewari (supra) as also Union of India v. N Hargopal and others (supra) where it had clearly been laid down by the Apex Court that where different methods of inviting applications exist the method adopted in the exigency of a situation would be relevant for a particular case as long as it is not unfair.
Once such fair procedure are embodied in statute, the same must also necessarily be held to be in consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Apart from the aforementioned Special Bench decision a Division Bench of this Court in Ziaul Islam v. State reported in 1999(1) CLJ (Cal.)
509 while considering similar statutory rules, namely Recruitment and Leave Rules, 1991 framed under the West Bengal Board of Primary Education Act, 1973, inter alia, held that all appointments must be made in terms of the statutory rules and any deviation and departure therefrom shall render such appointments nullities.
The recruitment rules had been made under a statute.
It has, therefore, a statutory sanction.
The said recruitment rules having been framed in terms of 1969 Rules which in turn had been farmed in terms of the provisions of Section 45 of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963, would it be permissible for the managing committee to take interview of a person whose name had not been sponsored by the employment exchange is the primary question which fell for decision in Debasis Dutta (supra) and Ziaul Islam (supra).
The answer to the said question had been rendered in negative and in our opinion, rightly so.
The Managing Committee of a school as also the District Inspector of Schools are bound by the provisions of the recruitment rules.
7.
The next question, therefore, which would arise is as to whether this Court was within its jurisdiction to direct the managing committee to allow the respondent No. 10 herein to appear at the interview in violation of the statutory rules.
The answer to the said question must also be rendered in negative.
Although this Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India exercises a wide power, it is now a trite law that no direction can be issued upon an administrative authority to do something which would be violative or contrary to or inconsistent with any mandatory provisions of law.
What a statutory authority could not do directly it cannot be asked to do by a Court of law while issuing a direction in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Furthermore, even if this Court was to follow the decision in the Excise Superintendent (supra) the only direction which could have been issued upon the managing committee was to issue advertisement and/or to give wide publicity through broadcasting the existence of vacancy through radio or by telecasting the same through television.
It must be borne in mind by the Court that the ratio of decision is its reasoning.
The reasoning of the Apex Court in Excise Superintendent (supra) as we have been able to cull out is that keeping in view the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, no person who is entitled and/or otherwise eligible to consider for appointment should be deprived therefrom.
Keeping in view the fact that lakhs and lakhs of persons are unemployed and they have a right, subject of course to a statutory interdict, if any, to take part in the recruitment process, the only order, if at all, which could be passed by the Court was to direct the managing committee to issue requisite advertisement so that all eligible candidates may file their applications and appear at the interview.
The same was not done and if Excise Superintendent case (supra) was to be followed, no other direction could have been issued by the learned Single Judge.
An order is not passed by a Court of law for the benefit of an individual who had the requisite resources including financial resources, to approach this Court so as to enable him to obtain an order in the nature as was passed by this Court on 881997, as a result whereof a large number of persons similarly situated had been deprived from appearing at the interview.
Such a direction, in our considered view, cannot stand a moment's scrutiny.
Furthermore, the recruitment rules itself have laid down different procedures for recruitment to different posts.
Whereas in the case of Class IV staff and/or for the post of assistant teachers, rules provided for intimating employment exchange, which authority is required to sponsor 20 names against each vacancy, a provision had been made for advertisement in the case of appointment of headmaster.
The question as to whether for filling up of a particular vacancy by eligible candidates an advertisement throughout the territory of India should be issued or not depends upon the fact situation of each case.
In the matter of recruitment of Class III staff and/or assistant teachers and/or Class IV staff, the statutory rules made by the State and/or statutory authorities in exercise of their powers conferred upon them under the statute and/or directions issued by the State in this regard that only such candidates would be eligible for interview whose names are sponsored by the employment exchange, can neither be said to be arbitrary and fanciful in view of the decision in Union of India v. N Hargopal and others (supra) and Arun Tewari and others v. Sreje Gopal Biswas and others (supra).
8.
We also cannot lose right of a practical difficulty in such matters.
If there exists a vacancy as was the case at hand, of Class IV staff in one school situate in a remote village and if a wide publicity is given therefor thousands of applications may be filed and it may well- high be impossible for the authorities to screen the same and take interview of thousands of candidates.
Such a process in any event may take years which would frustrate the very object.
On the other hand, in a case where an appointment of an expert or an executive is required, such wide publicity may be necessary keeping in view the fact that many candidates may not be available therefor.
The question as to whether the procedure adopted for such recruitment is fair or not on the touch-stone of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India must thus be, judged on each fact situation.
This Court keeping in view the aforementioned proposition of law, inter alia, held in Muktipada Maity (supra) that any appointment made in violation of the Rules shall be ultra vires.
9.
Yet recently, in Dr. Meera Massey v. Dr. SR Mehrotra and others, 1998(3) SCC 88 : 1998(1) SCT 727 (SC) the Apex Court has clearly held that any appointment made in violation of the statutory rules would be nullity.
To the same effect another decision of the Apex Court in J and K Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, 1994(2) SCC 630 : 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) and Surinder Singh Jamuel v. State of J and K, AIR 1996 SC 2775, which have been followed by a Division Bench of this Court recently in State of West Bengal v. Ashoke Ranjan Chandra and others reported in 1999(2) C.H.N.
387.
10.
Before parting with this case, we must also place it on record that by reason of appearance at the interview alone a person does not derive a right of appointment.
There are several stages of recruitment process right at one stage may be different from right at another stage.
In terms of the recruitment rules not only panel prepared by the selection committee and approved by the managing committee of the school requires approval by the District Inspector of Schools, but even an appointment made pursuant thereto, requires a further approval.
Thus, even at the stage of grant of approval of appointment, the District Inspector of Schools is not denuded his power to consider as to whether such appointment has been made in terms of the provisions of rules or not and if not, may not approve such appointment.
It is, therefore, clear that the decision in Muktipada Maity (supra) was applicable on all fours to the fact situation of this case wherein it was held :-  "However the matter came up for consideration before a Special Bench of this Court reported in 1998(1) Cal.
H.N.
455 wherein it has been held that the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Excise Superintendent, Malkapatnam, Krishna District, AP v. KBN Visweshwar Rao and others, reported in 1996(3) SCC 216 on the basis whereof the said order dated 1771997 was passed by the learned Trial Judge does not lay down on inflexible rule and in any event is not applicable in a case where Recruitment is governed by statutory rules, the Special Bench held : "33.
Having considered the submission of learned counsel for the parties we are of the view :- (1) The Recruitment Rules although contained directory provisions, the same are required to be substantially complied with.
(2) Any deviation and departure from the directions issued by the Director of School Education by reason of the said Recruitment Rules can only be made by the Director of School Education himself or by the State Government by issuing an order or a direction or guide-line depending upon the facts and circumstances.
(3) The Managing Committee of the respondent school is bound to follow the provisions of the Recruitment Rules and the petitioner having not raised the question of constitutionality of the said rules in the writ application cannot be permitted to do so by way of argument.
(4) No direction can be issued by this Court upon the Managing Committee of the School to allow any and every person to appear in the interview although his name not been sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
The orders issued in this behalf by same of the procedure do not lay down the correct law and must be overruled.
(5) The Managing Committee cannot act in contravention of the said provision unless the same is unconstitutional.
This Court in exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot also issue a direction asking it to violate the provision of Statute."
"In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot be said to have appeared at the interview, in his own right inasmuch as, the aforementioned order dated 1771997 passed by a learned by a learned single Judge of this Court, although had not been questioned by any other person, will be deemed to have (been) overruled.
Furthermore, the Apex Court as also this Court in various other decisions clearly held that any appointment made in violation of the Recruitment Rules shall be void and nullity.
Recruitment must be made strictly in terms of the procedure laid down in the Recruitment Rules framed by the Director of School Education in exercise of its power conferred upon it in clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-rule (1) and clause (i) of sub-rule (4) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969."
11.
The learned trial Judge, therefore, in our considered opinion, erred in law in issuing the aforementioned directions as a result whereof, the Director of School Education was directed to consider the decision of the Division Bench of this Court.
We, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, are of the view that the learned trial Judge ought to have followed the binding precedent of the Division Bench decision of this Court.
12.
As regards the question that the order dated 881997 has attained finality, we are of the opinion that the said submission cannot be accepted not only in view of the Special Bench Judgment of this Court, but also in view of the fact this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India may pass an order rectifying the mistake committed by it and in any event a larger Bench can always overrule a decision of a smaller Bench and issue requisite direction.
13.
A writ Court in the interest of Justice and particularly whence the order passed by a learned Single Judge without jurisdiction, being contrary to the Judgments of Supreme Court is entitled to re-examine the same by way of review.
See Shivdeo Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, reported in AIR 1963 SC 1909.
14.
In AR Antulay v. RS Nayak and another, reported in 1988(2) SCC 602, the Apex Court stated the law thus :-  "The directions dated February 16, 1984 were void being in deprival of constitutional rights of the appellant and contrary to the express provisions of the Act of 1952, in violation of the principles of natural justice and without precedent in the background of the Act of 1952.
The directions definitely deprived the appellant of certain rights of appeal and revision and his rights under the Constitution."
It further held :  "Ex debite justitiae, the Court must, therefore, do justice and the legal wrong that has been caused to the appellant should be remedied.
Let that wrong be remedied.
Let right be done and in doing so let no more further injury be caused to public purpose.
Accordingly, all proceedings in this matter subsequent to the directions of the Supreme Court on February 16, 1984 are set aside and quashed.
The order taking cognizance, however, has become final and is unassailable.
The trial shall proceed in accordance with law, that is, under the Act of 1952."
15.
Ranganath Mishra, J. (as His Lordship then was) concurred with the aforementioned view and held that it is the duty of the Court to rectify the mistake by exercise its inherent power.
16.
As the writ application succeeds only on the aforementioned finding, the question of considering the question as to whether the respondent No. 10 filed a forged certificate or not need not be gone into.
17.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned order dated 28.6.1999 cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly and the appeal is allowed and consequently, the writ application filed by the appellant herein is allowed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
Xerox certified copy be supplied on priority basis.
Prayer for stay of operation of this Judgment is considered and refused.
Application allowed.