K Ramamoorthy, J - The petitioner's Association has prayed for the following reliefs :-  "In the premises aforesaid, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court be graciously pleaded to issue : (i) A writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to implement its decision taken in its meeting held on 12121995.
(ii) A direction to implement the Office Order dated 2351996 with immediate effect.
(iii) A direction to refer the issue relating to revision of pay scales of UGC Officers to the UGC Pay Committee for University Teachers and Administrative Officers."
2.
On the 5th of May, 1997 when the matter came up before the this Court, the following order was passed directing the Central Government to pass orders on the representation made by the petitioner/Association :  "CW.
4656/96 The UGC Class-1 Officer Association has preferred this writ petition with the prayer that the respondents be directed to implement the decision taken on 12121995 by the UGC.
The said decision is as follows :-  "The Commission agreed that the pay scale of Joint Secretary may be revised from Rs. 4500-5700 to Rs. 5100-6300 and that of Additional Secretary from Rs. 5100-5700 to Rs. 5900-6700 to remove the anomaly which is persisting since the revision of pay scales, in pursuance of the Fourth Pay Commission's recommendations as accepted by the Commission w.e.f.
111986.
In this connection, the Commission noted that the pay scales of Financial Adviser and Secretary of the UGC had been revised earlier, after implementation of the Fourth Pay Commission, without any reference to any Committee or the Pay Commission.
The Commission, therefore, desired that the Ministry of Human Resource Development may be approached for its concurrence.
The Secretary (Education), MHRD, expressed the view that there should be no difficulty for the Government of India to accept this recommendation of the Commission and that he would respond positively within a week."
The Fourth Pay Commission's recommendation adopted by the UGC w.e.f.
111986 have yet not been implemented because of the inordinate delay in getting the approval by the Union of India.
It may be pertinent to mention that number of letters and requests have been sent from the University Grants Commission to the Central Government.
In the letter dated 15.7.1996, sent by the Chairperson of the UGC to Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development, has mentioned that matter has now dragged on for 10 full years.
The three Chairmen of the UGC, namely, Prof. Yashpal, Dr. Reddy and Prof. Desai had written number of letters but no decision has been taken by the respondent UOI till date.
In this writ petition the Union of India was impleaded as a party respondent and a number of opportunities have been given to the learned Standing Counsel for the UOI to apprise this Court about the decision of the Central Government which is pending for several years.
Mr. Sharma, learned Counsel appearing for the UOI submits that the decision has yet not been taken.
This Court fails to understand why the Central Government has not been able to take the decision in this matter for the several years.
Mr. Sharma suggests that the final opportunity be given to the Central Government to decide the matter and he has given an undertaking to the Court that this matter shall be decided by a reasoned order by the UOI within two weeks from today, failing which the Secretary (Expenditure) shall remain present in Court on the next date of hearing to explain why the decision has not been taken ?
I order accordingly.
At the request of Mr. Sharma, adjourned to 21st May, 1997.
Copy of the order be given dasti to the learned Counsel for the parties."
3.
On the 15th May, 1997, the Central Government pursuant to the direction issued by this Court, wrote to the University Grants Commission, hereinafter called UGC, turning down the request made by the petitioner/Association.
The contents of the order passed by the Central Government would have to be dealt with at the appropriate stage.
4.
The only point that was argued before me was whether the approval of the Government is necessary for the UGC to implement its decision taken on the 12th December, 1995 following an office order dated 2351996.
The decision taken by the UGC on the 12th of December, 1995 is as under :-  "The Commission agreed that the pay scale of Joint Secretary may be revised from Rs. 4500-5700 to Rs. 5100-6300 and that of Additional Secretary from Rs. 5100-5700 to Rs. 5900-6700 to remove the anomaly which is persisting since the revision of pay scales, in pursuance of the Fourth Pay Commission's recommendations as accepted by the Commission w.e.f.
111986.
In this connection, the Commission noted that the pay scales of Financial Adviser and Secretary of the UGC had been revised earlier, after implementation of the Fourth Pay Commission, without any reference to any Committee or the Pay Commission.
The Commission, therefore, desired that the Ministry of Human Resource Development may be approached for its concurrence.
The Secretary (Education), MHRD, expressed the view that there should be no difficulty for the Government of India to accept this recommendation of the Commission and that he would respond positively within a week."
5.
The office order dated 2351996 reads as under :-  "In pursuance of the decision taken by the Commission at its meeting held on 12121995 [Item No. 7.01(i)], it has been agreed to provide the replacement scales for Joint Secretaries and Additional Secretaries and equivalent Officers w.e.f.
the 12th December, 1995 as under :- Name of the Post Existing Scale (Rs.) Replacement Scale (Rs.) Joint Secretary/Joint Director 4500-5700 5100-6300 Additional Secretary/Director 5100-5700 5900-6700.
6.
Originally, the UGC alone was made a party in the writ petition.
Subsequently, the Government of India was impleaded.
Some time later, Dr. Mukherjee, who is working in UGC, sought to implead himself as a party and he was impleaded as a third respondent.
7.
In view of the facts that the power and jurisdiction of the UGC to pass the Resolution dated 12121995 and the Office Order dated 2351996 is disputed by the Central Government, it is necessary to notice what is stated in the writ petitions.
8.
In para 5 of the writ petition, it is stated : "That presently there are three posts of Additional Secretaries and equivalent and sixteen posts of Joint Secretary and equivalent in the Commission.
The petitioner-Association, by virtue of the instant petition, is raising the issue of grant of higher pay scales to the Officers holding the posts of Additional Secretary and the Joint Secretary and equivalent posts (hereinafter referred to as "the said Officers").
The said Officers of the petitioner- Association are performing the onerous duties in-as-much as they have to assist the key officials (Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary as also the Members of the Commission) to enable them to discharge their role effectively as all of them happen to be on term appointments.
In all their endeavours, the said Officers have to work with the persons with senior positions in the Universities such as Vice-Chancellors, Senior University Academics, Professors, Principals, Registrars and Finance Officers etc.
It is significant to point here that most of the said Offices are holding PhD Degrees, having first class careers and several years of research to their credit before they joined the Commission in various capacities.
They have initially been recruited by open selection on all-India basis by open selection."
9.
The petitioner has stated that the officers of the UGC, after good academic career, had joined this organisation and the Government of India and the UGC had not appreciated the position of the officers.
It is the claim of the petitioner that the officers having similar qualifications and discharging similar duties and responsibilities, cannot be denied their due emoluments.
The officers of the UGC were not put on the scales of pay as recommended by the Pay Commission while officers similarly situated in Government and other public authorities are given the emoluments as fixed by the Pay Commissions.
The petitioner stated that the officers of the UGC are paid less than pay of the Professors in colleges.
10.
A comparative analysis of the scales of pay of the officers of the petitioner/Association and the teaching staff of the Universities would show the position of the officers of the UGC.
The analysis is as follows :- Years Pay Scale of + E.O./U.S.
Professor Reader Lecturer 1956-57 Rs. 900-1250 Rs. 800-1250 Rs. 600-800 Rs. 250-500 1965-66 Rs. 900-1250 Rs. 1000-1500 Rs. 700-1100 Rs. 400-800 1973-74 Rs. 1200-1600 Rs. 1500-2500 Rs. 1200-1900 Rs. 700-1600 1986-87 Rs. 3000-4500 Rs. 4500-7300 Rs. 3700-5700 Rs. 2200-4000 11.
As on the 1st of January, 1996, the pay scales of the petitioner/Association were as follows :- Post Pay Scale Additional Secretary Rs. 5100-5700 Joint Secretary Rs. 4500-5700 12.
In the year 1956-57, an Under Secretary of the Government of India was getting more than a Professor.
Subsequent revision of pay scales by the Pay Commissions for the teaching staff had given them more than what was being paid to the officers of the petitioner/Association.
Further it is stated by the petitioner that offices of the petitioner/Association are paid less than what is paid to the Additional Secretaries and Joint Secretaries in the Central Government.
The petitioner has given a comparative statement of the scales of pay of the officers of petitioner/Association and the pay scales of the Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary in the Government of India.
Name of the post Pay Scales + UGC GOI Additional Secretary Rs. 5100-5700 Rs. 7300-7600 Joint Secretary Rs. 4500-5700 Rs. 5900-6700 8.
On the 1st of February, 1994, the petitioner/Association made a representation to the Chairman, UGC, requesting that the recommendations made by Kulandaswamy Committee appointed by the UGC itself must be implemented.
9.
With a view to getting disparity removed, the petitioner submitted a Memorandum to the Vth Central Pay Commission.
By letter dated 24th of January, 1995, the Vth Central Pay Commission replied by stating that autonomous organisations would not come under the purview of the Commission.
On the 12th of December, 1995, the UGC, after taking into account all aspects of the matter, passed the Resolution, which is extracted above, and that was followed by an Office Order dated 2351996, which is also extracted above.
10.
The stand taken in the petition is that by virtue of power under Regulation 10 of the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967, the UGC has passed the Resolution dated 12121995 and no approval of the Central Government is required.
11.
On the 4th of April, 1997, the Central Government filed its counter.
Broadly stated, the stand taken by the Central Government is that under Section 26 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, whenever the UGC wanted to effect change in the service conditions of the employees appointed by the Commission, it should take prior approval of the Central Government, and inasmuch as the UGC had not obtained prior approval of the Central Government, the UGC had no power to revise the scales of pay.
It is also stated that under Section 25 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the Central Government alone can frame rules for specifying the terms and conditions with reference of employees appointed by the Commission.
It is sated in paragraph 1 of the reply on merits in the counter filed by the Union of India :  "That para 1 of the petition as stated is wrong and the same is denied.
It is submitted that the Commission has not passed the impugned order after taking prior approval from the Central Government as required under Sections 25 and 26 of the Act.
The impugned order dated 12121995 in itself is illegal and void ab initio and has no force in the eyes of law.
It is submitted that the petitioners are getting the pay scales as per the recommendations of the Fourth Central Pay Commission and as decided by the Central Government and Central Government may further change the service conditions as per the Fifth Central Pay Commission's Report, as and when the same is accepted by the Government.
The Commission has to follow the procedure as laid down in the Act before changing the service conditions of its employees.
It is submitted that the decision of the Commission is not binding on the Central Government if the same is in violation of the provisions of the Act itself."
It is stated in paragraph 5 of the reply on merits in the counter filed by the Union of India :  "That para 5 of the petition is wrong and the same is specifically denied.
It is submitted that the qualifications like PhD Degree etc. of the petitioner members are considered only for the purposes of their appointment in the Commission and the same has nothing to do with fixing of pay scales as such.
It is submitted that the members of the petitioner association have to possess the minimum qualifications and fulfil other requirements before their appointment in the Commission.
It is submitted that only by virtue of their qualifications, the members of the petitioner association or employees of the Commission cannot claim parity with other similarly qualified persons who are teaching and carrying on research work in the universities.
Therefore, the assertion of the petitioners that they are treated by the Central Government discriminately is totally wrong, mis-conveived and baseless and the same is specifically denied."
It is stated in paragraph 6 of the reply on merits in the counter filed by the Union of India :  "That para 6 of the petition as stated is wrong and the same is specifically denied.
It is submitted that the employees of the Commission are not performing the duties, as performed by the lecturers and research scholars of the universities.
Therefore, the petitioners have no right to claim parity with them although they may have the qualifications which the said scholars have.
It is submitted that the pay scales of the officers of the petitioner association are decided by the Central Pay Commission and hence, their case for revision of their pay scales could not be referred to the UGC Pay Review Committee.
It is submitted that as the employees of the Commission are not teachers and further, their service conditions and financial assistance is under the direct control of the Central Government, therefore, neither they could be treated at par with the teaching employees of the Universities nor their case of revision of pay scales could be referred to UGC Pay Review Committee.
The pay scale comparison chart given by the petitioners in para under reply is totally misconceived as the petitioner officers pay scales and revision thereof is the subject-matter of the Central Pay Commissions only and the UGC Pay Review Committee has no authority to revise the pay scales of the employees of the Commission.
The contentions raised by the petitioner association in para under reply are totally irrelevant and imaginary and are aimed only to misguide this Hon'ble Court.
It is submitted that the Central Government is regularly revising their pay scales as per the Central Pay Commission reports and other Government orders.
It is further submitted that the officers of the petitioner association have no right to claim parity or seniority with their erstwhile colleagues who are teachers in the universities.
It is submitted that the officers of the petitioner association were appointed by the Commission as per rules and regulations and their seniority in the Commission would only be calculated from the date of their appointment in the Commission and their previous service, if any, as teachers.
Present petitioners are claiming something for which they are not entitled.
It is submitted that the Commission is fully financed by the Central Government, i.e., by the Ministry of Finance, and the pay scales of the officers of the petitioner association are regularly revised by the Central Government as per the reports of the Central Pay Commissions.
It is submitted that the answering respondent would revise the pay scales of the Officers of the petitioner-association after the approval of the recommendations of the Fifth Central Pay Commission by the Government.
This fact in itself is clear that the Office Memorandum issued by the Government on 29.10.1986 and 371987 copies of the same are annexed herewith and marked as Annexure `A' (colly).
It is submitted that the pay scales of the officers of the Commission and of the Central Government officers are fixed by the Central Government and they are in force since 1956.
The answering respondent, till date, has been regularly implementing the recommendations of the Central Pay Commissions as approved by the Central Government and keeping the officers of the petitioner-association in parity with the Central Government officers in consonance with the recommendations of the Central Pay Commission as approved by the Government from time to time."
It is asserted by the Central Government that the Resolution of the UGC dated 12121995 and the Office Order dated 2351996 are void in law.
12.
Mr. R Venkataramani, the learned senior Counsel for the petitioner, submitted that in the light of the rules framed by the Central Government and the regulations framed by the UGC in 1967 and the provisions of Regulation 10 of the Regulations, and Sections 25 and 26 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the UGC has got the power to pass the Resolution dated 12121995 and no approval of the Central Government is required, and the Central Government had proceeded on a misconception of the scope of the provisions of the regulations framed by the UGC and provisions of Sections 25 and 26 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The learned senior Counsel submitted that the approach by the Central Government is vitiated, is arbitrary and unreasonable.
The learned senior Counsel referred to the following judgments of the Supreme Court :  1.
Sukhdev Singh and others v. Bhagatram Sarda Singh Raghuvanshi and another, 1975(1) SCC 421 : AIR 1975 SC 1331.
2.
VT Khanzode and others v. Reserve Bank of India and another, 1982(2) SCC 7 : AIR 1982 SC 917.
The learned senior Counsel, referring to Section 58(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1932, brought to my notice paragraphs 13, 17 and 21 of the judgment of the Supreme Court.
13.
Dr. JP Vergheese, the learned Counsel appearing for the UGC, submitted that while the UGC passed the Resolution on the 12th of December, 1995, the representatives of the Government of India were present and the Central Government was well aware of the Resolution, and according to the learned Counsel, no approval of the Government is necessary.
The learned Counsel referred to Sections 4, 5, 10 and 16(2) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The learned Counsel also referred to the Rule 25 of the 1958 Rules with reference to selection of posts.
14.
Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned Counsel of the Central Government, submitted that the writ petition itself is not maintainable in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and another v. Collector of Central Excise, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 541.
The learned Counsel referred to Sections 10, 25 and 26 and Clause 10 of the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967.
The learned Counsel also referred to Sections 12, 15 and 16 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The learned Counsel referred to the decision by the Central Government on the 15th May, 1997.
The learned Counsel submitted that the Central Government had considered the matter keeping in mind the relevant rules and provisions, and the petitioner/Association is not entitled to any relief.
15.
In reply to the arguments of Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned Counsel for the Central Government, Dr. JP Vergheese submitted that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and another v. Collector of Central Excise, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 541 (supra), relied by Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned Counsel for the Central Government, would not at all apply as UGC cannot be termed as a public sector undertaking and this is not a case where Members of the Commission had taken any decision about their own emoluments.
The learned Counsel, reading Clause 10 of the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967, laid stress on the words `Mutatis Mutandis'.
The learned Counsel further submitted that the Central Government cannot say that by virtue of Section 10 of the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967, the UGC does not vest with the revolutionary power.
The learned Counsel submitted that the argument by Mr. Maninder Singh that Regulation 1983 does not give any power to the UGC is not correct.
16.
The learned senior Counsel for the petitioner, Mr. R Venkataramani, in reply to the arguments of Mr. Maninder Singh, submitted that in 1995 (Suppl) 4 SCC 541 referred to by Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned Counsel for the Central Government, had followed the decision is Oil and Natural Gas Commission and another v. Collector of Central Excise, 1992 Supp.
(2) SCC 432 and the Supreme Court dealt with the disputes between a public sector undertaking and the Union of India, and therefore, the dictum laid down by the Supreme Court does not apply to the facts of the instant case.
The learned senior Counsel, referring to Section 10 of the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service Employees) Regulations, 1967, submitted that the fixation of pay scales of the staff of the Commission and this provision has to be read along with the provisions of Sections 25 and 26.
The learned senior Counsel submitted that once rules have been framed under Section 25 by the Central Government leaving open to the UGC to act under Section 26, it would be open to the UGC to frame Regulations under Section 26 and by virtue of the Regulations, the UGC gets the power to pass the resolution.
Therefore, the learned senior Counsel submitted that the Resolution passed by the UGC on the 12th of December, 1995 should be implemented and no question of any approval of the Central Government would arise.
It is in the light of the above submissions, we have to examine the provisions of the Regulations/Rules framed by the Central Government in 1958, the Regulations framed by the UGC in 1967 and the Regulations in 1983 in the light of the provisions of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
17.
By virtue of powers conferred under Section 25(2)(d) read with sub- section (1) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Rules were framed by the Central Government in the year 1958 called by the University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service Employees) Regulations, 1958.
There are nine provisions.
Rules had come into force immediately in the year 1985.
Rule 2 of the said rules provides that University Grants Commission means the Commission established under Section 4 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
Rule 3 provides for appointment of staff.
Rule 4 speaks of recruitment of staff.
Rule 5 refers to Contributory Provident Fund.
Rule 6 provides for allotment of residential accommodation.
Rule 7 provides that the employees of the Commission shall be admitted to Contributory Health Service Scheme.
Rule 8 fixes the age of retirement of the employees of the Commission at 55 years.
18.
Rule 9, which is relevant, reads as under : -  "The other terms and conditions of Service of officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be laid down by the Commission by regulations made under Section 267(1)(c) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956."
19.
In 1963, there was an amendment to Rule 8 with reference to age of retirement and the notification in this behalf reads as under :-  In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1), read with clause (d) of sub-section (2), of section 25 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), the Central Government hereby makes the following amendment of the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Education, No. F.24-4/56-U5, dated the 1st July, 1958, namely :-  In the aid notification, for rule 8, the following shall be substituted :  "The age of retirement of the employees of the Commission shall be 58 years, subject to such conditions as may be laid down by the Government of India from time to time relating to the retirement of any employee after he has attained the age of 55 years : Provided that, in special cases, the Commission may permit any employee to continue in service, after he has attained the age of 58 years, for a period of one year at a time upto a total period of two years, i.e., until such employee attains the age of 60 years : Provided further that a person recruited from a University or a similar body may be allowed to carry his conditions of service, relating to the age of retirement, which was applicable to him in his previous post under the University or the similar body; to his new post in the Commission."
20.
On the 28th of August, 1964, there was an amendment deleting the second proviso to Rule 8.
The same is as under :-  "In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) read with clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Rules, 1958, published with the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Education No. F.24-4/56-U5 dated the 1st July, 1958, namely :- 1.
These rules may be called the University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Amendment Rules, 1964.
2.
In the University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Rules, 1958, in rule 8, the second proviso appearing at the end shall be omitted."
21.
In 1967, the University Grants Commission framed the University Grant Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967 by virtue of power conferred on it under Section 26(i)(c) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
Regulations are 13 in number.
The regulations came into force on the 1st of April, 1967.
Regulation 1 reads as under :  "Short Title, commencement and application.
(i) These regulations may be called the University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967.
(ii).
They shall come into force on the 1st April, 1967 and shall apply to all the employees of the University Grants Commission : Provided that a Government servant or an employee of a local authority whose services have been or may be retained on deputation by the Commission, may be governed by such terms and conditions as may be settled by the Commission in consultation with the Government or the local authority concerned : Provided further that an employee appointed on contract or a tenure basis may be exempted from the Regulations to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Commission."
22.
Regulation No. 2 defines necessary terms.
Regulation No. 3 empowers the Commission to prescribe qualifications for appointment.
Regulation No. 4 provides that all employees shall be on probation for a period of two years.
Regulation No. 5 speaks of fixation of seniority of the employees of the Commission.
Regulation No. 6 provides for the entitlement of leave to the employees of the Commission.
Regulation No. 7 provides for the age of superannuation of all the employees of the Commission, subject to para 8 of the UGC (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Rules, 1958.
Rule No. 8 provides Conduct, Discipline and Penalty.
Regulation No. 9 speaks of medical facilities for employees of the Commission.
Regulation No. 10, which is relevant reads as under :-  "Other Conditions of service In respect of matters not provided for in these regulations, the rules regarding general conditions of service, pay, allowances, including travelling and daily allowance, leave salary, joining time, foreign service, and deputation in India or abroad as contained in Fundamental and Supplementary Rules and order and decisions issued therein applicable to the Central Government Servants shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the Commission."
23.
Regulation No. 11 empowers the Commission to relax certain conditions.
Regulation No. 12 provides that employees of the Commission shall take oath of allegiance.
Regulation No. 13 refers to declaration to be made by the employees of the Commission providing that every employee shall declare that he or she had understood the subsequent terms and conditions of UGC (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 1967.
24.
On the 19th of May, 1983, the Government, Ministry of Culture, Department of Education issued notification framing University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Rules, 1983, superseding the University Grants Commission (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Rules, 1958.
There are also nine rules.
Rule No. 1 provides that the rules shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
Rule No. 2 is definition clause, which gives definitions of certain expressions.
Rule No. 3 speaks of appointment of staff.
Rule No. 4 provides for production of medical certificates by the employees of Commission.
Rule No. 5 speaks of provisions for Contributory Provident Fund-cum-Gratuity Scheme.
Rule No. 6 refers to allotment of residential accommodation to the employees of the Commission.
Rule No. 7 refers to Central Government Health Scheme.
Rule No. 8 provides for the age of superannuation of the employees of the Commission.
Rule No. 9, which is relevant, reads as under :-  "The other terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be laid down by the Commission by regulations made under Section 26(1)(c) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956."
25.
The learned senior Counsel for the petitioners, Mr. R Venkataramani, submitted that the University Grants Commission had acted in accordance with the Regulations, and no approval of the Government is necessary.
26.
Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned counsel for respondents referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and another v. Collector of Central Excise, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 541 (supra).
27.
In the light of the fact that the Pay Commission had expressed the view that it was not within its purview with reference to fixation of pay of the employees of the UGC.
The UGC had to act within the purview of Regulations framed by it under Section 26 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
Having regard to the qualifications and the nature of the work done by the members of the petitioner-Association, the UGC cannot be said to act beyond its powers.
On a proper construction of the provisions of the Act, when University Grants Commission (Supplementary Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees), Regulations, 1967 are framed under Section 26 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 by the Commission, and it acts within the four corners of the regulations, there is no need for the UGC to seek approval of the Government of India.
Having regard to the purpose for which the Act had been framed and the provisions had been prescribed for the purpose of appointment of the Commission, the Government of India and the UGC have to act together for the efficient performance of the officers of the Commission.
It is rather surprising that the Central Government has taken the attitude that its approval is necessary when the UGC had fixed the scales of pay of the members of the petitioner/Association.
It is also submitted that the Central Government is represented in the Commission and the decision for the revision of scales of pay of the members of the petitioner/Association was taken in the presence of the officers of the Central Government.
28.
In decision, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 544, referred to by Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned counsel for the Union of India, the dispute was between the Oil and Natural Gas Commission and the Collector of Central Excise.
The Supreme Court said :-  "We are happy to find that the Cabinet Secretary has taken the appropriate initiative as indicated in our order dated 1191991 and has reported to us that the dispute between the Government Department and the public sector undertaking of the Union of India has been settled.
In that view of the matter no further action is necessary on the petition."
In his report the Cabinet Secretary has stated :  "I would also like to state that the Government respects the views expressed by this Hon'ble Court and has accepted them that public undertakings of Central Government and the Union of India should not fight their litigation in Court by spending money on fees on counsel, court fees, procedural expenses and wasting public time.
It is in this context that the Cabinet Secretariat has issued instructions from time to time to all departments of the Government of India as well as to public undertakings of the Central Government to the effect that all disputes, regardless of the type, should be resolved amicably by mutual consultation or through the good office of empowered agencies of the Government or through arbitration and recourse to litigation should be eliminated."
We direct that the Government of India shall set up a Committee consisting of representatives from the Ministry of Industry, the Bureau of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Law, to monitor disputes between Ministry and Ministry of Government of India, Ministry and Public Sector Undertakings of the Government of India and public sector undertakings in between themselves to ensure that no litigation comes to Court or to a Tribunal without the matter having been first examined by the Committee and its clearance for litigation.
Government may include a representative of the Ministry concerned in a specific case and one from the Ministry of Finance in the Committee.
Senior Officers only should be nominated so that the Committee would function with status control and discipline.
It shall be obliged of every Court and every Tribunal where such a dispute is raised hereafter to demand a clearance from the Committee in case it has not been so pleaded and in the absence of the clearance, the proceedings would not be proceeded with.
The Committee shall function under the ultimate control of the Cabinet Secretary but his delegate may look after the matters.
This Court would expect a quarterly report about the functioning of this system to be furnished to the Registry beginning from 111992.
Our direction may be communicated to every High Court for information of all the courts subordinate to them."
29.
This was the decision subsequent to the Supreme Court's decision in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and another v. Collector of Central Excise, 1992 Supp.
(2) SCC 432 (supra).
In that the Supreme Court said :  "These are applications for restoration of Civil Appeal Nos. 2058-59 of 1988 which on February 3, 1989 were permitted to be withdrawn at the request of the appellants.
The withdrawal was on the basis of the instructions issued by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas vide their letter dated October 3, 1988.
Later on September 28, 1989 the Chairman of the ONGC was intimated to the following effect : "Please refer to our DO letter No. DBC/Acctts/111/87 dated June 24, 1989 regarding excise duty on lean gas supplied to consumers ex-Uran.
The suggestion made by you has been examined and in view of the fact that the CBEC is not prepared to withdraw the demand and refer the matter to arbitration.
ONGC may approach the Supreme Court for appropriate relief."
On the basis of the later instructions, these applications are said to have been filed.
This Court has on more than one occasion pointed out that Public Sector Undertakings of Central Government and the Union of India should not fight their litigations in Court by spending money on fees of counsel, court fees, procedural expenses and wasting public time.
Courts are maintained for appropriate litigations.
Court's time is not to be consumed by litigations which are carried on either side at Public expenses from the source.
Notwithstanding these observations repeated on a number of occasions, the present cases appear to be an instance of total callousness.
The letter of October 3, 1988, indicated that the Cabinet Secretary was looking into the matter.
That has not obviously been followed up.
As an instance of wasting public time and energy this matter involves a principle to be examined at the highest level.
The Cabinet Secretary is called upon to handle this matter personally and report to this Court within four weeks as to why this litigation is being conducted when the two sides are public sector undertaking and the Union of India.
The report of the Cabinet Secretary should be supported by an affidavit of a responsible officer.
The matter be placed again before us on October 11, 1991.
30.
The UGC cannot be said to be a public sector undertaking.
It is a body entrusted with the cause of education which is now considered to be essential for the growth of the country, both economically and culturally.
The importance of the UGC has to be recognised by all front for the sake of the development of the country.
The Government of India should be aware of the purpose of existence of the UGC.
The officers, who are well qualified, should be provided with all amenities and they should be given salary and perks consistent with the qualifications and status, so that they may work with all dedication and sincerity.
If the officers of the UGC are denied of their salary and their cause is not referred to the Pay Commission, inter alia, the officers of the UGC get frustrated and their interest for the cause for which they have been appointed, will be very much affected.
In the light of this position in law, the members of the petitioner/Association are entitled to the reliefs prayed for.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
31.
A writ of mandamus is issued to the University Grants Commission to implement its decision dated 12121995, and it is hereby declared that the approval of the Union of India is not necessary and the Union of India shall render all assistance to the University Grants Commission for the implementation of the decision taken by the University Grants Commission on the 12th of December, 1995.
32.
The Union of India and the University Grants Commission shall implement the decision of the UGC dated 12121995 on or before the 31st of March, 2000.
33.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.