GS Singhvi, J - Whether the order dated 13.8.1998 passed by the Employees Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal (for short described as `the Tribunal') suffers from an error of law warranting interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is the question which arises for consideration and decision in this petition filed by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner Faridabad.
2.
The parties do not have any dispute on the issue of applicability of the provisions of the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') to the establishment of respondent No. 1 w.e.f.
181982.
There is also no controversy between them that respondent No. 1 had delayed the payment of the provident fund contribution, the family pension contribution, the insurance fund contribution and the administrative charges under the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 and the Employees Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, 1976 and further that after issuing notice and giving opportunity of hearing to it, the petitioner passed order dated 2141997 for levy of damages amounting to Rs. 14,50,172/- but that order was set aside by the Tribunal and the case has been remanded for re- assessment of the damages with a direction that no penal damages should be levied and only the loss of interest is to be recovered from respondent No. 1.
3.
Shri Rajesh Bindal submitted that the impugned order is liable to be quashed in view of the law down by the Supreme Court in The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner v. SD College, Hoshiarpur and others, 1997(2) RSJ 686 : 1997(2) SCT 141 (SC).
Learned counsel pointed out that an order similar to the one passed by the Tribunal had been made by this Court in C.W.P.
Nos. 637 and 692 of 1995 but the same was reversed by the Apex Court.
He submitted that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of SD College, Hoshiarpur, the consequences of non-payment of the dues under the Act cannot be avoided simply because no loss had been caused to the employees or the fund.
Shri Bindal also relied on the decisions of the Supreme Court in M/s Hindustan Times Limited v. Union of India and others, JT 1998(1) SC 18 : 1998(2) SCT 256 (SC) and MP Shikshak Congress and others v. R.P.F.
Commissioner, Jabalpur and others, 1999(1) RSJ 156 : 1999(1) SCT 172 (SC) and argued that the deposit of amount by respondent No. 1 under the PF Scheme framed by the State Government cannot be made basis for nullifying the damages awarded under Section 14-B of the Act.
He also invited our attention to the proforma filled by the representative of respondent No. 1 in the year 1982 to show that the said respondent was fully aware of its liability to deposit the amount under the Act and the scheme framed thereunder and submitted that its failure to deposit the amount in accordance with the provisions of law warranted levy of damages.
Shri KL Dagga did not controvert the fact that respondent No. 1 had filled the prescribed proforma and accepted its liability to make payment in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the schemes framed thereunder.
He also admitted that respondent No. 1 had defaulted to pay the amount by the due dates for the period from August, 1982 to June 1993 and from October, 1993 to August, 1995 but, at the same time, he argued that his client had been remitting the provident fund dues to the Education Department and it was the duty of the department concerned to transfer that to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective contentions.
In view of the fact that the Act was made applicable to the establishment of respondent No. 1 w.e.f.
181982, respondent No. 1 was obliged to deposit the requisite amount with the petitioner.
The doubt, if any, in this respect stood cleared by the judgment of the Supreme Court dated 711988 vide which the validity of the notification extending the applicability of the Act to the educational institutions was upheld by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, at least after January, 1988, there could be no valid reason for respondent No. 1 not to deposit the amount with the petitioner.
We, therefore, hold that the petitioner was fully justified in passing the order dated 2141997 for levy of damages.
The Tribunal upset the order passed by the petitioner solely on the ground that respondent No. 1 cannot be held guilty of having intentionally defaulted in the payment of dues under the Act and the scheme framed thereunder.
In our opinion, this view of the Tribunal appears to be based on the judgment of this Court in SD College, Hoshiarpur v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 1996(2) SCT 81 (P&H) : 1996(1) A.I.J.
154 and similar other decisions rendered by other High Courts.
However, as the judgment of this Court has been reversed by the Supreme Court the view taken by the Tribunal cannot be approved.
In Regional Provident Fund Commissioner v. SD College, Hoshiarpur (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held as under :  "A reading of Section 14-B of the Act would indicate that the employer in under an obligation under the statute to comply with the payment of the amount.
In the event of his committing default in the payment of the contribution to the fund or in the payment of any charges payable under any other provisions of the Act or any scheme of insurance or any of the conditions specified in Section 17, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette in this behalf, recover from the employer by way of penalty, such damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears, as may be specified in the scheme.
The second proviso only lifts the embargo in the event of the industry becoming sick and it was reconstructed under the provisions of Section 4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in the scheme of rehabilitation.
In other words, the Act envisages the imposition of damages for delayed payments.
The Act is a beneficial welfare legislation to ensure health and other benefits to the employees.
The employer under the Act if under a statutory obligation to deduct the specified percentage of the Contribution from the employee's salary and matching contribution, the entire amount is required to be deposited in the fund within 15 days after the date of the collection, every month.
Thereby the employer is under a statutory obligation to deposit the amount to the credit of the Fund every month.
In the month of any default committed in that behalf, Section 14-B steps in and calls upon the employer to pay damages by way of penalty, the maximum of which is the accumulated arrears.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner is given discretion only to reduce a percentage of damages and he has no power to waive penalty altogether.
In this case, admittedly, after the judgment, there was no reason for the respondents to deposit the amount with the University.
We can understand that, since there was a scheme framed by the University and the respondent was under an obligation to comply with the scheme, they can have a feeling of doubt as to whether they should abide by the scheme framed by the University or other under the Act.
Since they had filed the writ petition in this Court, this Court gave direction on January 29, 1988 directing the respondents to deposit the contribution with the appellant.
Thereby the respondents have a statutory obligation to deposit the amount from February, 1988 onwards.
Therefore, there is no justification whatsoever to deposit and keep depositing the amount in the University account after the judgment of this Court.
The mere fact that the University has given permission to redeposit the amount with the appellant does not enable the respondents to take shelter thereunder for non-deposit of the amount in the Fund."
5.
By applying the ratio of the Apex Court judgment to the facts of this case, we hold that the impugned order passed by the Tribunal suffers from an error of law, and therefore, it deserves to be set aside.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 13.8.1998 passed by the Tribunal is quashed and the one made by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner is restored.
Petition allowed.