JS Narang, J - The petitioner had served in the Indian Air Force as Radar Operator, Group II with effect from 14121963 upto 30.6.1973 when he was released as per the terms of his appointment.
The petitioner joined as Constable in the Wireless Wing of Punjab Police on 1941976.
The petitioner earned promotions from time to time and after earning the rank of Sub Inspector, he claimed benefit of Military Service rendered by him during the emergency i.e. from 14121963 to 10121968.
The petitioner claimed re- fixation of his seniority as per rule 4(ii) of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The petitioner had not been granted the benefit of military service and as a result thereof, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5499 of 1992.
The said petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 611993.
The order reads as under :-  "The petitioner was undoubtedly entitled to the benefits of military service under the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
In terms of these rules, the petitioner has already been given the benefit of increment and the period has also been counted towards pension.
Seniority and promotions, which were due to the petitioner by virtue of this concession have, however, not been given to him.
The stand taken by the respondent-State is that this claim of the petitioner was barred by time.
Counsel for the respondents was, however, unable to point to any provision providing for any limitation in the matter of the grant of this concession, to those who are entitled under the rules.
This being so, we hereby direct the respondents to grant to the petitioner the promotions and the seniority as he was entitled to under the rules and also all consequential benefits flowing from this.
This petition is, thus, accepted with costs of Rs. 500/- (Rupees five hundred).
The direction contained in this order be complied with and the amount due to the petitioner be paid to him within six months from the date of the receipt of this order by the respondents."
2.
The respondents had been given categoric direction for granting to the petitioner the promotion and seniority as he would be entitled to under the rules and of course with all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
The said judgment was challenged by the State of Punjab before the Apex Court by way of filing Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 6068 of 1993 The said SLP was dismissed vide order dated 751993 by the apex Court.
Thus the petitioner was entitled to be given the benefit of military service.
3.
In pursuance to the judgment rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5499 of 1992, the Deputy Inspector General of Police (Computer and Wireless), Punjab, Chandigarh passed an order dated 1571993 (copy Annexure P-3) vide which the petitioner had been given the effect of military service of 4 years and 27 days towards seniority and promotion to the petitioner working in the Punjab Police Telecommunication Wing.
The deemed date of appointment as Constable/Technical was given as 2331972.
The deemed date of promotion as Head Constable was given as 171973, the date from which his junior Constable Ranjit Singh had been promoted.
The deemed date of promotion as ASI/Technical had been granted to the petitioner with effect from 17111979, the date on which his next junior Head Constable Anil Singh had been promoted as ASI.
The deemed date of promotion as Sub Inspector (Technical) had been granted to the petitioner with effect from 1731986, the date from which his junior ASI Anil Singh had been promoted.
The petitioner was thereafter, granted the deemed date of F-List with effect from 2081991 and the deemed date of promotion as officiating Inspector of Police (Technical) was given as 25.9.1991, the date from which his junior Sub Inspector Anil Singh had been promoted as Inspector.
A copy of the order dated 10.9.1993 vide which the deemed date of promotion to the rank of officiating Inspector of Police (Technical) had been granted to the petitioner is annexed as Annexure P-4.
4.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police (Telecommunication), Punjab, Chandigarh passed another order dated 2971997 vide which the deemed date granted to the petitioner as ASI and also that of Sub Inspector had been reshuffled.
It shall be appropriate to mention here that the deemed dates given to the petitioner as Constable and as Head Constable had been maintained.
The petitioner being dis-satisfied filed the present writ petition challenging the said order.
While issuing notice of motion, the Division Bench of this Court granted status quo regarding petitioner's service.
This interim order was vacated when the petition was admitted by the Division Bench.
5.
The respondents have taken the plea that passing of Radio Mechanic Grade II course is a pre-requisite for getting promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector/Sub Inspector/Technician.
The petitioner had failed in the Radio Mechanic Grade-II examination in the year 1985 and his case was considered for promotion to the rank of ASI on 1731986 and 2691996 but he was ignored on account of having failed in the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course.
As per the petitioner and also the fact having been admitted in the impugned order dated 2971997, the petitioner had passed the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year 1986 and was promoted as ASI with effect from 12111986.
The stand is that the petitioner had not passed the examination till 1986, thus the question of giving deemed date of promotion as ASI with effect from 17111979 did not arise.
Further the stand is that the petitioner had accepted his supersession in the year 1986 which had not been challenged, as such now he is not entitled to question the same.
However, it is admitted by the respondents that in view of the order passed by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5499 of 1992 the petitioner has been given the benefit of military service and his deemed date of appointment as Constable/Technician has been given as 23.2.1972 instead of actual date of joining i.e., 2041976 and so also he has been given the deemed date of promotion as Head Constable/Technician with effect from 171973 from the date his junior Shri Ranjit Singh had been promoted as Head Constable/Technician.
The relevant para where the above said admission has been made by the respondents reads as under :-  "Para 7.
Admitted to the extent that the petitioner has filed CWP No. 5499 of 1992 in this Hon'ble Court and orders passed by this Hon'ble Court and reproduced in this para is also admitted.
Rest of the contents of this para are denied being incorrect.
As per the judgment dated 611993 passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 5499 of 1992 the petitioner has been granted the benefit of military service towards increments and pension and in his appointment by giving him the deemed date of appointment as Constable Technician w.e.f.
23272 instead of actual date of joining i.e. 20476 and he has been assigned seniority above Ranjit Singh 450/W.
He has also been given deemed date of promotion as Head Constable Technician w.e.f.
171973 i.e. from the date his junior Shri Ranjit Singh was promoted as HC/Technician."
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the impugned order dated 2971997 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police (Telecommunication), Punjab (copy of which is Annexure P-5) is not sustainable because by virtue of the said order, the military service benefit of 4 years and 27 days has been given to the petitioner upto the rank of Head Constable and the deemed dates given in the two ranks vide order dated 1571993 passed by the Deputy Inspector General Police have been maintained and the deemed date given as ASI and Sub Inspector have been withdrawn only on the ground that in the year 1979, the petitioner had not passed the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course and also for Sub Inspector the Radio Mechanic Grade I course which is the pre-requisite for being promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector.
The argument is that the petitioner did pass the said courses in 1986 and 1990 respectively but while applying the deeming fiction, the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed the courses on the said relevant dates, as such, the order dated 1571993 had correctly granted the deemed dates to the petitioner in the rank of ASI and so also Sub Inspector.
The deeming fiction cannot be applied half way and while granting the deemed date in the ranks where the passing of the examination is the pre-requisite on the deemed date it is to be taken that the said course was passed by the petitioner.
The whole purpose of granting the military service benefit to the petitioner would be negated.
It is the case of the petitioner that he had passed both the courses when the direction had been given by this Court for granting the benefit of military service for the purpose of granting promotion and seniority.
It would have been a different matter if the petitioner had not passed the said courses, the question of giving deemed date in the said two ranks, would not have arisen.
In the case at hand, the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed the said courses in the year 1979 and 1986 when the deemed dates in the rank of ASI and Sub Inspector had been given to the petitioner.
In this regard, my attention has been drawn to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court given in Civil Writ Petition No. 8197 of 1999 decided on 20121999, Ravinderjit Singh and another v. The State of Punjab etc. in which reliance has been placed upon a judgment of House of Lords in East and Dwellings Co Ltd, (1993) AC 109 and my attention also has been drawn to a judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 17391 of 1999 decided on 222000.
In both the cases the question had arisen as to whether a person can be given retrospective promotion including counting of experience even if the person has not physically worked for the requisite period provided under the rules, if that be so, can that person be promoted to the next rank.
The answer is that once a person is notionally considered to be in office from a particular date, all consequences must flow.
The relevant portion of the judgment rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 8197 of 1999 reads as under :-  "Point No. 4.
So far as point No. 4 is concerned, it may just be noticed that once respondent No. 3 is given the date of promotion as Executive Engineer w.e.f.
October 16, 1991, all consequences from retrospective promotion including counting of experience from this date must flow.
If petitioner's counsel's argument is accepted that unless a person physically works as Executive Engineer for seven years, he cannot be promoted as Superintending Engineer, then as in the present case it may result in grave injustice to an incumbent like respondent No. 3.
Supposing a person is under a cloud and his case for consideration is deferred and after he is exonerated from all the enquiries etc., his case is considered for promotion.
Naturally it has to be from a retrospective effect.
If the Court orders consideration from a retrospective date, could it be said that such a person cannot count the period from retrospective promotion for purpose of experience to the next higher rank.
The answer has to be in the negative.
Once a person is notionally considered to be in office from a particular date, all consequences must flow.
In a House of Lords case in East and Dwelling CoLtd, (1932) A.C.109, Lord Asquith observed as under :- "If you are bidden to treat as imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real consequences and incident which, if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it.........The statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs, it does not say that having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs."
This dicta was further followed by the Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 17391 of 1999 where again the question had been raised - Whether an employee by getting a deemed date of retrospective appointment is entitled to reckon his experience from the said deemed date for purpose of promotion to the next higher rank ?
It was again held that for the purpose of promotion to the next post, the experience shall be counted from the deemed date of appointment/promotion and not from the actual date of promotion.
The judgment rendered in the above said petition reads as under :-  "The only question that calls for our determination is -- whether an employee by getting a deemed date of retrospective appointment is entitled to reckon his experience from the said deemed date for purpose of promotion to the next higher rank ?
The case of the respondents is that in fact the experience should count from the actual date of promotion and not from the deemed date of promotion.
For giving answer to this question, we may just observe that recently this Bench had an occasion to consider this question in Ravinderjit Singh v. State of Punjab (CWP No. 8197 of 1999, decided on 20121999) wherein, relying upon a judgment of House of Lords in East and Dwelling Co Ltd (1932) Act 109, this Court held that if a person gets promotion or appointment with retrospective effect from a particular date, the experience for the purpose of promotion to the next post is to count from the deemed date of appointment/promotion and not from the actual date of promotion.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the official respondents to consider the case of promotion of the petitioners to the rank of Under Secretary in the Secretariat Administration by counting their experience in the rank of Superintendent Grade-I w.e.f.
the deemed date of promotion as such.
Since the petitioners are retiring shortly, let these directions be carried out within a period of six weeks."
7.
The words `deemed to be' also came for interpretation before the Privy Council as far back as in 1929 and the said words had been used in Section 43 of Income Tax Act, 1922.
The question arose as to what shall be the possible meaning attributable to be the words `Deemed to be'.
Their Lordships were of the categoric view that when a person is "deemed to be" something, the only meaning possible is that whereas he is not in reality that something the Act of Parliament is required to be treated as if he were, i.e., the person shall be considered to be so for the purposes of the said statute.
The judgment is reported as Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay Presidency v. Bombay Trust Corporation Ltd, AIR 1930 Privy Council 54.
Relevant para of the judgment reads as under :-  "The necessary notice of the intention of the tax officer to treat them as agents provided for has been served on them.
All this being so, what says the section ?
They are "for all the purposes of the Act to be deemed to be such agent".
Now one of the purposes of the Act is Section 42.
They are therefore to be "deemed to be".
The agent who is chargeable to income-tax, are deemed to be the assessee the assessee being in terms of S.2(2) defined as the person by whom income-tax is payable.
New when a person is "deemed to be" something the only meaning possible is that whereas he is not in reality that something the Act of Parliament requires him to be treated as if he were.
It follows that although the High Court was perfectly right in holding that if Section.42 stood alone "agent" in that section would mean an agent in actual receipt of the profits or gains which were to be assessed, they failed to appreciate that Section 43 puts the person who comes within its term artificially into the position of the agent and of assessee under Section 42."
8.
In the present case, the petitioner passed Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year 1986 and Radio Mechanic Grade-I course in the year 1990 and if the deeming fiction is applied, the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year when his immediate junior as Head Constable was given the opportunity to appear in the course and likewise in Radio Mechanic Grade-I course.
The argument is that the petitioner had been rightly given the deemed date of promotion as ASI with effect from 17111979 and w.e.f.
1731986 as Sub Inspector.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the petitioner is not entitled to the deemed date as ASI and Sub Inspector as spelt out in the order dated 1571993 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police (Computer and Wireless), Punjab because on that date the petitioner had not passed the said courses which are the pre-requisite for being promoted to the ranks of ASI and Sub Inspector respectively.
He has further argued that similar claim had been made by one Shri Dev Dutt and for the same, Civil Writ Petition No. 10397 of 1996 had been filed in this Court which was dismissed by passing the order dated 2971997 (copy Annexure P-6).
The discrimination as alleged by Sub Inspector Dev Dutt stood removed as the impugned order dated 2971997 has been passed by way of honouring the judgment rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 10397 of 1996.
10.
I am afraid the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents cannot be accepted as the benefit given to the petitioner had been decided to be withdrawn as per the determent made by the learned counsel for the State in the said case.
The Division Bench of this Court has observed that in case Daniel or Karam Singh (the present petitioner) are re-granted the benefit by the Government itself or by a decision of a competent Court, the case of the petitioner (Dev Dutt) shall also be re-considered.
It is obvious that the order to withdraw the benefit given to the petitioner has not been passed in pursuant to the order passed by the Division Bench of this Court.
11.
The question which arises now is - Could the benefit given to the petitioner vide order dated 1571993 while granting deemed date of promotion as ASI and Sub Inspector be withdrawn ?
The answer is in the negative.
The petitioner had been given the deemed dates by virtue of granting benefit of military service of 4 years and 27 days towards seniority and promotion in pursuance to the order dated 611993 passed by the Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5499 of 1992.
As per the dicta of deeming fiction which already stands answered by the Division Bench of this Court in Ravinderjit Singh's case (supra), the case of the petitioner can also be somewhat similar.
However, to my mind, I find that the petitioner had been given the first opportunity to undergo the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year 1985 but he failed to qualify the same but subsequently passed the said course in the year 1986.
If the deeming fiction is applied, the person junior to the petitioner in the rank of Head Constable had been given the first opportunity to undergo the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year 1979.
In these circumstances, the petitioner would be entitled to undergo Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year 1979.
We cannot forget one thing that he had failed once i.e., in the year 1985 when he had been given the opportunity to undergo the said course.
Since he had failed once, deemingly, he shall be taken to have failed in the year 1979, therefore, he shall be deemed to have passed the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course which had been conducted immediately after 1979.
For example, if the course is said to be conducted in the year 1980, he shall be deemed to have passed the said course in the year 1980 but then he shall not be equated with the batch of 1979 but shall be equated with the batch of 1980 and his seniority as ASI shall be determined accordingly.
Thereafter, when the first Radio Mechanic Grade-I course is held after 1980, he shall be deemed to have passed the said course, i.e., the Radio Mechanic Grade-I in that year and his seniority shall be determined as Sub Inspector accordingly.
Thus, it would mean that deemingly he shall suffer for having failed once in the year 1985.
According to me, justice shall be deemed to have been done to all if the petitioner is also not allowed the benefit with effect from 1979 for having failed in the year 1985 but giving the benefit to have passed the course held in the year immediately after 1979 and determining his seniority accordingly by equating him in the said batch in the rank of ASI.
12.
So far as the rank of Sub Inspector is concerned, the benefit shall be allowed to the petitioner to the extent that the shall be deemed to have passed Radio Mechanic Grade-I course in the year which is held immediately after his seniority in the rank of ASI stood determined, keeping in mind the first opportunity made available to the petitioner for the said course held after the deemed date given to the petitioner for the course of Radio Mechanic Grade-II.
It may be mentioned that giving benefit by applying the deeming fiction has to be answered to the benefit of the petitioner because the benefit of military service has to be given to the petitioner in pursuance to the rules and also in accordance with the judgment rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5499 of 1992.
13.
In view of the above, I allow this petition and modify the order dated 2971997 to the effect that the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed the Radio Mechanic Grade-II course in the year when it had been held immediately after 1979 and the deemed date of promotion shall be determined accordingly and the seniority ascribed to the petitioner in the rank of ASI accordingly.
Further the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed the Radio Mechanic Grade-I course in the year when it was held after his seniority has been ascribed as ASI and he shall be deemed to have passed in the first attempt in the first course held thereafter.
The seniority of the petitioner in the rank of Sub Inspector shall be determined accordingly and the deemed date in the said rank i.e. Sub Inspector shall be accorded accordingly.
Thereafter his name being brought on list `F' (Technical) shall be accorded deemingly and as a consequence thereof, the deemed date of promotion as Inspector of Police (Technician) shall be granted to the petitioner accordingly.
The respondents are directed to determine the deemed date of the petitioner in the rank of ASI and Sub Inspector in accordance with the above observations and so also his name being brought of list `F' and deemed date of promotion as Inspector (Technician) be also determined within a period of three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order from this Court or from the petitioner whichever is earlier.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed