JS Khehar, J - The petitioner was appointed as Constable on 2311963 and then promoted as Head Constable on 20101970.
In 1976 there was a State- wide police agitation on account of dissatisfaction about the conditions of services of members of the police force in State of Punjab.
In the agitation, there were processions and demonstrations.
Whereupon, the Government initiated disciplinary action and dismissed approximately 1100 members of the police force on account of the fact that they had participated in an agitation which was not permissible under the rules governing the police force.
A number of criminal prosecutions were also filed against those who had participated in the processions and demonstrations.
2.
Orders of dismissal passed by the Government were challenged by a number of affected employees in this Court.
The petitions were, however, dismissed.
After dismissal of the writ petitions, the Government constituted a committee to review the cases of the dismissed agitators.
On the basis of the recommendations made by the Committee, about 1000 dismissed employees were reinstated and criminal cases pending against them were withdrawn.
The petitioner's claim, however, did not find favour with the Committee and as such, he was not reinstated.
A copy of the order of dismissal of the petitioner dated 861979 has been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
Its perusal shows that it had been passed by the disciplinary authority in exercise of powers vested in it under clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
3.
The petitioner approached this Court challenging the action of the Government under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India alleging arbitrariness and discrimination.
When this Court turned down the petitioner's claim he preferred a petition for special leave to appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
When the claim of the petitioner came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, legality of the action of the High Court had already been determined in Civil Appeals No. 3183-3184 of 1983, decided on 281983.
Judgment in the aforesaid case titled as Sengara Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, is reported in 1983(3) Services Law Reporter 685.
On the basis of the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in Sengara Singh's case, the claim of the petitioner was disposed of by an order dated 25.11.1983.
A copy of the aforesaid order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court has been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-2.
For the present controversy, only relief granted to the petitioner is relevant.
Accordingly extracted hereunder is the operative part of the order depicting the relief granted to the petitioner :-  ".....
Accordingly, these petitions succeed.
The State of Punjab is directed to reinstate the petitioners subject to the same conditions to which the other dismissed personnel of the police force of Punjab were directed to be reinstated forthwith.
Their services would be treated as continuous and the period between termination of service and reinstatement shall be treated as if they were on leave, if leave was admissible and available or leave without pay if any other kind of leave is not available.
If leave is admissible to them, they should be paid salary but no other back wages are to be paid to them.
For all other purposes, their services should be treated as continuous."
(emphasis is mine) The order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in the case of the petitioner was sought to be implemented by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, who vide his order dated 411984 expressly reinstated the petitioner in service "forthwith" and also indicated that the period spent out of service will be treated as leave of the kind due.
4.
From the narration of facts depicted above, it is clear that the petitioner had been dismissed from service on 861979 and had been reinstated on 411984.
Be that as it may, the petitioner was not allowed increments which became due to him during the period he remained out of service.
To claim the said increments, the petitioner addressed representations and also submitted a legal notice dated 2081990.
Having not received any favourable orders, the petitioner approached this Court by filing the present petition.
The solitary claim of the petitioner is that he should be granted increments which he would have received in ordinary course if he had not been dismissed from service on 861979.
In this behalf, the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that in the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court it was repeatedly emphasized that his services would be treated as continuous irrespective of his dismissal from service vide order dated 861979.
In this behalf, it is claimed that grant of annual increments is natural and normal consequence of his reinstatement with continuity in service.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the decision rendered in petitioner's case by the Supreme Court of India is based on the decision rendered in Sengara Singh's case.
He has pointedly brought to my notice the operational part of the judgment rendered in Sengara Singh's case.
To buttress his argument the portion of the judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents is extracted hereunder :-  ".....The State of Punjab is directed to reinstate the appellants subject to the same conditions set out at Annexure P-II subject to which the other dismissed personnel of the police force were reinstated.
They should be reinstated as directed herein forthwith from today.
Their services should be treated as continuous and the period between the date of the dismissal and the reinstatement shall be treated as leave if available and admissible or leave without pay if leave of any kind is not available.
To the extent they are treated as on leave they should be paid leave salary......." It is submitted by the learned counsel that the benefit of annual increments was not granted to any of the employees by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Sengara Singh's case.
Since none has been granted annual increments in spite of similar observations made by the Supreme Court in Sengara Singh's case, the petitioner could not be given the benefit of annual increments for the period he remained out of service on account of his dismissal.
The learned counsel for the respondents has, however, not relied on any rule on the basis of which an employee can be denied increments in the present set of circumstances.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondents.
In my view, the claim of the petitioner for grant of annual increments is liable to be accepted.
One of the natural consequences of continuity in service is entitlement to annual increments.
A perusal of the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court by which the claim of the petitioner was accepted would show that it was repeatedly emphasized that reinstatement of the petitioner would vest in him the right of continuity in service or in other words, right to all benefits is as if his services had never been terminated.
The directive of the Supreme Court has indeed been implemented by the Authority, even leave of the kind due from the date of dismissal from service till his reinstatement, has been granted to the petitioner.
Natural consequence, in the absence of any rule to the contrary, is that the petitioner would also be entitled to annual increments which had fallen due during the period of his absence on account of his dismissal from service.
As indicated above, no rule has been brought to my notice whereby annual increments can be denied to the petitioner.
The question before this Court is not whether the decision rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sengara Singh's case was correctly implemented by the State Government.
Merely because the petitioners in Sengara Singh's case were denied the benefit of annual increments will not lead to the conclusion, that the present petitioner should also not be given the benefit of annual increments.
It is not proper for me to make any observation in so far as entitlement of the petitioners in Sengara Singh's case for the grant of annual increments.
However, in view of the position expressed above, I have no doubt that the petitioner on his reinstatement with continuity in service shall be notionally entitled to all annual increments which would have become due to him but for his dismissal from service.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner is held notionally entitled to increments which fell due to him during the period of his absence from service on account of his dismissal.
He is also held entitled to recomputation of his salary on the basis of the aforesaid annual increments.
The arrears due to the petitioner on the aforesaid account with effect from his reinstatement into service shall be released to him within a period of four months from the date of the receipt of the instant order.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.