M Katju, J - This writ petition has been filed against the impugned order of the Central Administrative Tribunal dated 3101997 Annexure 4 to the petition and against the award of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Kanpur dated 18.6.1993 Annexure 3 to the petition.
2.
It appears that a reference was made by the Central Government to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Kanpur regarding the termination of service of respondent No. 2 and the Tribunal gave an award dated 18.6.1993 in favour of the workman.
Against that award of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court it appears that the petitioner approached the Central Administrative Tribunal and the Central Administrative Tribunal passed the impugned order dated 3101997.
3.
In our opinion, the petition before the Central Administrative Tribunal was wholly misconceived.
It may be mentioned that under Section 17(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act the award of the Industrial Tribunal is final.
This means that the award of the Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court cannot be challenged by way of any statutory remedy.
It can only be challenged by means of the constitutional remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution The Central Administrative Tribunal has been created by the Administrative Tribunal Act which is statutory enactment.
Hence the award of the Industrial Tribunal can only be challenged in this Court by means of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution and it cannot be challenged before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The decision of the Supreme Court in AIR 1997 SC 408 in our opinion has no relevance in this case.
In that case the Supreme Court only held that the Payment of Wages Authority will continue to have jurisdiction to decide claims under Section 15 of the Act even after establishment of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
This has nothing to do with the question whether any petition can be filed before the Central Administrative Tribunal against an award of the Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court.
In our opinion, it cannot in view of the bar of Section 17(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
4.
However, since the petitioner has also challenged the award of the Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court we have carefully perused the award and find no illegality in the same.
The respondent No. 2 was alleged to be absent unauthorisedly for certain periods but the Industrial Tribunal has held that there is no evidence to show that the workman was absenting himself unauthorisedly for the periods in question.
Moreover, even if the respondent was absenting the remedy of the petitioner was to charge sheet him and hold disciplinary proceedings but the service could not be terminated strightway of a regular employee without giving him an opportunity of hearing.
Thus there is no illegality in the award of the Industrial Tribunal.
There is no force in this petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.