Hari Nath Tilhari, J - This is a revision under S. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure from the judgment and order dated 2081996 dismissing the application for execution taking the view that there is no executable decree produced by the decree-holder before the Court.
The facts of the case in nutshell are that the petitioner had moved an application for execution and sought for realising a sum of Rs. 5,63,653.56 by attachment of moveable and immoveable properties of the judgment-debtors.
The execution applicant filed a suit No. 80/78 in the Court of Civil Judge, Raichur for declaration that the order of removal of the plaintiff by the defendants dated 2261974 has been illegal, null and void and further sought declaration for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 14,45960.
The said suit was decreed for declaration that the order of removal of the present revision petitioner by the defendant vide order dated 2261974 was illegal, null and void.
It further decreed the suit for recovery of sum or Rs. 14,45960 vide decree dated 2261982.
This decree was maintained in the first appeal as well as in the second appeal.
As the first appeal and second appeal filed by the defendant had been dismissed, the plaintiff-applicant moved an application for execution for his reinstatement and for realisation of the salary for the period from the date of decree onwards alleging that under the decree he has been reinstated, so the plaintiff-revision petitioner has been entitled to the salary and as the defendants are not allowing him to work and are not paying him the salary which has accumulated to the tune of Rs. 5,60,000/-, the decree may be executed for this amount against the defendants.
The trial Court held that there is no specific direction of reinstatement as it had not been pressed.
The Court held that the decree has been fully satisfied and there was no further executable decree to be executed.
Feeling aggrieved from that order of the execution Court, the plaintiff-revision petitioner has come up before this Court in revision under S. 115 of CPC  2.
I have heard Sri M Raghavendra Achar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Smt. Rajeevi Shyam, learned counsel for the respondents.
3.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the revision-petitioner that at appellate stage an application for amendment has been made in the relief clause which has been allowed.
Though at earlier stage relief for reinstatement was deleted.
Therefore, when the suit was decreed, he was entitled to reinstatement.
The learned counsel contended that it is well settled principle of law that when an employee's services are terminated and that order is illegal and null and void and is found to the so, then the consequence thereof is that the employee gets his own earlier position namely reinstatement automatically taken place, claiming of reinstatement is superfluous as has been observed by this Court in second appeal.
He referred to the observations made, in this regard, in the case of Sulochana S Shetty v. Chief Executive Officer, ILR 1988 Kant 1988.
The learned counsel further made reference to the decision of their Lordships in the case of Devendra Pratap Narain Rai Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 1334 and made reference to the following observations (at p. 1337) :-  "This rule has no application to cases like the present in which the dismissal of a public servant is declared invalid by a Civil Court and he is reinstated.
This rule, undoubtedly, enables the State Government to fix the pay of a public servant whose dismissal is set aside in a departmental appeal.
But in this case the order of dismissal was declared invalid in a civil suit.
The effect of the decree of the civil suit was that the appellant was never to be deemed to have been lawfully dismissed from service and the order of reinstatement was superfluous.
The effect of the adjudication of the Civil Courts is to declare that the appellant had been wrongfully prevented from attending to his duties as a public servant.
It would not in such a contingency be open to the authority to deprive the public servant of the remuneration which he would have earned had he been permitted to work."
4.
These decisions have laid down the law to the effect that once decree is granted by the Civil Court declaring removal of an employee to be null and void, the effect thereof is that it is to be taken to be deemed that the employee was never dismissed or removed from his services and as such, reinstatement order is superfluous because he is automatically reinstated.
When the declaration of order of dismissal or removal or termination to be illegal, null and void is that the employee stands reinstated, then there is no question of decree being executed.
He is reinstated to the post.
It is open to the employer either to take work or not to take work from the employee, but the right of the employee to get salary for the period continues to be vested with him.
The employer is no doubt bound to pay the salary for the period even if he does not take work from the employee.
If the employer fails to pay in spite of that, the plaintiff has got a fresh cause of action to file a suit for recovery of full emoluments upto date with all increments from time to time by way of remedy of suit, not by execution of that decree.
5.
Further it has been well laid down that by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Ladulal Mali, 1996(8) SCC 37 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
601 that where the decree in suit merely declared the termination of service to be illegal without any direction of consequential payments of monetary benefits and execution Court has refused to grant relief of backwages, it acts rightly.
6.
In the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Mangilal Sharma, AIR 1998 SC 743 : 1998(1) SCT 322 (SC) dealing with effect to declaratory relief, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid it down as under (para 6) :-  "A declaratory decree merely declares right of decree-holder vis-a-vis the judgment-debtor and does not in terms direct the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
Since in the present case the decree does direct the reinstatement or payment of arrears of salary the executing Court could not issue any process for the purpose as that would be going beyond the decree.
Respondent as decree-holder was free to seek his remedy for arrears of salary in the suit for declaration.
The execution Court has no jurisdiction to direct payments of salary or grant any other consequential relief which does not flow directly and necessarily from the declaratory decree."
Their Lordships thereafter in paras 8 and 9 of the report approved the principle of law as laid by the Full Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Parkashchand v. SS Grewal, 1975 Cri LJ 679 in following terms (para 8) :-  "A declaratory decree, in my opinion, cannot be executed as it only declares the rights of the decree-holder qua judgment-debtor and does not in terms, direct the judgment-debtor to do or to refrain from doing any particular act or thing since there is no command issued to judgment-debtor to obey, the civil proceeds (process ?)
cannot be issued for compliance of that mandate or command.
The decree-holder is free to seek his legal remedies by way of suit or otherwise on the basis of declaration given in his favour."
In para 9 of their judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court approved the above as the correct statement of law on the subject, subject to service rules and law.
7.
Subject to the above observations, it is held that when the Court below held that the present decree has been completely executed, so now not executable any further, it was not wrong simply because reinstatement automatically was given effect to.
In my opinion, the petitioner has wrongly been advised to file the execution application.
The remedy of the plaintiff is subject law and rule of service to file a suit for recovery of money from the date of decree onwards on the basis of decree in the suit.
8.
Thus considered, in my view, the order impugned and order passed by the execution Court cannot be said to suffer from any jurisdictional error within the framework of S. 115, C.P.C.
The revision, as such, deserves to be dismissed.
Subject to the above observations, the civil revision petition is hereby dismissed.
If the suit is filed, all pleas as are available under (sic) will be open to the defendants to raise.
Petition dismissed.