M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The short point for consideration is whether the instant writ application is maintainable.
2.
The petitioners are in Ad hoc Committee of Mangal Kodalia Menaka Debi Sat Sangha Vidyamandir.
The said school had been granted recognition as II Class Junior High School with effect from 111971 to 31121972 with Classes V and VI subject to the conditions enumerated therein.
It was also stated in the said letter of recognition that the question of granting further extension of recognition of the school will be considered on compliance of the conditions by the petitioner.
The said recognition was granted by Memo.
dated 22.2.1972 (Annexure `A') by the Secretary of West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
3.
By a Memo No. 276 dated 721994, the District Inspector of Schools (SE) transferred the three (3) teachers of the school in question to certain other schools on the ground that the proposals of de-recognition of the school had already been started upon the copy of the DLIT report (Annexure `B').
4.
The petitioners submitted a representation dated 9.5.96 to the District Inspector of Schools (Annexure `I') wherein, it was requested that for the facts stated therein, the institution be admitted to the grant-in-aid scheme in order to revive the said school.
5.
According to the petitioners, no action was taken thereon and, therefore, a writ application being CO No. 17387(W) of 1996 was filed which was disposed of by an order dated 1741997 whereby the concerned authority was directed to consider the representation, annexure `G' (Representation dated 9.5.96 being annexure `I' to the instant writ application) within the time framed therein and disposed of by a reasoned order, it was made it clear that the time limit so fixed is peremptory and mandatory.
6.
The grievance of the petitioner in the instant writ application is that despite such specific direction issued by this court dated 1741997, the said representation has not been considered in accordance with the law till date and it is, therefore, a fit case where the Hon'ble Court should issue a mandatory direction upon the respondent authorities to revive the recognition of the said school in question and to admit the same in grant-in-aid scheme.
7.
In the instant writ application, the reliefs prayed for are as under:-  "(a) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to allow the school namely Mangal Kodalia Menaka Debi Sat Sangha Vidyamandir to run effectively by admitting the said institution in grant-in-aid scheme with the approval of the appointments of the petitioner Nos. 9 to 11 in the respective teaching posts in the said institution forthwith; (b) A declaration to the effect that the order passed by the respondent No. 3 (Annexure `B' to the petition) is without jurisdiction and is a nullity".
8.
Similar averments and contentions had been raised in the first writ application being CO No. 17387(W) of 1996 and the relief as prayed for therein was, inter alia, as under :-  "(b) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondent authorities, particularly the respondent No. 3 to deal with and dispose of the representation dated 9.5.96 in accordance with law; (e) An interim order of injunction do issue directing the respondent No. 3 to admit the said school in the grant-in-aid scheme forthwith according to the representation made by your petitioners on 9595."
9.
A question has, therefore, arisen as to the maintainability of the instant writ application being the second writ application.
10.
It is the contention of Mr. Samanta, learned counsel for the petitioner that the instant writ application though a second writ application is maintainable as the reliefs claimed in the two writ applications are distinct and separate.
Also, it was contended that the first writ application was filed praying for grant of a direction to consider the representation of the petitioner and as there has been non-consideration with the said order of court, the petitioners are entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for grant of a mandate in its favour and a direction to the respondent authorities to revive the recognition of the school in question and to admit the same in grant-in-aid scheme.
11.
Mr. Samanta has, in support of his said submissions, relied upon the case of Devaki Nanda Prasad v State of Bihar & Ors., reported in AIR 1983 SC 1134, The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Gian Prakash, New Delhi & Anr. v. KS Jagannathan & Anr., reported in AIR 1987 SC 537; State Transport Authority, West Bengal & Ors. v. Asis Kumar Roy & Ors., reported in AIR 1995 Calcutta 42.
12.
On behalf of the State, Mr. Pabitra Kr.
Basu has contended that the instant writ application being the second writ petition based upon same cause of action as in the earlier writ petition is not maintainable.
It was contended that the reliefs now prayed for in the instant writ petition were available to be prayed for in the first writ petition as well.
Merely, because the petitioner chose not to seek the said reliefs in the earlier writ petition, he cannot be permitted to seek the said reliefs in the instant writ petition when the cause of action in both the writ applications being one and the same.
Mr. Basu relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Prasad Gupta v. State of UP & Ors., reported in AIR 1997 SC 3425 : 1997(3) SCT 556 (SC) and submitted that the Supreme Court in that case has deprecated the practice of filing successive writ petitions.
In that case, the Supreme Court observed that no litigant has a right to unlimited drought on court time and public money in order to get the affair settled in the manner he wishes.
Finality of judicial proceedings must be accepted at some stage.
Court cannot allow its process to be abused.
13.
I am inclined to accept the submissions made on behalf of the State that the instant writ application is not maintainable.
It is evident that the cause of action is the same in both the writ applications.
The institution in question was granted recognition for a limited duration of two years and the same was liable to be extended subject to fulfilment of the conditions prescribed therefor.
Thereafter, it appears that based upon the DLIT report, the extension was not granted and the three (3) teachers of the school in question were transferred to other schools.
The aforesaid action was not questioned when the first writ application was filed instead it was prayed that the representation dated 9.5.96 being annexure `G' to the first writ application which is annexure `I' to the instant writ application be considered.
However, the interim relief prayed therein (extracted supra) was similar to the instant writ application (relief `A' extracted supra).
14.
The representation dated 9.5.96 was to the effect that the institution be once again admitted to grant-in-aid scheme and the recognition to be revived.
In the instant writ application also the same relief has been prayed for.
It is thus apparent that the reliefs as prayed for in the instant writ application could have been prayed for in the first writ application filed by the writ petitioners herein.
15.
As to the contention of Mr. Samanta, learned counsel for the petitioners that there has been non-implemetation of the directions issued by this court dated 17.4.97 in CO No. 17387(W) 1996, the instant writ application is maintainable, suffice it to state that an application for implementation of an order passed in an earlier writ application is not maintainable.
16.
As already noticed supra, Supreme Court has condemned the practice of litigants filing successive writ petition for similar reliefs.
17.
The question of filing of successive writ applications may arise under various circumstances.
The Supreme Court has considered certain circumstances wherein successive writ applications were filed.
18.
In Sarguja Transport Service v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Gwalior & Ors., reported in AIR 1987 SC 88, it was observed that the principle underlying in Rule 1 of Order 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure should be extended in the interest of administration of justice to cases of withdrawal or writ petition also, not on the ground of res-judicata but on the ground of public policy.
Withdrawal of a writ application, it was observed, does not amount to res-judicata.
The remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution should be deemed to have been abandoned by the petitioner in respect of the cause of action relied on in the writ petition when he withdraws it without such permission.
19.
Where a party does not pray for the relief in the earlier writ application which he ought to have claimed in that petition, he cannot file a second writ petition claiming that relief as it would be barred by the principle of constructive res-judicata under Explanation IV to Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Although, Code of Civil Procedure is not applicable in terms to writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, the principle of constructive res-judicata underlying explanation IV of Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure have been held to be applicable to writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
See :- Forward Construction Company & Ors. v. Prabhat Mandal & Ors., reported in AIR 1986 SC 391, wherein, it has been observed that adjudication is conclusive and final not only as to actual matter determined but as to every other matter which the parties might and ought to have litigated and have had decided as incidental or ancillary connected with the subject matter of litigation.
20.
The Privy Council as far back as in 1926 in Hoystead & Ors. v. Commissioner of Taxation, reported in 1926 Appeal Cases 155, held that parties are not permitted to begin fresh litigation because of new views.
If this is permitted, litigation would have no end except when legal ingenuity is exhausted.
21.
Mr. Samanta, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the direction issued in the earlier writ application was in favour of the petitioner and had thereby created a legal right in favour of the petitioner to enforce the said right.
The grievance of the writ petitioners being that there has been non-compliance with the aforesaid directions, the instant writ application, it was submitted, is maintainable.
22.
The aforesaid contention of Mr. Samanta, learned counsel for the petitioner would have merited consideration, if the petitioner was remedyless.
Such is not the case here.
If the grievance of the petitioner in substance is as to non-compliance by the respondents of the directions issued by this Court, then the invoking of Article 226 of the Constitution by filing a second writ application for enforcement of the orders passed in earlier writ petition is not the appropriate remedy.
The appropriate remedy would be to seek reliefs under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 or by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 215 of the Constitution.
23.
In State of Rajasthan v. Mohan Singh, reported in 1995 (Suppl) 2 SCC 153, the Apex Court while holding that no modification can be made of the order already passed in exercise of the power of the contempt jurisdiction by the court and if a party wanted any kind of modification for that appropriate application has to be filed in the main petition.
In the contempt jurisdiction, however, the court has a right to enforce the order passed by it in exercise of the contempt jurisdiction.
In that case, the Supreme Court directed the respondent to implement the order within the time stipulated by it.
24.
In Nur Ali Babalthanewala v. KMM Shetty, reported in AIR 1990 SC 464 ; 1990(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 155 : 1990(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 82, it was held that where mere punishment to the contemnor for violating the order would not serve the purpose, there must be an order to purge the contempt by directing the contemnor to comply with the order passed by that court and for that, the court has a power to issue necessary further and consequent directions for enforcing its orders in advance of the power to punish the contemnor.
25.
In my view, therefore, it cannot be contended that in exercise of the contempt jurisdiction, the court can only punish the contemnor and that would bring no satisfaction to the writ petitioner.
The court in exercise of its contempt jurisdiction not only has the power to punish but has the power and jurisdiction to enforce the order passed by it.
However, if the petitioner has slept over his rights or has not diligently pursed the cause and thereby disentitled himself to the reliefs and remedies available to him in law, he has only himself to blame.
26.
For the reasons aforestated, it must be held that the instant writ application is not maintainable and is accordingly dismissed.
27.
As to the judgments relied upon by Mr. Samanta, suffice it to state that the question as to the maintainability of a second writ application was neither raised nor considered in any of those cases.
In my view, therefore, none of the judgments, cited supra, by Mr. Samanta, are authority for the proposition that a second writ petition is maintainable on the same cause of action, reliefs in relation thereto had or had not been granted by the court in the first writ application.
28.
Mr. Samanta, learned advocate for the petitioner has merely relied upon certain stray sentences and/or observations in the judgments cited by him to support his submission that a second writ petition is maintainable.
None of the judgments relied upon by Mr. Samanta deals with the question as to the maintainability of a second writ petition on the same cause of action.
It is the ratio decidendi which is alone binding on the court as precedent.
It is the rule deducible from the application of law to the facts and circumstances of a case which constitutes its ratio decidendi.
It is neither proper nor appropriate to rely upon various observations which may appear from a judgment made not in the context of the issue falling for decision.
In the course of his judgment, a Judge may make various observations which do not constitute the ratio decidendi.
Such observations may be by way of obiter-dicta.
29.
Be it placed on record that I have not entered into the merits of the issue involving the entitlement of the reliefs as prayed for nor decided any question in relation thereto by this judgment which has been restricted only to the consideration as to whether the instant writ petition is maintainable or not.
For the reasons aforestated, the instant writ petition is dismissed as not maintainable.
Petition dismissed.