RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of R.S.A.
No. 3803 of 1999 (State of Punjab v. Kuldip Singh Bains) and R.S.A.
No. 4288 of 1999 (Kuldip Singh Bains v. The State of Punjab) as both the appeals have arisen from one judgment and decree dated 961999 passed by the learned Addl.
District Judge, Chandigarh, who allowed the appeal of the plaintiff-respondent Kuldip Singh Bains and decreed his suit to the extent that the impugned order dated 791993 and the appellate order dated 251995 are not in accordance with law.
It was also declared by the first Appellate Court that respondent Kuldip Singh would be entitled to the benefit of his earlier service besides his claim to salary and other benefits of service w.e.f.
the date he submits his joining report along with the copies of the judgment and decree-sheet passed in the appeal, which was disposed of on 961999.
2.
Some facts of the case can be noticed in the following manner :-  Kuldip Singh filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 791993 passed by defendant No. 2 vide which he was removed from service and the order rejecting his appeal are illegal, without jurisdiction, arbitrary, against the principles of natural justice and are liable to be set aside.
He also claimed a decree for mandatory injunction directing the defendants to treat him to be in continuous service of the defendants as Senior Assistant and that he may also be paid all consequential benefits such as seniority, pay and allowances, increments along with interest @ 18% per annum.
The case set up by the plaintiff was that he joined as Clerk in the Local Government Department, Punjab on 22.6.1973 and thereafter joined the service in the Punjab Civil Secretariat as Clerk on transfer basis on 20.1.1980.
It was pleaded that on 1371987 he was promoted as Senior Assistant and was performing his duties to the entire satisfaction of his superior officers.
Vide application dated 781991 he applied for sanction of ex-India leave for a period from 2681991 to 29111991 to accompany his father to USA to get him operated upon on account of eye problem.
He was granted 96 days earned leave w.e.f.
2681991 to 29111991 and thereafter he applied for extension of leave upto 2231992 from USA on the ground of his ill-health duly supported by a medical certificate.
Thereafter, he received a memo dated 9.1.1992 from the defendants directing him to satisfy the Medical Board/Councillor at the Indian Embassy in USA and to supply a copy of the medical certificate duly countersigned by the Councillor for consideration of extension of leave.
Accordingly the plaintiff vide application dated 231991 requested the defendants to supply an extract of rules regarding the same.
He also informed the office of the Indian Councillor but did not receive any reply from the side of defendants.
Against vide application dated 741992 he requested the concerned authorities to send him a draft of 900 US Dollars for reading (reaching ?)
the Indian Councillor's office in Washington for medical test and for extension of leave on the ground of ill-health but to no avail.
Vide memo dated 2561992 the plaintiff was charge-sheeted on the ground that he remained wilfully absent from duty beyond 30111991.
It was further pleaded that the wife of the plaintiff moved an application in September, 1992 along with copy of power of attorney executed by the plaintiff in her favour authorising her to represent him in connection with his leave case pending with the department.
Reply to the charge sheet was given, but without considering the same, the Deputy Secretary, Inquiries, Punjab Government was appointed Inquiry Officer.
On receipt of the order of appointment, vide application dated 23121991 the plaintiff intimated the concerned branch officer that he is under treatment and is unable to join his duties.
His wife also submitted an application dated 811993 before the Inquiry Officer in which ill-health of the plaintiff was informed and it was also requested that before taking any action, length of 19 years of service of the plaintiff be also kept in view.
The Inquiry Officer vide memo dated 431993 sent a copy of memo dated 2111993 in which 431993 was fixed as the date for conducting the inquiry directing the plaintiff to appear before him to submit his defence.
Vide memo dated 431993 the Inquiry Officer intimated that he has proceeded ex-parte against the plaintiff and fixed 1931993 as next date of hearing on which the management/Government would lead evidence.
Thereafter a memo dated 451993 and a copy of inquiry report was sent to the plaintiff to which the plaintiff is stated to have sent a reply and vide application dated 29.5.1993 he requested for personal hearing in the matter and accordingly he was asked to appear before the Joint Secretary on 281993.
It was pleaded by the plaintiff that without affording any opportunity of personal hearing, vide order dated 2281993 he was removed from service.
He also filed the appeal but the Appellate Authority without application of mind dismissed the same.
In these circumstances, the suit was filed.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants, who contested the suit.
It was pleaded by the defendants that the medical certificate which was furnished by the plaintiff was not countersigned by the Councillor of Indian Embassy in USA as required under the rules and therefore the plaintiff was directed to supply the copy of medical certificate duly countersigned by the Councillor for extension of leave.
It was maintained by the defendants that the plaintiff was directed to join his duties vide letter dated 741992 within a fortnight as his leave on medical ground was rejected.
The request of the wife of the plaintiff for grant of three months time for filing reply to the charge-sheet was considered and rejected.
The defendants maintained that the charge levelled against the plaintiff was duly proved by the Inquiry Officer in his finding after careful consideration of the finding of the Inquiry report and the punishment imposed upon the plaintiff was according to rules.
The plaintiff filed re-joinder to the written statement in which he reiterated the averments made in the plaint by denying those of the written statement.
3.
From the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration that order dated 251995 is null and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for mandatory injunction as prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
4.
The parties led evidence in support of their respective cases and vide judgment and decree dated 3131998 the learned Sub Judge IInd Class, Chandigarh dismissed the suit of the plaintiff for the reasons given in paras No. 11 and 12 of the judgment, which are reproduced as under :-  "11.
Having heard the learned counsel for the plaintiff Mr. Gurdev Singh and learned Govt. Pleader Mr. LR Kaushal for the defendants, I am of the considered view that the impugned order does not suffer from the taint of illegality.
Admittedly, the plaintiff was granted ex-India leave for the period from 2681991 to 29111991 only.
It is also admitted on the record that the plaintiff had applied for extension of leave on the ground of ill- health and he was asked to get the medical certificate countersigned by the Councillor of Indian Embassy in USA as required under the relevant Rules to which he failed.
The contention of the plaintiff that he could not get the medical certificate countersigned because the defendants did not send the travel expenses of 900 US dollars to him, is fully devoid of merit.
The plaintiff has failed miserably to show any provisions of law/rules under which the defendants were obliged to pay him travel expenses.
Certainly, it was for the plaintiff to get the medical certificate signed from the concerned official of the Indian Embassy as directed by the defendant.
However, nothing of the sort was done.
Similarly, no illegality whatsoever, in the enquiry report has been brought into my notice.
It clearly transpires from the record that despite a number of communications, the plaintiff failed to appear before the Enquiry Officer and he was rightly proceeded against ex-parte and the Enquiry Officer proceeded against the plaintiff in accordance with the Rules while conducting enquiry.
After considering the Enquiry report Ex. D.3, the punishing Authority had passed order Ex.P.17 in accordance with the Rules which is prerogative of the Punishing Authority.
The Appellate Authority had also rejected the plaintiff's appeal vide order Ex. P.19 after considering each and every aspect of the matter.
This deserves to be mentioned that sufficiency or insufficiency of the evidence in an enquiry proceedings is not to be looked into by the Civil Court.
The law is well settled that in a Civil Suit the Court has not to sit as an Appellate Authority.
12.
The upshot of the entire discussion is that the plaintiff has miserably failed to bring into my notice any illegality in the impugned order.
Certainly, it was for the plaintiff to prove his case to which he failed miserably.
The authorities Ministry of Finance and another v. SB Ramesh; HK Khanna v. UOI and AL Kalra v. The Project and Equipment Corp of India Ltd (supra) cited by the learned counsel for the plaintiff are not applicable to the facts of the present case.
Accordingly, I find both the issues against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants."
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff filed first Appeal before the Court of Addl.
District Judge, Chandigarh, who accepted the same by setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court in terms of the observations as mentioned in para No. 1 above.
The reasons of acceptance of appeal are given in paras No. 14 and 15 of the judgment of the first Appellate Court, which are also reproduced as follows :-  "14.
In the instant case, the punishing authority of the plaintiff was Chief Secretary and the appeal lies to the Chief Minister as per order passed by the Appellate Authority dated 251995 (Ex.P.19).
Here again there is similar infirmity.
The plaintiff was not provided personal hearing by the Appellate Authority himself.
In response to the request of the plaintiff to give him personal hearing, the plaintiff was directed to appear before the Chief Secretary for personal hearing as is revealed by the letter available at page 395 bearing No. 7/25/92-Amla-1(4)/39 dated 1211994.
There is nothing on record that personal hearing to the plaintiff was given by the Appellate Authority himself (Chief Minister of Punjab).
Even order dated 251995 (Ex.P.19) was not passed by the Chief Minister.
There is nothing in this order to infer that file was scrutinised by the Chief Minister and the order was passed by him as Appellate Authority.
As per law laid down by Full Bench of Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana in an authority reported as Ram Niwas Bansal v. State of Bank of Patiala, 1998(2) L.L.R.
205 : 1998(3) SCT 550 (P&H) a delinquent official has a right to ask for personal hearing at the appellate stage.
Such right accrues from the principles of natural justice and violation peruse (per se ?)
is prejudicial to the delinquent official and would effect the order of the Appellate Authority.
In another authority of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India reported as Ram Chander v Union of India, 1986(2) A.I.S.L.J.
249 it was held that personal hearing at the appellate stage must be an effective one.
It was held further that the Appellate Authority must not only give a hearing to the government servant concerned but also pass a reasoned order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal.
In the instant case, the Appellate Authority did not provide personal hearing to the appellant nor any reasoned order appears to have been passed by the Appellate Authority himself.
There is a reference in the order that the case has been seen by the Appellate Authority and nothing more than this.
15.
Even otherwise dismissal from service due to absence from service is disproportionate punishment as per laws laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in an authority reported as Union of India v. Giri Raj Sharma, AIR 1994 SC 215."
6.
I have heard Mrs. SK Bhatia, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of the appellants, Mr. GS Bal, Advocate, on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the plaintiff- respondent did not participate in the inquiry.
He wilfully remained absent from the inquiry.
No prejudice has been caused to him if the plaintiff has not been heard by the punishing authority or that he was heard by the Joint Secretary.
8.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-plaintiff submitted that the Chief Secretary was the punishing authority of the plaintiff and in these circumstances this valuable right of personal hearing of the plaintiff could not be delegated to any other officer.
9.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellants is totally devoid of merit.
Opportunity of personal hearing to a public servant is not an idle formality.
It is based on the principles of natural justice to give option to a public servant to explain his delinquent conduct, if any, against him.
He can defend himself on many counts - firstly, that the findings of the Inquiry Officer are not based on proper appreciation of evidence; secondly, he can also show to the punishing authority that the procedure adopted by the Inquiry Officer is not based on proper appreciation of evidence; secondly, he can also show to the punishing authority that the procedure adopted by the Inquiry Officer is not in accordance with rules.
It is for the punishing authority to formulate its opinion with regard to the quantum of punishment to a delinquent official.
All these powers are exclusive to the punishing authority itself and these must not and should not be delegated to the subordinates.
In the present case, it is the common case of the parties that the punishing authority of the plaintiff was the Chief Secretary and personal hearing was not given to him.
Rather, it was given by the Joint Secretary.
The office of the Joint Secretary is lower in rank than that of the Chief Secretary.
In these circumstances, a serious prejudice must have been caused to the plaintiff when he has not been properly heard by the punishing authority itself.
The learned counsel for the appellants has not been able to show me any law or rule to fortify her contention that the power of personal hearing can be delegated by rules of business to the Joint Secretary.
10.
In this view of the matter, when there is a non-compliance of the procedure and there is a violation of natural justice, the impugned order cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
Therefore, I dismiss the appeal of the appellants with no order as to costs.
11.
Reverting to the appeal of the plaintiff, the learned counsel Mr. Bal argued that he is entitled to the back wages from the date when he reported for duty after returning from USA.
This argument of the learned counsel is totally devoid of any merit.
The plaintiff at that time was under inquiry.
Moreover, he never served the department.
The order of reinstatement came in his favour for the first time on 961999.
In this view of the matter, the plaintiff cannot claim back wages.
The appeal of plaintiff-Kuldip Singh Bains is also devoid of any merit and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.