RL Anand, J - The State of Punjab and its three functionaries (petitioners No. 2 to 4) have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and have given challenge to the award dated 12.5.1999 passed by the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, vide which the learned Presiding Officer ordered for the reinstatement of the workman Shri Yash Pal, respondent No. 1 (workman), with contiunity of service and payment of Rs. 10,000/- in lump sum in lieu of back wages.
2.
Few facts of the case can be noticed in the following manner:-  The workman served a demand notice dated 961992 and stated that he was employed as Chowkidar-cum-Mali on 2221990 by the State of Punjab through its functionaries i.e. XEN and SDO and was getting Rs. 88270 per month by way of salary.
His services were illegally and wrongly terminated by the employer on 3041992 in utter violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F and 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, 'the Act') and he was not allowed to work after 3041992.
With these allegations, the workman prayed for his reinstatement with contiunity of service and full back wages.
3.
The stand of the petitioners before the Labour Court was with regard to the maintainability of the reference made by the appropriate government on the plea that the termination of the service of the workman was covered by the provisions of Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act.
On merits, it was contended that the workman was appointed purely on daily wages basis on muster rolls between 2121990 to 29.2.1992 and he worked intermittently.
He never worked after 3041992 as alleged.
After 29.2.1992, the workman could not be employed, as the work against which he was employed had completed.
Since the job of the workman was purely contractual, which was not renewed, therefore, it does not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act.
4.
The Labour Court on the pleadings of the parties framed the following issues:-  1.
Whether the case of the workman was under Sec. 2(oo) (bb) of the ID Act ?
2.
Whether there is no termination of the workman on 3041992 as alleged in the demand notice and S/claim ?
3.
Whether termination of services of the workman is justified and in order ?
4.
Relief.
5.
Both workman and the management were afforded the opportunity to lead evidence in support of their respective claims and it was held that the employment of the workman was not contractual.
It was further observed by the Labour Court that retrenchment compensation has not been given as required under Section 25-F of the Act, and, therefore, the workman is entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
The Labour Court awarded a sum of Rs. 10,000/- in lump sum in lieu of back wages.
The relief granted by the Labour Court can be described in the following manner:-  "13.
Apropos the claim of back wages, the AR of the management has, no doubt, disputed his entitlement to the full back wages on the ground that he should be relegated to his remedy u/s 33-C(2) of the ID Act so as to enable the employer to raise question and establish that the workman was gainfully employed for some period during termination.
However, the ratio is Subhas Chand case (supra) relied upon by the AR of the management clearly indicates that the termination in the said case was ordered to be held to be violative of principle of natural justice; whereas in the instant case, the termination is clearly in violation of the statutory provisions of the ID Act and both the parties have raised the specific pleas to entitlement and disentitlement of the wages and further opportunity as granted to adduce evidence in this behalf.
In the instant case, the workman has not deposed anything that he was not gainfully employed after termination of his services.
Though equally, nothing has been counter deposed by the management.
Under the circumstances of the case, I order for reinstatement of the workman with contiunity of service and payment of Rs. 10,000/- to the workman in lump sum in lieu of back wages.
The workman shall report for duty as and when the award becomes enforceable act law."
6.
Feeling aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
7.
We have gone through the writ petition and the well reasoned award of the Labour Court and are of the considered opinion that there is no illegality or material irregularity in the award dated 12.5.1999 Annexuree P3 and the writ is liable to be dismissed in limine.
After going through the relevant paras of the award, we are further of the opinion that the learned Labour Court has based its findings on the proper appreciation of evidence and no legal infirmity is discernible on the face of the award which may warrant interference of the High Court in the said award.
As per Section 2(j) of the Act "industry" means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and includes any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen.
Even the averments of the writ petition would show that the workman was appointed initially as Fitter Coolie (Assistant Mate) against a scheme known as "Scheme Paharo Chack".
He then worked against another scheme starting from 171990 to 30.11.1990.
He further worked in different capacities in more schemes.
His employer was the same.
The nature of the duties of the workman clearly indicates that he was rendering services to the petitioners in the capacity of Assistant Mate, Skilled Mazdoor, Fitter Coolie and Mali-cum-Chowkidar.
It is the systematic activity of the government to employ various persons against different schemes.
The workman was employed as a skilled or semi-skilled worker.
The activities of the petitioners squarely fall within the definition of "industry" as enshrined in Section 2(j) of the Act.
8.
The findings of the Labour Court with regard to the days of employment of the workman are clear, cogent and based on the proper appreciation of evidence.
Since the workman had worked for more than 240 days and the provisions of Section 25-F and 25-G of the Act have not been complied with in this case, therefore, the order of retrenchment suffered from legal infirmity entitling the workman to reinstatement in the service with benefit of continuity of service and back wages.
9.
The award of the Labour Court has been challenged mainly on the ground that the case of the petitioners is covered under Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act on account of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman and, therefore, it does not amount to retrenchment.
We are not in a position to accept the contention of the petitioners in view of the widest import given to the term "retrenchment", which means the termination by the employer of the services of a workman for any reason whatsoever otherwise than as punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action.
The onus lies heavily upon the petitioners to convince this Court that their case is squarely covered under Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act.
The petitioners have not placed any document prima facie to indicate that the employment of the workman was contractual in nature for a specified time.
Rather, it appears that the workman was given the employment from time to time and the management took the benefit of his services in one project or the other.
In the present case, the workman remained in the employment of the petitioners from 2121990 onwards upto 29.2.1992 and he worked for more than 240 days in 12 months prior to the termination of his services.
The petitioners have failed to show that the services of the workman were terminated on account of non-renewal of the contract.
There is no evidence on the record prima facie to show that the nature of the job was for a specified purpose and for a specified time.
Therefore, the learned Labour Court was right in holding that the petitioners could not take the advantage of the provisions of Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act.
The term "for any reason whatsoever" is to be given a wider interpretation and it covers all types of terminations.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the workman was a daily wager, still he was a workman, nevertheless within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act.
In this view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion that the award of the learned Labour Court does not suffer from any infirmity or material irregularity.
Rather, it is based on proper appreciation of evidence.
The jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India in such a situation cannot be invoked by the petitioners.
Resultantly, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.