RL Anand, J - At this stage, Mr. Amardeep Singh Gill, Advocate, accepts notice on behalf of the respondent.
2.
Union of India has filed the present appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 6.10.1999 passed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar who set aside the judgment and decree dated 20.11.1995 passed by the Sub Judge IInd Class, Jalandhar and decreed the suit of the plaintiff by holding that the order of rejection of the disability pension claim of the plaintiff by Union of India vide letter dated 13.10.1982 as mentioned in the plaint was illegal, arbitrary ultra vires, mala fide and against the Constitution of India and Pension Regulation Air Force and the plaintiff was entitled to the grant of disability pension with effect from 31.3.1981 and was entitled to receive all arrears with retrospective effect.
3.
Sgt.
Mohinder Singh Parmar joined Air Force on 431957 and at the time of enrolment, he was medically examined and found fit in all respects in medical categories.
In the year 1973, plaintiff sustained an injury when he allegedly fell from the Air Carft with head down.
He suffered head injury which shook all his nervous system and he was admitted and treated in the Air Force Hospital Kanpur and thereafter he was shifted to Command Hospital, Lucknow and finally he was relieved from Air Force on 31.3.1981.
The plaintiff made claim for disability pension which was rejected by the defendant-authorities on the ground that the disease was not attributable to the armed service.
4.
With the above broad pleadings, the trial Court framed the following issues:-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether suit of the plaintiff is within time ?
OPP 3.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD 4.
Whether suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable ?
OPD 5.
Relief.
5.
Parties were afforded opportunities to lead evidence and finally the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the Trial Court.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, plaintiff filed first appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge who for the reasons given in paras No. 13 to 16 of the judgment decreed the suit of the plaintiff by reversing the judgment and decree of the trial Court, as under :-  "13.
The plaintiff has proved on record Ex. P.1 his enrolment from when he joined the service on 431957 and this form shows that the plaintiff was perfectly medically fit for the service and he was not suffering from any disease.
The plaintiff has also placed on record Ex. PX, the Medical Board proceedings dated 1631977 in which it has been opined that the disability of the plaintiff was contracted for service.
The only question to be decided is as to whether the Grand malepilepsy from which the plaintiff started suffering in the year 1973 long after the joined his service in 1957 is attributable to military service or not.
For this the relevant law is contained in Para No. 423(c) of the Regulations for the Medical Services and Armed Forces, 1962, which proves in which the question of attributability to service has to be determined.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that according to the law contained in this para the disability is deemed to have arisen in service, if no note of it was made at the time when the petitioner joined the military service.
14.
The relevant clause (c) of para No. 423 of the said Regulations reads as under :- "(c) The cause of disability or death resulting from disease is attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service on the condition and circumstances of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service condition did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent cause of the disease will be regarded as aggravated by service.
A disease which led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
However, if Medical opinion holds, for the reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during services."
In the present case, the plaintiff has proved on record his enrolment form Ex. P.1 which shows the medical fitness of the plaintiff while entering into service in the year 1957, according to which the plaintiff was absolutely medically fit for service and he was not suffering from any disease like ID Grand Mal Epilepsy.
There is no other document on record to indicate and nothing has been pointed out in the written statement to show that the existence of the said disease could not have been detected on the medical examination prior to acceptance in service.
In this situation, I have no alternative but to hold that the disease/disability was attributable to military service.
For this the learned defence counsel has relied upon Ex. Han./Clk Wishwa Nath v. Union of India, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 262 of Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jawahar Lal Gupta of our own High Court, where it has been held that the disease leading to discharge from service of Armed Forces is deemed to have arisen out of service if no note of it has been made at the time of the individual acceptance in the service of the Armed Forces.
15.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that the order under challenge was delivered to the plaintiff on 31121982 and the present suit was filed on 691991 and thus the present suit has been filed beyond period of limitation of three years.
However, there is no force in the contention, because the plaintiff has proved on record appeal Ex. P.4 filed by him to the order received by him on 31121982 and this appeal was dismissed by Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India on 21111990 vide order Ex. P.5 and the present suit has been filed on 691991 i.e. well within the period of limitation of three years from the date of rejection of the appeal when the cause of action lastly accrued to the plaintiff.
Otherwise also, it is a case for pension and in such like cases there is reckoning (recurring ?)
cause of action available to the plaintiff and there is no limitation in such like cases.
16.
Keeping in view the above discussion, I come to the conclusion that the suit has been wrongly dismissed by the trial Court.
So the present appeal is accepted.
Judgement and decree of the trial Court are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is decreed for declaration to the effect that the order of rejection of the disability pension claim of the plaintiff by CDA(P) Allahabad communicated to the plaintiff by Air force Records vide their letter No. RO/2703/224438/NERW (D) dated 13 Oct, 1982 is illegal, arbitrary, ultra vires, mala fide, against the Constitution of India and Pension Regulations for the Air Force and the plaintiff is entitled to grant of disability pension with effect from 31.3.1981 and to receive all arrears with retrospective effect.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Decree sheet be prepared.
Original record be sent back and the appeal file be consigned."
I have heard Shri Anil Rathee, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri Amardeep Singh Gill, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant placed reliance upon the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in Gurdip Singh v. Union of India, 1997(5) S.L.R.
341 : 1997(3) SCT 414 P&H)(DB) and submits that the Medical Board has examined the plaintiff and came to the conclusion that the disease is not attributable to the Army service and in such a situation when the Board has made an opinion, it is final and this aspect of the case has not been taken into account by the First Appellate Court by decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
Learned counsel for the appellant also relied upon para 423(d) of the Regulations for the Medical Services of the Armed Forces, 1983 which speaks to the similar effect.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the plaintiff relies upon Ex. Hav./Clk Wishwa Nath v. Union of India, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 262 in which it has been held that the disease leading to discharge from service of Armed Forces is deemed to have arisen out of service if no note of it has been made at the time of the individual's acceptance in the service of the Armed Forces and as such the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension.
It is common case of the parties that the plaintiff joined service in the year 1957.
He was medically examined.
There was no entry in the service book of the plaintiff that he had been suffering from any ailment or that his nervous system was not upto the mark.
It is proved on the record that the plaintiff suffered injury on the head in the year 1973 and on account that injury he was downgraded in the medical record.
For 16 years right from 1957 to 1973, plaintiff did not suffer from any problem.
In these circumstances, a reasonable inference can be drawn in favour of the plaintiff that the disease was attributable to the Armed Forces.
The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant is distinguishable on facts.
Hon'ble D.B.
never stated that the opinion of the Board in any circumstances can be challenged in the Civil Court.
The Hon'ble D.B.
further stated that the opinion of the Board is arbitrary and such an opinion can be questioned by a serviceman.
In the present case plaintiff has challenged the opinion of the Medical Board in the Civil Court and proved that he suffered injury attributable to the Armed Forces.
In these circumstances, suit has been rightly decreed by the First Appellate Court.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant placed reliance upon the judgment passed by this Court reported as 1999(4) R.S.J.
299, Sheo Nath v. Union of India and others : 2000(1) SCT 534 (P&H).
The judgment is again distinguishable on facts for the reasons given above and keeping in view the judgment passed by the Single Bench reported in the case of Ex. Hav/Clk Wishwa Nath (supra).
Resultantly, there is no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.