ML Singhal, J - Vijay Parkash was Conductor in Haryana Roadways, Kaithal Depot.
He was conveyed certain adverse remarks recorded in his annual confidential report for the year 1992-93 by General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal Depot vide order 2811994.
Vijay Parkash represented against the said adverse remarks and prayed for their expunction.
His representation was rejected and the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal Depot did not agree to expunge those remarks.
His grievance was that adverse remarks could not have been conveyed after such a lapse of time.
It was in contravention of the instructions of the Haryana Government to convey the adverse remarks after so much delay.
He filed suit for declaration to the effect that adverse remarks recorded in his annual confidential report for the year 1992-93 were illegal, null and void and did not have any legal validity as they had been conveyed after much delay which was violation of the instructions of the Haryana Government.
He claimed mandatory injunction seeking direction to the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal Depot to expunge the said remarks from his Annual Confidential Report for the year 1992-93.
2.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that plaintiff should have exhausted all the departmental channels before coming to the civil Court.
He should have approached State Transport Commissioner for the expunction of those remarks.
It was further urged that his representation for expunction of the adverse remarks was considered by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal Depot and the same was dismissed being without merit.
It was denied that the adverse remarks were the result of any mala fides on the part of officer, who had recorded those remarks.
It was urged that suit was not maintainable.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 2811994 is illegal, null, void and same is not binding upon the rights of the plaintiff ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD 3.
Relief.
4.
Civil Judge, Senior Division, Kaithal decreed the plaintiff's suit in view of his findings that the adverse remarks conveyed after a lapse of time are of no consequence and cannot be taken into account as affecting his career and that he was entitled to the expunction of those remarks and all the benefits that flow from the expunction of the adverse remarks i.e. additional increment after the completion of 18 years of service.
5.
Aggrieved from this judgment and decree dated 26.8.1996 passed by learned Civil Judge, Senior Division, Kaithal, State of Haryana went in appeal.
6.
Appeal was accepted by the learned Additional District Judge, Kaithal vide order dated 2111998 in view of his findings that there is no hard and fast rule laying down the time limit within which adverse remarks can be conveyed.
These can be conveyed within a reasonable time.
In this case, adverse remarks were conveyed within 8 months after they were recorded and these were conveyed within a reasonable time.
It was found that plaintiff was not discharging his duties honestly and efficiently and he had been repeatedly warned to improve his performance.
He did not pay any heed.
Consequently, adverse remarks were recorded in his Annual Confidential Report.
It was found that the recording of remarks in an Annual Confidential Report is a matter of subjective satisfaction of the Reporting Authority and the correctness of these remarks cannot be agitated in the civil Court.
His remedy is to file representation against the adverse remarks on departmental side.
It was found that civil Court cannot substitute its own opinion for the opinion recorded by Reporting Officer.
7.
Aggrieved from this order of the learned Additional District Judge, Kaithal dated 2111998, Vijay Parkash has come up in appeal further to this Court.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana.
9.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the adverse remarks with respect to the integrity of the plaintiff were not recorded in accordance with the instructions of the Government in this behalf since those instructions are binding and any remarks recorded in contravention thereof were illegal.
It was submitted that as the adverse remarks affected the civil rights of the appellant, he was entitled to approach the civil Court to seek redressal of his grievance.
It was submitted that if the adverse remarks are recorded in violation of executive instructions, they suffer from serious infirmity.
In support of this submissions, he drew my attention to MM Valand v. The State of Gujarat, 1978(1) SL.R.
489, BR Kulkarni v. Government of Gujarat, 1978(2) SL.R.
682 and TN Sarkarasundram v. Director of S and P Madras, 1983(2) SL.R.
183.
There may not be much dispute so far as this proposition of law is concerned but there is no gain saying that Civil Court could not substitute its own remarks in place of that of the reporting officer.
At the most, the authority concerned may be directed by the Court to record remarks in accordance with law which may or may not be possible after the lapse of time spent in Court.
In Baldev Kapoor v. Union of India, 1980(2) SL.R.
309 a Division Bench of this Court held that "These instructions are only meant for the guidance of the authorities concerned.
They do not have any statutory force and their violation or non-compliance does not render the decision illegal."
It was held in State of Punjab and others v. Janak Raj Jain, 1987(1) I.L.R.
(P&H) 413 by a Division Bench of this Court that "the recording of annual confidential reports is, in essence, subjective and administrative.
The recording of such reports is in the sheer public interest and in a large governmental organisation, the same would be imperative, and equally, its confidential nature must also be maintained to a certain extent.
Once that is so, either on the basis of a larger public policy or usually in compliance with the Government Instructions on the point, the superior officers are enjoined and indeed duty bound to put down their subjective assessment of the public servants conducted in the shape of a confidential report.
Instructions issued in regard to recording of confidential reports are not statutory in nature.
They are in the nature of guidelines and instructions for internal consumption by the officers for recording the annual confidential reports.
Of course, the Officers would follow such instructions and in case there is a violation thereof, it would be for the reviewing authority on a representation by the aggrieved employee to got into the matter to give necessary relief to him if so satisfied, but at the same time, the said instructions cannot be enforced in a Court of law."
In SSS Venkatrao v. State of Orissa, 1974(2) SL.R.
899 the Hon'ble Orissa High Court observed as follows :-  "The Government in maintaining the character roll is exercising administrative function in which it is to act justly and fairly.
That is not a quasi- judicial function though certain elements in the exercise of both the functions are similar.
The Government servant is not entitled to establish his case in any other manner except by way of making a representation against the adverse entry.
Excepting this, no other principle of natural justice is available.
It is not open to the Government servant to justify his stand by giving evidence.
Behind him the Government as a benevolent master is to act bona fide in testing ex-parte the correctness of the statements made in the representation."
10.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the reporting authorities are bound to consider the instructions of the government while recording annual confidential reports.
It was submitted that the reporting officers are required to be very careful while recording adverse remarks relating to integrity because if adverse remarks are recorded relating to integrity of officer/official reported upon loosely and without exercising circumspection and responsibility, those adverse remarks will smash his career and, therefore, instructions emphasised that the reporting authority should fortify with reasons his remarks relating to official.
He drew my attention to Avtar Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) RSJ 262 : 1995(3) SCT 214 (P&H) in support of this submission.
In Kuldip Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1992(5) SLR.
189 a Division Bench of this Court held that "recording of annual confidential reports is subjective and administrative nature.
The breach of administrative instructions which are in the nature of guidelines for the internal consumption by the officers at the time of recording of annual confidential reports and expunction of adverse remarks etc. do not confer upon the officer concerned a right to challenge in the Court of law".
It is, thus, clear that the recording of annual confidential reports is a subjective assessment of the public servant conducted in the shape of confidential report.
If there is any breach of the instructions of the government while recording confidential report, the confidential report does not get vitiated.
The recording of annual confidential report being a matter of subjective satisfaction of the concerned officer in the very nature of things the correctness thereof cannot be gone into by a Civil Court.
A superior officer may make certain remarks while assessing the work and conduct of the subordinate officer based on his personal supervision or contact.
It will indeed be difficult, if not impossible, to prove by positive evidence that a particular officer is dishonest but those who have had the opportunity to watch the performance of the said officer in close quarters of the nature and character not only of his performance but also of the reputation the such officer enjoys."
The recording of the annual confidential report being therefore matter of subjective satisfaction of the concerned officer in the very nature of things its correctness could not be gone into by a civil Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that adverse report was not conveyed to the appellant and uncommunicated adverse remarks could not injure his career.
Suffice it to say, the adverse remarks recorded in his Annual Confidential Report for the year 1992-93 was conveyed to him but after 8 months when they were recorded.
Whole object of the making and communication of adverse remarks is to give to the officer concerned an opportunity to improve his performance, conduct or character as the case may be.
In this case, the adverse remarks were conveyed to him before annual confidential report for the year 1993-94 was recorded.
Object of conveying adverse remarks is also to enable the officer commented to represent against the remarks.
If he feels that he has not been properly assessed, he can represent.
For the year 1992-93 he was graded as not `honest'.
He was graded as `below average'.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the column `defects, if any', the remarks `no' is mentioned and if there was no defect in him the recording of remarks "not honest" would be contradiction in terms.
It was submitted that the word `not honest' was recorded casually otherwise in the column of defects, if any, the remarks would have been not honest and below average worker.
Suffice it to say, when there is a column No. 8 against which his honestly could be commented upon and his honesty was commented upon why should there have been repetition of the same remarks in the column defects, if any.
In the column `hard work' also he was graded as `no'.
In the column `capable of earning', he was graded as `no'.
I do not think there was any contradiction in the annual confidential report recorded on the work and conduct of the appellant for the year 1992-93.
11.
Reporting Authority was to record remarks on his work and conduct on the impressions, which he had formed over a period of time as regards his work and conduct.
It is not open to the civil Court to go into the correctness or otherwise of the remarks recorded on his work an conduct.
If there was no proper assessment on his work and conduct, he could represent to the department against those remarks.
Right of representation against adverse remarks is in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
12.
In my opinion, the appellant had no case.
For the reasons given above, this appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.