SB Sinha, A.C.J - This appeal raises a question as to whether in the facts and circumstances of this case the principles of res judicata would apply as against the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner moved the writ application with the following prayers :-  "(a) A writ/order in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents, their agents, servants and/or employees not to proceed further in withholding the salaries of the petitioner since December, 1960 till to-date as an Assistant Teacher of Monosha Pukar Bansra Free Primary School under Ghutiyari Sharrif Circles, District 24 Parganas (S) and further direct them to pay his arrear salaries month by month to the petitioner without any slightest delay.
(b) A Writ/Order in the nature of Certiorari commanding the respondents to reduce (produce ?)
the entire original records relating to the services of the petitioner and all relevant connected records of the District School Board, 24 Parganas (South) and all other relevant papers as to payment of salaries up to November, 1963 and thereafter all other papers as to non-payment of salaries to the petitioner upto date for proper adjudication of real point at issue and on such production being made administer/render conscionable justice by commanding the respondents to pay all the arrear salaries and as well as regular salaries month by month to the petitioner.
(c) A writ/order in the nature of Prohibition prohibiting the respondents from exercising powers not warranted under the statute."
3.
The petitioner was appointed in Himchi Free Primary School.
Thereafter, he has been transferred to Ghutiyari FP School.
After several transfers he was ultimately posted to Mansapukur Bansra FP School.
Allegedly, the head teacher of Mansapukur Bansra FP School asked the petitioner to produce transfer order to regularise his claim transferring him from Kalidanga FP School to Mansapukur Bansra FP School but he failed to produce any such document.
He filed a Money Suit being No. 9 of 1964 in the 2nd Court of Munsif at Baripur for recovery of arrear of pay amounting to Rs. 2,16464 only for the period from November, 1960 to November 1963 from the then District School Board, 24-Parganas (South).
The said Money Suit was dismissed but an appeal preferred thereagainst was allowed and the matter was remitted back to the learned Munsif.
The suit was thereafter decreed.
An appeal was preferred thereagainst by the District School Board which was registered as Money Appeal No. 70/68.
The said Appeal was dismissed.
4.
Another Money Suit was filed by the petitioner being Money Suit No. 4/70 claiming arrears of pay from December 1963 to June 1969.
The said Suit and the appeal preferred thereagainst were dismissed.
The writ petitioner filed a Title Suit being Title Suit No. 309/74 against the teachers of Manspukur Bansra FP School and the same was also dismissed.
An appeal preferred thereagainst was dismissed.
The petitioner thereafter filed a writ petition before this Court which was marked as CR No. 12305 (W)/80 for non-payment of his salary and disallowing him to discharge his duties as an Assistant Teacher of the said School without terminating his services.
The said writ petition was dismissed by BC Ray, J (as His Lordship then was), inter alia, on the ground that there had been laches on the part of the petitioner.
An appeal was preferred against the said order by the writ petitioner which was marked as FMAT No. 265/84 but the said appeal was also dismissed by a Division Bench comprising of the Hon'ble Mr. Justice MM Dutt and Hon'ble Mr. Justice CK Banerjee by an order dated 1361984 with an observation made therein that the District School Board will consider the case of the appellant sympathetically and provide him with the employment of an Assistant Teacher in any manner, if possible.
A Special Leave Petition was filed by the writ petitioner but the same was dismissed on or about 18111985 by a Division Bench wherein Ray, J was also said to be a member.
Despite the same, the petitioner filed another writ application which was marked as CO No. 18787(W)/92.
When the writ petition was filed, despite the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 having come into force, the District Primary School Council was not impleaded as a party.
The learned Judge, inter alia, held that the writ petition is not barred by the principles of res judicata as the writ petition was dismissed only on the ground of delay.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant merely submitted that the impugned order is wholly bad in law as after dismissal of the Title Suit as also the Writ Petition in the earlier case the relief granted to the petitioner could not have been granted by the learned trial Judge.
In an elaborate judgment the learned trial Judge held that the writ petitioner was entitled to continue in service.
As regard the applicability of principles of res-judicata it was observed :-  "Consideration by the writ Court and subsequent orders against the petitioner is not a bar and the doctrine of res-judicata will not operate inasmuch as in all the Courts, the writ petition was dismissed on the ground of inordinate delay.
It would not be proper to shut out the petitioner from raising the plea in separate cause of action in the subsequent writ.
As the issue of termination of service was not considered by any Court of law and accordingly it cannot be said that the instant writ petition is not maintainable."
6.
After citing various decisions as regards the fairness in Government action it was directed :-  "In such view of the matter, I direct the respondents to allow the petitioner to resume his duties and to reinstate the petitioner in the same position.
But as the writ petitioner has attained 60 years he cannot be allowed to resume his duties in the post of Assistant Teacher.
Accordingly I direct that petitioner shall be reinstated and shall deem to be in service in the last attended school and he will be deemed to be superannuated on attaining 60 years ie 28th February 1989 from Mansapukur Bansara Free Primary School, Respondents are directed to release arrear salaries to the petitioner from December 1963 up to the date of superannuation i.e. 28th February, 1989.
Respondents are directed to regularise the service of the petitioner and he would be deemed to be in service and for the purpose of regularising the record he would be given extraordinary leave with pay.
On the peculiar facts and circumstances, petitioner shall be allowed to opt for the revised scale and such benefit shall not create any precedence.
Respondents are directed to pay arrear salary and interest @ 12% compounded annually to be calculated from 1st May, 1989.
Respondents will complete necessary exercise for releasing pension and all pensionary benefits including gratuity, provident fund and other receivable amounts and such arrears shall be released and paid by 30th June, 1998.
Competent authorities will complete all exercise for issuing PPC within 30th June, 1998.
If the respondents failed to release arrear pension by 30th June, 1998, following decision of the Apex Court reported in State of Kerala v. S Padmanavan, AIR 1985 SC 356, followed by OP Gupta v. Union of India reported in AIR 1987 SC 2257, petitioner would be entitled to interest @ 12% compounded annually from 1st May, 1989.
All the competent authorities in releasing retirement benefits shall complete this exercise within the stipulated date as directed.
Since the petitioner had been trying to get access to the justice mechanism since 1964 when a Money Suit was instituted challenging withholding the salary of the petitioner and since petitioner had to embrance protracted litigation for about 34 years till date in different forums and for about 25 years if the petitioner's tenure of service be considered up-to date of superannuation, then petitioner is entitled to relief towards arrear salary since December, 1963 up-to-the date of superannuation, i.e. 28 February, 1989 and as a consequential relief, I hold that petitioner is entitled to relief u/s 89 of the Income Tax Act read with rule 21-A of the Income Tax Rules because the arrear salary and the interest includes salary which has been in arrear for 25 years.
This view was approved by the Supreme Court of India in KC Joshi v. Union of India and others reported in AIR 1985 SC 1046 followed by Rashbehari v. Haryana Agricultural University and others reported in AIR 1987 SC 1833.
The writ petition is disposed of on the above terms.
There will be no order as to costs."
7.
From the narration of facts as noticed hereinabove it is absolutely clear that not only a Money Suit but also a Title Suit and the Writ Petition had been dismissed.
In the Money Suit the petitioner had prayed for arrears of salary which Suit could have been decreed only upon arriving at a finding of fact that he was entitled to continue in service.
8.
It is now a well settled principle of law that the principles of res judicata apply also in a writ proceedings.
Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, although in terms thereof have no application but the principles thereof apply.
Thus, principles of constructive res judicata shall also apply in a writ proceedings.
Only because, as has been held by the learned trial Judge the question as regard the petitioner's right to continue in service had not been considered, the same does not mean that the principles of res judicata would not apply in the case.
The plea taken in the subsequent writ petition by the writ petitioner ought to have been taken in the earlier writ petition as also in the Title Suit.
A plea which could and ought to have been taken and had not been taken would also attract the principles of constructive res judicata.
9.
The fact that writ petition had been dismissed on the ground of delay and laches on the part of the writ petitioner would also attract the principles of res judicata as such a question could not have been re-opened again.
10.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, however, has relied upon two decisions of the Supreme Court in Hoshnak Singh v. Union of India and others reported in AIR 1979 SC 1328 and Union of India and another v. Sher Singh and others reported in AIR 1997 SC 1796.
In Hoshnak Singh (supra) the fact of the matter was absolutely different.
In that case the cause of action for filing the writ application was found to be separate one.
The earlier writ application was dismissed by a non-speaking order.
It is well known that such non-speaking order would not attract the principles of res judicata.
However, in the instant case, the question had not only been considered in details by the writ Court but also by the appeal Court.
The said orders were speaking orders.
11.
In Hoshnak Singh (supra) it was held :-  "If after preferring an appeal or revision under the statute under which the right is claimed by the petitioner a petition under Article 226 is filed irrespective of the fact that the revision or appeal was dismissed and the original order which was challenged in the first petition had merged into the appellate or revisional order, nonetheless the second petition in the circumstances would not be barred by the principles analogous to res judicata because the cause of action is entirely different and the merger of the order cannot stand in the way of the petitioner invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226."
Such is not the petition here.
12.
In Sher Singh (supra), similar special leave application was dismissed in limine and on that ground the principles of res judicata was sought to be invoked.
In that situation it was held :  "Initially, Shri M.C.
Dhingra, learned Counsel for some of the respondents, has brought to our notice that since this Court had dismissed similar special leave petitions, this appeal does not merit consideration.
We find no force in the contention.
This Court, by then, had already granted leave in the appeal, but unfortunately, that was not brought to the notice of the respective Benches including the one presided over by one of us (K Ramaswamy, J) when the matters had come up.
As a consequence, without any speaking order some special leave petitions came to be dismissed.
In view of the settled legal position by a catena of decision of this Court that the dismissal of special leave petition without speaking order does not constitute res judicata, the question of law is at large to be gone into.
Accordingly, we reject the objection and we have heard the Counsel on both sides on merits."
Again such is not the case here.
13.
As both the Title Suit as also the Writ Petition were dismissed by speaking orders, the second writ application was not maintainable.
The learned Counsel contends that although the first Writ Petition was dismissed by BC Ray, J, he was a party to the disposal of the special leave application but in this case even if we ignore the order passed in the special leave application, the order of the Division Bench remains and, thus, it must be held that this writ application was not maintainable.
The appeal is allowed and the judgment and order is set aside.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.