KJ Sengupta, J - In this case the petitioner is erstwhile member of the Indian Army served as barber, Class-III in Group-C, he has challenged the punishment of dismissal from services on the applicability of the principles of prohibition of double jeopardy.
2.
The short fact is that the petitioner deserted unauthorisedly from his place of work.
Immediately after resumption of his duty on account of desertion he was tried by court-martial and he was awarded sentence of rigorous imprisonment for six months in civil prison.
He has served the term in its entirety.
Along with this punishment the petitioner was also dismissed from services.
3.
By the aforesaid combined order of punishment being Annexure `C' the learned lawyer appearing for the writ petitioner, submits the petitioner has been punished twice for the same misconduct.
This impugned order inflicting double punishment is wholly unconstitutional and without jurisdiction.
He argues that when he has served rigorous imprisonment there was no question of inflicting further punishment by way of dismissal and the same hits the principle of double jeopardy which is prohibited under the Constitution.
4.
Mr. Bej, learned lawyer, appearing for the Union of India, has taken preliminary point of territorial jurisdiction.
He says the entire cause of action in this application has arisen outside the territorial limit of this Court.
5.
He also urges that under the Army Act, 1950 inflicting of double punishment is permissible at the discretion of the army authority.
The petitioner being a member of the highly disciplined forces without any authority deserted his duty and regiment.
The desertion in the army is treated to be a serious offence.
While exercising discretion the Army authority thought it fit not to retain him in service as it would be a dangerous precedent and that will invite gross indiscipline amongst the army personnel.
He also draws my attention to the provision of Sections 71 and 73 of the Army Act, 1950 that authorize inflicting of double punishment.
Therefore, it cannot be said the aforesaid order is without jurisdiction.
6.
Before embarking any enquiry into other issues I am to consider the question of territorial jurisdiction.
7.
It is settled that part of cause of action if arose within the territorial limit of this court in its constitutional writ jurisdiction then the writ petition can be entertained.
The `cause of action' means as it has been reiterated in the Supreme Court judgment in case of State of Rajasthan & others v. M/s Swaika Properties & another, reported in AIR 1985 SC 1289 that every fact which, if traversed, it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to support his right to a judgment of the court.
In other words, it is a bundle of facts which taken with the law applicable to them gives the plaintiff a right to relief against the defendant.
In this case the petitioner was recruited in Calcutta within the territorial limit of this Court.
So factum of appointment is one part of the bundle of facts as unless fact of appointment is stated and proved the factum of dismissal cannot arise.
Therefore, I hold following the ratio of the Supreme Court judgment (supra) this Court has territorial jurisdiction as part of cause of action has arisen within territorial jurisdiction of this Writ Court.
8.
Now coming to the question as to whether the combined punishment of rigorous imprisonment for six months and dismissal for services are permissible or not under the law.
9.
Section 73 of the Army Act, 1950 specifically provides as follows :  "73.
Combination of punishments.
- A sentence of a court-martial may award in addition to, or without any other punishment, the punishment specified in clause (d) or clause (e) of Section 71 and any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses (f) to (i) of that section."
10.
Therefore, I am of the view under the provision of Section 73 of the Army Act, 1950 order of dismissal from services can be passed in addition to imprisonment either rigorous or simple for any period not exceeding 14 years and the same would appear from the aforesaid language of Section 73 of the said Act.
In this case the petitioner was sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment along with order of dismissal from services.
11.
The above view of mine is supported by a Division Bench judgment of the Allahabad High Court reported in AIR 1976 All.
405.
In paragraph 5 of the aforesaid judgment it has been held amongst other that court-martial had jurisdiction under Section 73 to inflict the punishment of dismissal in addition to the punishment of imprisonment for three months.
The order of summary court-martial was in accordance with the provisions of Section 73 and cannot be successfully challenged as being without jurisdiction.
12.
On the facts and in the circumstances the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.