Jawaharlal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner was employed with the Gurgaon Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Gurgaon.
He was appointed as a Clerk on February 27, 1978.
He continued in service upto July 14, 1980.
Alleging that his services had been illegally terminated in 1980, the petitioner served a notice of demand on the management on January 28, 1991.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court.
Ultimately by its award dated January 30, 1996 the Labour Court held that "the petitioner had approached the Government after a delay of 11 years and he has been unable to give any satisfactory explanation for the delay and on this account, he is not entitled to any relief.
Moreover, the management cannot be burdened with a stale claim....." Aggrieved by the award the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Sanjiv Bansal learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the Labour Court has erred in giving the impugned award.
He claims that delay could not have defeated petitioner's right.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Roop Chand, who appears for the respondent bank.
3.
It is true that the Industrial Disputes Act does not prescribe any period of limitation within which a workman has to approach the State Government for making a reference.
However, it cannot mean that an employee is entitled to wake up from his slumber at any time and raise a dispute.
In the very nature of things, the management cannot be expected to preserve the record for decades and decades.
In the instant case, the services of the petitioner had been admittedly terminated on July 14, 1980.
He had not moved his little finger till the year 1991.
There was no explanation for this inordinately long delay of 11 years.
We are not surprised that the Labour Court found no ground to overlook the delay and to grant relief to the petitioner.
4.
Mr. Sanjiv Bansal submits that according to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Limited, 1999(2) Service Cases Today 667, the High Court cannot lay down a period of limitation.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, the factual position in Ajaib Singh's case was totally different.
In that case the management had not taken any plea regarding delay.
The only plea raised was that the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute regarding the termination of services of the workman.
However, this is not the position in the present case.
Herein the management had raised an objection on delay and the Court has examined the matter.
Thus the decision in Ajaib Singh's case is clearly distinguishable.
5.
Besides the above, it may also be observed that proceedings in courts are time consuming.
Public funds are spent.
A person who sleeps over his rights for inordinately long time cannot normally claim the sympathy of the court unless he gives a satisfactory explanation for delay.
None has been given in this case.
Therefore, no interference with the view taken by the Labour Court is made out.
6.
No other point has been raised.
We find no ground to interfere.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.