RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Unsuccessful plaintiff Dhiman Singh, Ex-conductor, has filed the present appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 2281997 passed by the court of Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Amritsar, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 10.2.1986 passed by the court of Sub-Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, who dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant, for declaration.
2.
The brief facts of the case can be noticed in the following manner :-  3.
The plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for declaration praying that the orders dated 6.6.1983, passed by the defendant-respondents, terminating his services are illegal, ultra vires and cryptic.
The case of the plaintiff was that he was working as a Conductor in the Transport Department of the Local Municipal Corporation.
On 14.2.1981, when he was on duty on bus No. 2677 in between village Bhakna and Amritsar, his vehicle was checked by a flying squad comprising of Inspectors Kanwal Nain Singh, Harpal Singh, Parduman Singh and Madan Lal, near the premises of Guru Nanak Dev University.
These inspectors submitted a report that the plaintiff had charged fare from 19 passengers and he had not issued the tickets to them and that on being asked to hand over the un-punched tickets the plaintiff refused to do so and started wielding a knife and got down from the bus and ran away and while doing so, he indulged in grave mis-behaviour.
The plaintiff was allegedly found having consumed liquor.
The plaintiff although refuted all these allegations, he was charge-sheeted and an inquiry was conducted against him.
His services were, finally, terminated in an illegal manner and in total contravention of the service rules.
4.
The notice of the suit was given to the defendants which filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the defendants, a regular inquiry was conducted according to the rules and the charges against the plaintiff were proved and on the basis of this finding, a show-cause notice was issued and, finally, the plaintiff was dismissed from service.
5.
The plaintiff filed a rejoinder to the written statement in which he controverted the allegations made in the written statement by reiterating those made in the plaint.
6.
From the above pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial court :-  "1.
Whether the order of termination dated 6683 is illegal, ultra vires and wrong and liable to be set aside ?
OPP 2.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD 3.
Whether notice u/s 396 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act was necessary and the suit was bad for non-issuance of such notice ?
OPD  4.
Relief."
7.
The trial court dismissed the suit and decided the vital issues against the plaintiff.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial court, the plaintiff filed an appeal and for the reasons given in paras 7 to 10 of the judgment and decree dated 2281987, which are quoted as under, the learned Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Amritsar, dismissed the appeal :-  "7.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that as a look at page 17 of the enquiry file which has also been made a part of the record reveals the proposal to hold a probe against his client was conveyed to him along with the charge-sheet to which he was yet to submit his reply, and which obviously was to be considered thereafter authorities had already made up their minds to go ahead with the matter even without considering as to what he (plaintiff-appellant) was to say, and that this in turn goes to show, that the whole thing was conducted with a prejudiced mind and that the impugned order is liable to be set aside for this reason alone.
He further argued that the plaintiff-appellant was not examined and his statement was not recorded as envisaged by rule 188 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as Appeal Rules) and that since the statement of the passengers from whom he is said to have had charged the fare without issuing tickets to them were also not recorded by the Inspecting staff, it also cannot be said that there was any such material before the punishing authority, as could have warranted the implication (infliction ?)
of the extreme penalty of removal of service on him, and that as is discernible from the judgment under challenge, these infirmities in the impugned order have not been taken into consideration at all by him and that his verdict is, therefore liable to be reserved and set aside.
I however do not find any force or merit in any of these submissions made by the learned counsel.
8.
Adverting first to the argument that the concerned authorities had acted with a pre-determined mind and that they had decided to hold an enquiry against him even without obtaining his reply to the show-cause notice, it would be seen that it is wholly and totally mis-conceived, because a peep into the enquiry file reveals, that the reply filed by him (appellant) was duly considered not only once but twice i.e. first when he submitted and initially and then after furnishing to him the documents which he had asked for, as is borne out by the endorsement of the General Manager and the Commissioner of the Corporation dated 25.5.81 at page 37 thereof and this being so, there can absolutely be no scope for it being said that the authorities had acted in any biased order (or ?)
prejudiced manner.
9.
Similarly the contention that the provisions of the aforesaid rule 818 which requires that the Enquiry Officer shall examine the delinquent official in regard to the circumstances appearing against him in the evidence brought on the file, if he (delinquent official) does not appear as his own witness in his defence, have not been complied with is also devoid of any force, and this I say because once again a reference to page 81 of the file in mistakenably divulges, that he (plaintiff-appellant) was in fact called upon to make a statement after the recording of the evidence against him had been concluded and that it was he himself who refused to avail of this opportunity and instead stated, that he was contended (contented ?)
and satisfied with the written explanation which he had submitted earlier in reply to the charge-sheet and that he had nothing more to say and in this state of things, therefore it now certainly does not file (lie ?)
in his mouth to stage a somersault and to urge anything to the contrary and no capital can, therefore, be made out of this argument also.
10.
In so far as the submission that since the statement of the passengers from whom the money was charged without issuing tickets are not on the file there was no warrant for the punishing authority to have passed any order detrimental to the plaintiff-appellant, much less one of his removal from service itself is concerned, I feel that it is also not tenable either factually or even legally and it has also, therefore, to meet the same fate as the one discussed in the proceeding paragraphs.
It is true that it would have been more appropriate and more desirable a thing for the concerned officials of the Flying Squad which had conducted the raid on the bus of the plaintiff-appellant to have questioned the passengers concerned and to have taken down their statements in writing but even so, the omission on their part in this regard cannot be taken to have vitiated the whole thing much less, to warrant the discarding of the entire proceedings, and in my opinion the effect of such a thing having had not been done has to be assessed and evaluated in the facts and the circumstances of each individual case.
My attention was drawn by the learned counsel for the appellant to a decision of our own High Court in a case of State of Haryana v. Mohan Singh, reported as 1985(2) SLR 116 wherein while being seized of an exactly a similar matter, it was held that the omission to examine the passengers in a matter like this is to be viewed seriously and it was urged that he (appellant) also, therefore, deserves to be let off on the analogy of the principle thus laid down.
I however do not agree with the learned counsel because whereas in the cited case the action against the employee concerned was taken on the solitary statement of an Inspector who had checked the bus, and as a reading of the observations made therein makes it abundantly clear, that it was for this reason alone that the evidence was not found to be sufficient enough to indict him, in the one before, the material against the plaintiff-appellant comprises of the testimonies of four Inspectors, and which as is evident from the file, have remained beyond the pale of any meaningful criticism, and that being so, no benefit i.e. in the cited case and all these circumstances, therefore, I do not find any force in this appeal and it is, therefore dismissed......" 8.
The plaintiff is still not satisfied with the impugned judgment and decree.
Hence, the present appeal.
9.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and also gone through the written arguments submitted by the counsel for the appellant.
10.
Counsel for the appellant submitted that neither the statements of the passengers were recorded by the Inquiry Officer nor he found out whether the plaintiff issued the tickets to them against consideration or not and in the absence of the statements of the passengers, it remains a case of no evidence.
The entire charge has been proved on the basis of a hearsay evidence, which is not admissible.
It was also submitted by the counsel for the appellant that u/s 112 of the Motor Vehicles Act, passengers were supposed to possess tickets while travelling otherwise they were liable to be fined.
The Conductor issued the tickets to the passengers and if they did not show the tickets to the Checking Staff, there can be no fault with the plaintiff.
It was also submitted by the counsel for the appellant that one of the Inspectors of the flying squad has not been examined by the department in a proper manner and this aspect of the case has also been admitted by the first appellate court and, therefore, the order dismissing the services of the plaintiff is bad.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that it is a case of regular inquiry and it is proved as per the findings of the Inquiry Officer that the plaintiff embezzled the amount when he did not issue the tickets to the passengers.
Even if the statement of the passengers is not recorded during the course of inquiry proceedings, still there is statement of three inspectors who have proved the allegations of the department.
A very strict proof of evidence is not required.
These Inspectors had no axe to grind against the plaintiff.
Those Inspectors interrogated the passengers who deposed that though they had paid the money, they were not issued with the tickets.
In these circumstances, the appeal of the plaintiff should be dismissed.
12.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that this appeal is totally devoid of any merit.
It was not obligatory on the part of the Department to examine the passengers before the Inquiry Officer.
The Department examined the Inspectors who deposed against the plaintiff.
The civil court cannot sit as a court of appeal over the decision of the punishing authority and the plaintiff can succeed if there is violation of statutory rules or principles of natural justice.
The Department examined Madan lal, Inspector, as DW-1, who has supported the charge.
It also examined Inspectors Parduman Singh and Harpal Singh, who were members of the flying squad and who corroborated the statement of DW-1.
The statement of these three witnesses were enough to prove a particular fact.
The record of the inquiry also shows that the plaintiff was afforded full opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses.
The plaintiff even examined Rattan Singh in defence and, then, closed his evidence.
He was given opportunity to give reply to the show-cause notice.
He submitted his reply to the show-cause notice and, thereafter, the impugned order was passed, after giving an opportunity to the plaintiff to appear in person.
He was even heard personally.
The impugned order has been passed after due application of mind.
There was a serious charge that the plaintiff embezzled a sum of Rs. 1960 when he did not issue the tickets to 19 passengers after collecting the money and he refused to hand over the unpunched tickets to the checking staff and further he was found under the influence of liquor and so much so, he mis-behaved with the checking staff and ran away from the bus.
The civil court cannot sit over the final action taken up by the authorities.
The departmental authorities are not supposed to prove the charge like a criminal charge.
Even if there is a case of some evidence against a delinquent employee, still action can be taken.
It is true that u/s 112 of the Motor Vehicles Act, a passenger is supposed to keep a ticket but if the ticket has not been supplied to the passenger and the money is devoured by the official, and there is a certification to that effect before the members of the flying squad, it becomes a misconduct on the part of the delinquent official.
13.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this appeal and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.