RL Anand, J - Piara Singh file a suit for declaration alleging that he was selected as LVO/Supervisor by the Primary Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank, Patiala, and was working at Samana with the Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank, Samana, as LVO/Supervisor.
The Land Mortgage Banks are the subsidiary and are affiliated to defendant No. 1-Punjab State Land Cooperative Mortgage Bank and its services and controlled by the defendants.
Defendant No. 1-Bank was established and constituted under the Punjab State Cooperative Land Mortgage Banks Act.
The Bank for this purpose is a statutory body and is a State for the purpose of Constitution.
The defendant No. 1 is wholly controlled and administered by the State of Punjab and the whole money and funds are invested by the State.
The defendants have adopted the CSR (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
It was further submitted by the plaintiff that while he was on deputation with the defendant-Bank, his services were always appreciated and there was no adverse report.
Further, he was placed under suspension vide order dated 1511982 by the Managing Director of defendant No. 1 and according to the plaintiff the said order was illegal and without jurisdiction.
He was also served with a charge sheet on 1121982.
He submitted the reply to the chargsheet on 531982.
Inquiry Officer was appointed on 2531982.
Finally, the findings of the Inquiry Officer went against him, who proposed stoppage of five annual increments with cumulative effect.
The findings of the Inquiry Officer are illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and without jurisdiction.
With the above broad allegations, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration challenging the proposed punishment of stoppage of five increments.
2.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants who filed the reply and stated that the suit of the plaintiff for declaration is not legally maintainable as no legal right of the plaintiff has been infringed.
The Primary Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank and the State Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank are not statutory bodies.
They are co-operatives societies registered under the Co-operative Societies Act and, as such, the relations of the employee of a co-operative society is that of a servant and a master and the plaintiff is not entitled to enforce his right in the Court for specific purpose against the defendants.
The punishment was awarded to the plaintiff after giving full opportunity of being heard.
The plaintiff did not give any notice before filing the suit.
3.
The plaintiff filed a rejoinder to the written statement of the defendants in which he reiterated his allegations made in the plaint by denying those of the written statement and from the above pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  "(1) Whether the order dated 2581983 passed by the defendants is illegal, null and void etc. as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
(2) Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD.
(3) Whether this Court has got no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD.
(4) Whether the written statement has been signed and verified by duly authorised person ?
OPD.
(5) Whether the defendants have passed resolution to defend the suit ?
OPD.
(6) Relief."
4.
Issues No. 2 and 3 were treated preliminary and for the reasons given in the judgment and decree dated 721987, the learned Sub Judge Ist Class, Patiala, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff holding that the civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit because the plaintiff had not given any notice u/s 82 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act and, secondly, the suit of the plaintiff is not legally maintainable.
In para 8 of the judgment, the trial Court held that before an institution can be considered a statutory body, it should owe its creation and existence to a statute.
There is a clear distinction between the institution created by a statute and an institution governed by a statute for the proper maintenance and administration of the institution.
The institution must owe its very existence to a statute which would be the fountain head of its power.
It means that without that statute the institution would have no legal existence."
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff filed the first appeal before the first appellate Court, who accepted the appeal and set aside the order of the learned trial Court, for the reasons given in paras 5 to 7 of the order, which read as under :-  "5.
As is obvious, the question as to whether the Bank is a statutory body or a State within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution, is mixed question of law and fact and could not have been decided without affording an opportunity to the plaintiff to lead evidence in support of his assertion that it is financed and controlled by the State Govt. Reliance was sought to be placed on the Full Bench decision of our own High Court in Pritam Singh Gill v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1982 P&H 228, to support the contention that the defendant Bank is not a `State' or `Authority' within the meaning of Art. 12.
6.
It was rightly urged by the learned counsel for the appellant firstly that the said Full Bench decision is under challenge before the Supreme Court and besides, the common cadre rules which have been applicable to the employees of the Bank were enacted subsequent to the said decision and that the rules being statutory have a material bearing on the question.
The infringement of the statutory rules would give cause of action to employees governed by it to challenge any order affecting them adversely.
The Judgment of the Hon'ble Mr. Justice DV Sehgal in CWP No. 3969 of 1984 dated 26.8.1986 supports the said view.
7.
Secondly, as is evident from the reference to the judgment in Pritam Singh Gill's case, the evidence was lacking to show that the State exercised effective control over the Bank to make it in instrumentality of the State.
Manifestly, there is no legal bar to such control being extended subsequently by the State Govt. and indeed, the plaintiff has pleaded about the Bank being financed and controlled by the State Govt.
He has, therefore, to be given an opportunity to prove his said assertion."
6.
The first appellate Court remanded the case to the trial Court for a fresh decision on merits after affording opportunity to both the parties to adduce evidence in support of their respective pleas except the one covered by issue No. 3.
This time the Bank was aggrieved by the order of the first appellate authority and hence the present appeal.
7.
I have heared Mr. DV Sharma, Advocate, on behalf of the appellant.
Nobody has given the appearance on behalf of the respondent.
8.
Though the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Bank is not a corporate body and, as such, the suit of the plaintiff was not legally maintainable against the Bank and, moreover, the plaintiff did not issue any notice u/s 82 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, but I do not find any merit in the contentions of the learned counsel in view of the provisions of Sections 30 and 82 of the Act.
However, I do not want to give any finding on the merits lest it may prejudice the case of the bank but suffice to say on my part that the orders of the trial Court as well as the first appellate Court are hereby set aside and directions are given to the trial Court to re-admit the suit to its original number and decide all the issues on merits without treating issues No. 2 and 3 as preliminary.
9.
In this view of the matter, the present appeal stands disposed of with the directions to the trial Court to re-admit the suit to its original number and after giving notice to both the parties, to dispose of the suit according to law and give findings on all the issues which were framed in the suit.
10.
The parties through counsel are directed to appear before the trial Court on 20.9.1999.
11.
Let a copy of this order be sent to Distt.
Judge, Patiala for compliance.
Appeal disposed of.