Bhawani Singh, C.J.
(Oral) - This group of eleven Appeals (LPA No. 300/1997, Ghulam Ahmad Paul v. State of Jammu and Kashmir & others, LPA No. 292/1997, Gh.
Nabi Shah v. State of Jammu and Kashmir; LPA No. 293/1997, Mohammad Amin v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 294/1997, Bashir Ahmad v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 295/1997, Abdul Hamid Naik v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 296/1997, Mohammad Tayoob v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 297/1997, Shamraz Ahmad Khan v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 298/1997, Ct. Mohammad Yousuf v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 299/1997, Gh.
Mohammad Wani v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others; LPA No. 301/1997, Gh.
Mohammad v State of Jammu and Kashmir and others and LPA No. 302/1997, Gh.
Mohi-ud-Din v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others) is proposed to be decided by common Judgment, since they arise out of the same Judgment of single Judge dated July 15, 1997.
Before adverting to the question involved for determination in these cases, desirability would be to narrate essential facts of the case.
2.
Petitioners were Constables, Sg.
Constables and Head Constables in the Police Department.
While on guard duty at Yaripora Bridge, militants appeared and damages the Bridge during night intervening 30/31 March, 1994.
Consequently, the petitioners were charged of negligence.
Petitioners submit that they did their best to save the Bridge, in the process, they fired 437 rounds of ammunition, besides reporting the matter to the Police at Anantnag on March 31, 1994.
However, respondent-3 directed respondent-4 to dismiss the petitioners from service.
Before that, they were suspended on April 1, 1994 and directed to remain available at the Office of District Police, Anantnag to face the enquiry.
Ultimately, they were discharged from service in exercise of power under Section 126 of J&K Constitution (corresponding to Article 311 of the Constitution of India).
3.
Petitioners challenged the termination order inter-alia on the ground that the same suffers from non-application of mind, passed at the instance of respondent-3 and that the same did not indicate the relevant provisions under which the power was exercised nor there was any justification for dispensing with the enquiry against them.
Respondent asserted that Order was passed under Section 126(2)(b) of the State Constitution for valid reasons.
Petitioners were assigned the duty to guard the Bridge which was life-line for the people of the far-flung area.
They failed to discharge the duty.
It is also contended that it was not practicable to hold the enquiry against them, since no person would be willing to give statement against Police personnel for fear of reprisal by militants nor would any civil witness be available to depose against the militants, who could not possibly be identified.
Further, initation of normal departmental enquiry would result in delay which in turn would promote negligence and dereliction of duty in the Police Force.
4.
Matter was considered by Single Judge and it was held that petitioners were members of the Civil Service of the State.
They could not be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank by authority subordinate to the appointing authority and without holding enquiry in which they are to be informed of the charges against them and to be afforded reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of such charges.
For making deviation from the normal course and for dispensing with the enquiry on the grounds of impracticability, competent authority is required to record reasons and failure to do so would invalidate the decision so taken, Learned Judge held.
Dealing further with the question, Single Judge also said that Governor's satisfaction with respect to inexpediency of holding the enquiry in the interest of security of the State must be based on some material, which should be relevant and not frivolous, as held by the Supreme Court in AIR 1985 SC 1416, Union of India and another v. Tulsiram Patel; AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC), Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others; AIR 1995 SC 1403 : 1995(3) SCT 15 (SC), AK Kaul and another v. Union of India and another; and 1995 SLJ 19, Nazir Ahmad Dar v. State and others.
Ultimately, after dealing with the principles, which are necessary to be seen by authority while exercising this power, learned Single Judge found the action not to be in consonance with the provisions of law and quashed the same.
Before coming to this conclusion, it said in para 13 that :  "13.
Tested thus, none of the reasons stated in the impugned order in the present case stand scrutiny and cannot be said to have any nexus with doing away with the inquiry.
For instance it is not a good reason to say that holding of inquiry would result in delay and in turn encourage negligence and dereliction of duty in the police force.
An inquiry may take sometime but it cannot be discarded for that to take away a constitutional right and moreover it is for the authority concerned to ensure expeditious conduct of inquiry and to eliminate the scope for delay."
Further, in para 14, the Court said that :  "14.
Similarly, it is again a matter of conjecture that no civil witness would depose against the police personnel.
Firstly, it was not known whether any witness was required to be examined and then how could his willingness or otherwise to depose be anticipated.
A witness may even be willing to incur risk and come forward to depose.
Therefor, non-availability of witness can not be suggested as a possible circumstance to do away with the inquiry.
This does not suggest that the authority is handicapped in projecting a good circumstance.
All that is required to be explained is that the authority must disclose a valid basis as distinct from his/her imaginary exercise or brain wave, to take away the constitutional safeguard of inquiry."
Again, in para 14, the Court said that :  "14.
In the circumstances, it is difficult to hold that respondent No. 5 had valid reasons for dispensing with the inquiry.
It appears that he was not even conscious of the nature of the power exercised by him."
Finally, in para 16, the Learned Judge concluded that :  "16.........The impugned Order Nos. 277 and 36 of 1994 dated 1141994 shall stand quashed.
But it shall be open to respondents to decide to reinstate petitioners in service and to place them under suspension with a view to subject them to a departmental inquiry, if any intended, into the charges/allegations against them in accordance with law and rules.
This is in tune with a view taken by a Division Bench of this court in Rias Ahmad Gazi v. State, 1997 SLJ 178.
Any such inquiry initiated shall be concluded within six months from the date of receipt of this order.
If petitioners succeed in it and come out unscathed or where no inquiry is held, they shall be reinstated in service retrospectively though without any pecuniary benefits.
But if they are again found in the dock, respondents shall be free to take appropriate diciplinary action against them under rules which may even involve their removal from service."
Respondents have not filed any Appeal against this Judgment.
Present Appeal is at the instance of the petitioners questioning the legality, propriety and reasonableness of the Judgment only to the extent that if the petitioners succeed in it and come out unscathed and where no inquiry is held, they shall be reinstated in service retrospectively though without any pecuniary benefits.
But if they are found in the dock, respondents shall be free to take appropriate disciplinary action against them under rules which may even involve their removal from service.
Grievance of petitioner is that on reinstatment after exoneration in the inquiry, if any, held or if no inquiry is held, in both cases, they are entitled to full back wages.
Shri G.A.
Lone, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, contended that respondent had no material indicating the negligence or dereliction of duty by the petitioners.
Holding of inquiry in such a case was neither desirable at the initial stage nor after the decision, which is clear from the Order No. 618 of 1997 dated August 16, 1997 passed by Superintendent of Police, District Anantnag.
Paras 5 and 6 of this Order say that :  "5.
Whereas the petitioners were discharged from service without holding any departmental enquiry under Section 126 of J&K Constitution for the elaborate reasons given in the discharge orders.
The same phenomena subsits at present also.
Therefore conducting the departmental enquiry at this belated stage will be (sheer) wastage of precious time of the Enquiry Officer in absence of any documentary or oral evidence against the petitioners."
"6.
Now, therefore, in compliance of the directions of the Hon'ble High Court the petitioners are ordered to be re-instated in service retrospectively with effect from 11-04-1994, the date of their discharge from service without any pecuniary benefits as ordered by the court."
With a view to bring home the contention, Shri G.A.
Lone relies on Articles 108-B(ii) of J&K Civil Services Regulations (Volume-I), which envisages that :  "108-B(ii) : Where the authority mentioned in sub-rule (i) is of opinion that the Government servant has been fully exonerated or in the case of suspension, that it was wholly unjustified the Government servant shall be given the full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled had he not been dismissed, removed compulsorily, retired before attaining the age of superannuation or suspended, as the case may be.
The period of absence from duty shall be treated as period spent on duty."
Reference to number of decisions is also made and some of the decisions are : The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda and others v. RS Thakar, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 2112; Om Prakash Goel v. The Himachal Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation Ltd, Shimla and another, 1991(2) SCT 534 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1490; and Dipti Prakash Banerjee v. Satvendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and others, AIR 1999 Supreme Court 983 : 1999(1) SCT 861 (SC).
6.
Adverting to the facts of the case(s), we find that Superintendent of Police, District Anantnag has plainly stated that Government has no documentary or oral evidence against the petitioners.
This means, allegation of negligence foisted on the petitioners by the respondents was baseless and their removal from service was without justification.
Respondents, therefore, prevented the petitioners from performing their duties and the petitioners cannot be subjected to pecuniary loss for this period.
But for the direction by Single Judge, Respondents would have allowed them full back wages as is clear from the order passed by Superintendent of Police, District Anantnag.
Apart from the decisions referred to above, provisions of Article 108-B(ii) (supra) are also available to the petitioners for claiming full pay and allowances.
7.
Consequently, these Appeals are allowed, impugned Judgment debarring the petitioners from claiming pecuniary benefits is set aside.
As a result Order No. 618 of 1997 dated August 16, 1997 shall also stand modified to that extent and the petitioners shall be paid full pay and allowances for the period they have been deprived of the same.
Cost on parties.
Appeal allowed.