P Shanmugam, J - In all these writ petitions, the revised norms of rural reservation is under challenge.
Based on the recommendation of a High Level Committee that because of locational advantage with regard to schools, coaching for entrance examination etc., rural students were in a disadvantageous position, and that in order to help the bright students of rural areas, a reservation of 15% of seats in professional courses to rural students subject to usual communal reservation was suggested.
The said recommendation was accepted and the Government issued order in GOMs.
No. 261, Higher Education Department dated 1251997, reserving 15% of the seats in Engineering Colleges and in GOMs.
No. 600, Health and Family Welfare Department dated 5121997, in Medical and Dental Colleges to rural students.
The Government Orders were upheld by the Division Bench of this Court in Navarasam Matriculation Higher Secondary P.T.A.
v. State, 1998(II) C.T.C.
129.
2.
While the matter stood thus, on the basis of certain complaints from representatives of the public, parent- teacher associations, journalists and writings in editorial columns and reports, the Government had to reconsider the norms adopted for the allotment of 15% seats.
The main objection was that self-financing matriculation schools situated in rural areas adjoining the urban areas are the maximum beneficiaries earmarked for this category.
Consequently, the real rural students to whom the benefit was intended are deprived of this concession.
After further deliberation of this issue headed by the Hononrable Minister for Education and other officials, it was decided that this concession should not be made applicable to schools which collected tuition fees from the students, and also restricted this concession to Government Higher Secondary Schools, Aided Higher Secondary Schools and Schools run by Adi Dravidar Tribal Welfare Department, Backward Classes Department and Reformatory Schools which are located in village panchayats.
On the basis of these guidelines, a list was prepared and approved.
This policy decision of the Government was made into an order in GOMs.
No. 209, Higher Education Department dated 7.5.1999 and GOMs.
No. 232, Health and Family Welfare Department dated 161999.
Three of these writ petitions challenge these Government Orders and two other writ petitions seek for a mandamus to direct the Government to consider their applications based on the earlier orders and include the schools wherein the petitioners studied under 15% reservation, and for a declaration that giving the benefit of rural reservation to students who studied in private schools is discriminatory.
3.
On behalf of the first respondent, the Deputy Secretary to Government has filed a counter affidavit.
It is pleaded in the counter that the decision was taken after considering complaints and suggestions and based on the Note of the Honourable Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu in his Budget Speech directing the Government to take necessary steps to ensure that the entire benefit must go to the real rural students.
Thus, the Government had taken a policy decision to exclude the schools collecting tuition fees and include the Government and Aided Higher Secondary Schools only under the rural reservation.
It is stated that even in Government Schools, for English Medium classes, a nominal fees of Rs. 30 collected.
But the above schools belong to the weaker sections of the society.
They cannot be equated or treated as equal to those schools located in rural areas, but who are collecting a substantial amount of tuition fees.
The object sought to be achieved is to help the rural students who are in a disadvantageous position than the others who study in the fees levying schools.
The impugned Government Orders were passed only in order to rectify the anomaly and to benefit genuine rural students.
4.
Learned senior counsel Mr. R Muthukumaraswamy, who led the arguments on behalf of the petitioners, submitted that the object of the Government from the inception of this scheme is to assist the students who are in locational disadvantageous position.
Once they are classified as such, there cannot be a further classification.
The Division Bench had upheld the Government Order holding that students going to two schools hailing from rural areas cannot get the benefit, the object being that the students from the rural areas should be given the concession.
Therefore, once the schools are in the rural setup, those schools and the students studying in those schools cannot be denied on the ground of collection of fees.
According to him, the students have no alternative but to attend the fees levying schools located in their villages and therefore, for no fault of theirs they should not be denied of the benefits of concession.
5.
Learned counsel Mr. MM Sundaresh submitted that the classification of the schools based on tuition fee is nothing but bringing in economic criteria alone, which cannot be sustained under Article (sic) of the Constitution of India.
6.
Learned counsel Mr. STS Murthy submitted that the Government is the authority to prescribe the qualifications for the teachers and the syllabus for the curriculum.
Consequently, all the students are equally placed.
Hence, there cannot be a discrimination only on the ground of attending the schools which are levying fees.
He submitted that there are not enough Government or Aided Schools in their rural areas and hence they are compelled to attend self-financing schools.
Therefore, the students cannot be denied of their benefits.
7.
Mr. Abdul Nazeer, appearing for one of the petitioners submitted that the students had undertaken the study at the time of joining in the hope that the school will be included in the list of rural schools.
As a matter of fact, the District Collector has recommended their school to be included.
However, on the basis of the Government Order since the school is a fees collecting matriculation schools, the benefits of rural reservation is not given.
This violates the principles of legitimate expectation and promissory estoppel.
8.
Learned Additional Advocate General, meeting the various points, submitted that after looking into the working of the earlier Government Orders, the circumstances indicated that many of the schools in rural areas are having facilities similar to those of urban schools.
The object of the Government Order was that the students who are deprived of infrastructure facilities, assistance and guidance should be given the concession.
On the contrary, it was brought to their notice that there are schools in the rural areas which are having the same facilities to those or urban schools which may not require reservation.
If those students are also permitted to avail of the reservation, it will be depriving the real rural students of the benefits of concession and treating the unequals as equals.
9.
Learned Additional Advocate General further submitted that this provision is a concession and the Government is competent to correctly identify the beneficiaries.
They found that the benefit did not go to whom it was really intended.
The concession is not a right and the same cannot be given to a person unless he is within the norms prescribed by the Government for that purpose.
The benefit should go to the students and not to the schools.
The Government took a policy decision that students who are studying in fees levying schools are in an advantageous position similar to that of urban schools, whereas students who are studying in Government Aided Schools did not have the same facilities and hence the said criteria was adopted.
10.
I have heard the counsel for the petitioners and learned Additional Advocate General and considered the matter carefully.
11.
The reservation of 15% seats to rural students as such is not objected to and the power of the Government in making reservation is not questioned.
All the petitioners want is that reservation should be extended to them and not just restricted to fees levying schools only.
12.
From the records made available by the Government, it is seen that in so far as Erode District is concerned, there was a detailed representation by 22 parent-teacher associations of different schools requesting the extension of the benefit of reservation to schools located in town panchayats.
In that representation, it is alleged that the benefit of rural reservations is cornered by few Matriculations Higher Secondary Schools located on the periphery of the municipal limits, but which are part of village panchayats, and they have also stated that 90% of the benefit did not reach the real village students.
13.
A write-up in "The Hindu" dated 1981998 drew the attention of the Government that the scheme helped not the real rural students.
If further added that instead of the less privileged students which the Government targeted, many of the beneficiaries were from upmarket schools which just happened to be in rural areas.
When the Government policy was to provide a level playing field for students from rural areas, as they constituted only 4% of the total admissions to professional courses, when the policy was put into practice, the "posh" neighbourhoods snatched the bulk of the benefit that should have reached the real rural students.
The report went on to say the academic experts say that if the defects are not rectified at the earliest, it would result in yet another flawed reservation policy and subversion of attempts to help the under privileged.
It also suggested that a criteria based on fees can be made to filter the unwanted out.
"Dinamalai", in their write-up dated 4101998 also pleaded that the benefit of reservation should go to the really rural poor students.
Many of village schools did not have proper buildings or sufficient teachers.
Science subjects were being taken by History teachers in those schools.
Whereas, the private schools adjoining the towns, but which happened to be situated in the village, were having sufficient facility equal to that of urban schools.
It was pointed out that the benefit available to I standard students in those schools were not available even to Plius Two Students in the rural schools.
Therefore, the write-up pleaded that the 15% reservation should go to students who are studying without even a black board and proper seating facility.
"Dinamani", in their editorial dated 1531998, supported the proposal of the Government that the facility should be given to the students who are studying in schools not levying fees.
In a Note submitted by Ramanujam Computer Centre of Anna University on the reservation for candidates hailing from rural school, it is stated that the criteria is not only the economy, but also the exposure of candidates to opportunities in education, general knowledge, coaching centres, school facilities and infrastructure etc.
If all these factors are taken into account, them, only the rural students alone deserve help and concession.
But, among these schools which are in the rural areas, schools with good infrasturctural facilities and exposure alone attract students, but with sizable amounts as tuition fees.
The students who have to be given concession and a helping hand are only those who hail from rural areas and who cannot, not only afford paying hefty tuition fees, but also miss, other than classroom, opportunities available to urban boys and girls.
The professor concluded as follows :  "Taking all the pros and cons and factors for and against, it may be safely concluded that the reservation for rural school candidates can be made available only to the students of schools in village panchayat limits and also not charging any tuition fees from the candidates.
The Government may delete from the list of rural schools, those schools which collect tuition fees from the students.
14.
After considering these various representations, reports and evaluation of experts in the field, a meeting was convened under the head of the Hononrable Minister for Education on 19499.
They have decided that in order to provide the benefits to the rural students, the students studying in schools which are run by the Ali Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Department, Backward Classes Department and Reformatory Schools which are located in village panchayats alone are eligible for 15% rural reservation.
It was also decided that the concession should not be made applicable to schools which collected tuition fees from the students.
Thus, the only criteria in the earlier Government Order, that students who have studied in XI and XII standards in the Higher Secondary Schools located in village panchayats, is further modified and a condition added to the effect that those schools which are levying tuition fees, though located in village panchayats, are to be excluded.
The exclusion is based on the conclusion that certain Matriculation and Higher Secondary Schools, though located in village Panchayats, are having sufficient facility equal to that of an urban school, and consequently they are liable to corner 90% of the seats made available to the real rural students.
In other words, the object of the rural reservation to provide a level playing field and to extend a helping to the students studying without sufficient facilities was defeated and they were deprived of it by certain schools, though located in village areas, but did not have the deficiencies or disadvantages which required the reservation.
After considering all the pros and cons and the reasons to set right the anomaly, the Government thought levying fees can be taken as a criteria for the purpose of excluding those schools.
It is not the economic criteria that is adopted.
It is only a factor to identify the quality of the particular school.
Thereby, the Government object is sought to be achieved.
15.
The basic formulation of reservation is to make the rural students equal with the urban students.
In other words, the rural students suffer a handicap of lack of facilities in the form if insufficient teaching, coaching and other facilities.
The schools which levy tuition fees, though located in the rural areas, if they provide equal facilities etc., to those of urban school, they have to be excluded from the reservations category, or else it will lead to a discrimination against the really rural poor students.
The Government, after considering all the materials, have decided that the Government Schools and Aided Schools and Schools of the Department of the Government are only eligible for this concession.
Similarly, they found out that certain schools which are able to corner 90% of the 15% reservation are fees levying schools with all the facilities of a modern school of a town, may not require a reservation.
Any benefit to them also would really deprive the really poor rural students.
16.
The instances were pointed out in the newspaper reports as follows :  "For example, 36 students got admission into the MBBS Course from just two schools at Thindal, Erode with one school accounting for 24 seats.
Out of the 24 seats, 9 came under the rural quota.
In the case of other schools, 7 students got admission because of "rural cover"... A study of the admission list indicates that the bulk of the seats are cornered by upmarket schools with the real students getting sparse representation.
One school in Enammaniyachi has sent 9 students, while another in Sogathur, Dharmapuri has sent 8 students.
In the former, 4 students came under rural category, while in the latter, the rural advantage came to the help of 3."
Thus, on factual analysis, it was found that there was an anamoly in the granting of concession to rural students without regard to the object for which the benefit was intended, namely to provide a level playing field and to offset the lack of facilities in the rural school.
This is sought to be rectified by identifying the schools which are having equal infrastructure facilities.
One such criteria adopted for that identification is the fee levying norm.
The Government found that these self-financing school are equally well placed and are comparable to those of urban school.
The fees that are levied also cannot be compared to the normal fees of Rs. 30 for the English Medium Section in Government Higher Secondary Schools.
17.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, in support of their contention that students who are paying tuition fees cannot be discriminated, relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 477 : 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) wherein it was held that if some of the members are far too advance socially (which in the context necessarily means economically and may also mean educational), the connecting thread between them and the remaining class snaps.
They would be misfits in the class .
After excluding them alone would the class be compact class.
In fact, such exclusion benefits the truly backward.
The said reference actually may not support the case of the petitioners.
Even though this is not reservation under Article 15(4) of the Constitution, the principle being that if some of the members of the same class namely rural students are too advanced from that of rural students, they would be misfits in that class.
After excluding them alone there would be a compact class of rural students.
In Deepak Sibal v. Panjab University, AIR 1989 SC 903, the Supreme Court held that it is true that a classification need not be made with mathematical precision, but if there be little or no difference between the persons or things which have been grouped together and those left out of that group, in that case, the classification cannot be said to be a reasonable one.
The Supreme Court held that the University cannot restrict the admission to evening classes if the object is to accommodate employees in general including the private employees who are unable to attend morning classes.
The test is whether the employees of the private establishments are equally in a disadvantageous position in attending morning classes.
There can be no doubt that both of them stand on an equal footing and there is no difference between these two classes of employees.
To exclude the employees of private establishments will not therefore, satisfy the test of intelligible differentia.
This decision may not apply to the facts of this case.
It cannot be stated that the students of fees levying schools and the students of schools not levying fees as also the Government and Aided Schools are in the same disadvantageous position as the rural students.
It has been found, as a matter of fact, that they form a different class and the object being to help the rural students, the Government Order wanted to achieve the object to help the real rural student.
18.
Per contra, the learned Additional Advocate General referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Bombay v. FN Balsara, AIR 1951 SC 318, wherein the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court had taken the view that relaxation of the rule in favour of Armed Forces as a class is not unreasonable and there is nothing wrong prima facie in the legislature according special treatment to persons who form a class themselves in many respects.
In Ameerunisa v. Mahboob Begum, AIR 1953 SC 91, another Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that a legislature must, of necessity, have the power of making special laws to attain particular objects and must have larger powers of selection or classification of persons and things upon which such laws are to operate.
Mere differentiation or inequality of treatment does not per se amount to discrimination and it is necessary to show that the selection or differentiation is unreasonable or arbitrary and that it does not rest on any rational basis having regard to the object which the legislature has in view.
It was further held that it is well settled that a legislature which has to deal with diverse problems arising out of infinite value of human definitions, must have the power of making special laws to obtain particular objects : and for that purpose it must have large powers of selection and classification of persons and things upon which such laws are to operate.
The Constitution Bench also held that in judging reasonableness of the classification, the court has undoubtedly to look into the social, political and economic interest of the community as a whole.
Applying the said principle, learned Additional Advocate General submitted that the decision is made on a rational basis having regard to the object and therefore, there is no unreasonableness in the classification.
19.
In Jagdish Saran v. Union of India, AIR 1980 SC 820, their Lordships of the Supreme Court, in reference to the scope and applicability of Article 14 in admission to educational institutions, observed as follows :  "Constitutional equality itself is dynamic, flexible and moulded by the variables of life.
For instance, if a region is educationally backward or woefully deficient in medical sciences, there occurs serious educational and medical service disparity for that human region, it must be redressed by an equality and service-minded welfare State.
The purpose of such a policy is to remove the existing inequality and to promote welfare based equality for the denizens for the backward regions.
The specific strategy to ameliorate the unequal societal condition is left to the State, provided it is feared to producing equality in the quality of life of that handicapped area subject, of course, to basic recognition of individual quality and criteria of efficiency.
Their Lordships further held that if the State finds that only students from backward region who are given medical education care to serve that area, drawn towards it by sense of belonging and whereas those from outside will, on graduation, leave for cities or their own region, it may evolve a policy of reference for reservation of students of that University.
Such measures may be constitutionalised even by Articles 14 and 15.
In Katra Education Society v. State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 1307, the Supreme Court held that exemption granted to recognised educational institutions maintained by the State and the Central Government from operation of certain specified provision has prima facie justifiable classification between privately managed educational institutions and those maintained by State Governments.
To claim protections of Article 14, it must be shown that persons differently treated are similarly situated and discrimination is made with uneven hand.
In Reserve Bank of India v. EN Sahasranamam, AIR 1986 SC 1830, the Supreme Court held, in reference to service rules, that there cannot be any service rule which would satisfy each and ever employee and its constitutionality has to be judged by considering whether it is fair, reasonable and does justice to the majority of employees and fortunes of some individuals is not the touchstone.
In some areas, the chances of promotion occur more often, but that is fortuitous and would not really affect the question and violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The justice of the case should be judged in conjunction with the other factors.
Therefore, the contention that in some villages there are no Government Schools or Aided Schools and therefore the fees levying schools should be treated as rural area schools cannot be accepted.
20.
On the question of legitimate expectation, the Supreme Court, in Food Corporation of India v. Kamadhenu Cattle Feed Industries, 1983(1) SCC.
71, held that the question whether expectation of a claimant is legitimate in the context of facts in each case.
Whenever the question arises, it has to be determined not according to the claimants perception, but in larger public interest wherein other more important considerations may outweigh what would otherwise have been legitimate expectation of the claimant.
The bona fide decision of the public authority reached in this manner will satisfy the requirement of non-arbitrariness and withstand judicial scrutiny.
The doctrine of legitimate expectation gets assimilated in the rule of law and operates in our legal system in the manner and to this extent.
In Kasinga Trading v. Union of India, 1995(1) SCC.
274, the Supreme Court held that the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be invoked in the abstract and the courts are bound to consider all aspects including the results sought to be achieved and the public good at large, because while considering the applicability of doctrine, the courts have to do equity and the fundamental principles of equity must forever be present on the mind of courts while considering the applicability of the doctrine.
The doctrine must yield when the equity so demands without which it can be shown having regard to the facts and circumstances of case, that it would be inequitable to hold the Government or the public authority to its promise, assurance or representation.
In Navjyoti Co-operative Group Housing Society v Union of India, 1993(1) RRR 127 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC.
477, the Supreme Court held that existence of "legitimate expectation" may have a number of different consequences and one such consequences is that the authority ought not to act to defeat the legitimate expecting without some overriding reason of public policy to justify it doing so.
In State of HP v. Ganesh Wood Products, 1995(3) RRR 589 (SC) : 1995(6) SCC.
363, the Supreme Court held that the rule of promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine, has to be moulded to suit the particular situation.
It is not a hard and fast rule, but an elastic one, the object of which is to do justice between the parties and to extend an equitable treatment.
Applying these principles on the legitimate expectation or promissory estoppel, petitioners cannot claim equity on the basis that the Government had promised reservation for rural students.
As a matter of fact, the Government is not estopped from identifying the real rural students, on the basis of a policy decision, which in turn, is supported by materials, the Government prescribes the norms for claiming the rural reservation.
The decision of the Government is a bona fide one and satisfies the requirement of non-arbitrariness.
Hence, no case is made out on the plea of promissory estoppel or legitimate expecting.
21.
The contention that there was a sub-classification within the classification and that here is no nexus between the object and there is no date on which conclusion has been arrived at cannot be sustained.
The Government has taken a decision based on the facts and materials gathered from the outcome of reservations made in the previous years, wherein it was found that only few schools, though located in the villages, are able to corner 90% of the seats.
It was also found out that they are not the real rural schools to whom the benefits were intended it is not a further classification, but it is actually a correct classification in the sense that the rural candidates were really identified by adding the criteria and excluding the fee levying schools.
It is true that there are only self-financing schools in some villages and in the absence of Government or Aided Schools, the students are forced to attend those schools and that they cannot be discriminated.
But the point is that the students who are studying in those schools are equally placed to those studying in the urban schools.
Therefore, the object of providing a concession to student studying in the schools lacking in the facilities cannot be achieved if the concession is extended to the fee levying schools.
It is to be remembered that exceptions cannot set at naught the real object and the benefit it sowed.
The Government, in their wisdom and the policy, thought these are the criteria for the purpose of reaching the real rural poor students.
Since there is no general objection as to the reservation of 15% and the granting of the benefit to the real rural students, it is only a question of working out the methodology to give the benefit.
The existing rule as evolved by the Government based on the previous experience cannot be held to be a decision made arbitarily and without any reason.
On the contrary, it is made with full consciousness, in response to the objections, informations and deliberations, and with the discussion of all concerned.
The classification made is based on rational basis having relation to the object achieved.
22.
For all these reasons, I hold that the impugned Government Orders are valid and enforceable.
The writ petitions are, therefor, dismissed.
Consequently, all the related W.M.Ps.
are also dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.