NK Aggrawal, J - This is a petition by the Nahri Co-operative Credit and Service Society Ltd under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing the award of the Labour Court, Rohtak, dated June 2, 1995.
2.
Respondent No. 2 Mehar Singh, gave a demand notice dated October 13, 1992 to the petitioner-Society alleging that his services had been illegally terminated on May 1, 1988.
The demand notice was rejected by the State Government of Haryana by order dated March 26, 1993 (Annexure P.3) on the ground that he had himself resigned from service and that the demand was raised after three years.
Thereafter, the Government referred the dispute to the Labour Court vide order dated June d18, 1993 (Annexure P-4).
The Labour Court allowed the claim of the workman, Mehar Singh, by award dated June 2, 1995.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-Society, while assailing the award of the Labour Court, argued that once the demand notice had been rejected by the State Government on March 26, 1993, there was no justification in referring the dispute within less than three months.
Moreover, the demand was raised with inordinate delay.
The Labour Court has wrongly held that resignation was not accepted.
It was actually accepted by resolution dated June 15, 1988 (Annexure P-9).
It is also contended that no reason was assigned in the reference order dated June 18, 1993 whereby the earlier order was reviewed.
Further, the workman had resigned from service on June 7, 1988 (Annexure P-8) and the Labour Court, therefore, took a wrong view in the matter.
Workman's resignation was accepted by the petitioner-Society.
The Labour Court, however, held that the resignation had not been accepted by any resolution by the Society.
This observation and finding are said to be wholly without any basis.
Moreover, the Labour Court wrongly observed that issues Nos. 3 and 4 were not pressed.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the award with the plea that reference is on account of delay as the workman had resigned on June 7, 1988 and thereafter he sent a demand notice on October 13, 1992.
Thus, a delay of more than four years should be treated to be sufficient to debar the workman from contesting his claim.
Reference is also said to be bad as it was made without any good reason after rejecting it once.
It is also pointed out that the workman had admitted in his statement before the Labour Court that he had given his resignation on June 7, 1988 (Annexure P-6/A).
He did not say that he had resigned under pressure.
Therefore, the plea now raised by the workman is wholly unfounded.
It is also argued by the learned counsel for petitioner that the pleas of delay and the reference being bad in law were raised vide paragraphs Nos. 4 and 5 in the written statement filed by the petitioner in the Labour Court.
5.
The respondent-workman raised the plea before the Labour Court that after rejection of the demand notice, the Labour Commissioner again tried conciliation and thereafter reference was made to the Labour Court.
No illegality took place.
It was not a true resignation but was a case of termination with effect from May 31, 1986.
It is also argued that issues Nos. 3 and 4 were pressed or argued before the Labour Court.
6.
Resolution to remove the workman form service had already had been passed by the Society on May 31, 1984.
It has been so indicated in the document containing the next resolution dated June 15, 1988 (Annexure P-9).
The respondent-workman had resigned under a promise.
His statement makes it out that he had not willingly resigned.
His termination from service is, therefore, illegal.
It is also explained that the workman had filed an appeal before the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, but that was rejected.
Then he gave a demand notice to the Management.
He did not resign at his own free will.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has, on the other hand, placed reliance on a decision of this Court inThe Management of Electric Limited.
v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) R.S.J.
512 : 1994(2) SCT 190 (P&H).
It has been held therein that the order of reference must be made in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
8.
In M/s Wings Wear (P) Ltd. v. Workmen as rep. by Wings Wears Workers Lal Jhanda Union, 1997(1) R.S.J.
264 : 1996(4) SCT 93 (Delhi), the Delhi High Court has also taken a view that non-challenge to the validity of the reference at the time the reference is made to the Labour Court did not operate as estoppel and it could be challenged even after the award of the Labour Court.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondent-workman has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in JK Cotton Spg.
& Wvg.
Mills Co Ltd, Kanpur v. State of UP and others, 1991-1-LLJ 39.
It has been held therein in that resignation tendered due to duress or coercion is no resignation.
10.
Counsel for the workman has argued that Mehar Singh was subjected to undue pressure and thereupon he tendered his resignation letter.
On a consideration of the matter, this plea is found to have no basis as no evidence was brought on record to substantiate it.
The workman, on the other hand, admitted in his statement, before the Labour Court that he had submitted his resignation.
No case of undue pressure is, therefore, made out.
11.
On a consideration of the matter, it is found that the workman has not been able to explain the delay in raising his demand.
His services were terminated in June 1988, whereas he raised his demand by the demand notice dated October 13, 1992.
Though he says that he had filed an appeal before the Registrar of Societies but neither a copy of the said appeal nor the order of the Registrar has been brought on record.
12.
The next plea of the workman that his services had been terminated is also found to have no substance.
He has in his statement before the Labour Court, admitted that he had resigned from service.
There is nothing on record to substantiate his charge that he had resigned under pressure.
He submitted his resignation on June 7, 1988 (Annexure P-6/A).
The resolution dated June 15, 1988 passed by the petitioner Society makes it clear that the resignation of the workman was accepted.
It is, therefore, incorrect to say that the resignation had not been accepted by the Society.
The observation made by the Labour Court in this behalf is found to be unfounded.
13.
The Labour Court has also not decided issues No. 3 and 4 with the observation that these issues were not pressed nor argued.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged this observation with the plea that the petitioner-Society had been all through raising an objection that the demand notice was highly belated.
The second objection related to the review of the earlier order made by the State Government without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner-Society.
The demand notice had been earlier rejected by the State Government by the order dated March 26, 1993.
The State Government thereafter granted the reference by order dated June 18, 1993.
The second order could not be passed without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner-Society.
A persual of the order dated June 18, 1993 shows that no opportunity of hearing was given to the Management of the petitioner- Society before reviewing the earlier order.
No reasons have been assigned either.
14.
Resultantly, in view of the above discussion, it is found that the order of the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
The workman had resigned from service.
That was accepted by a resolution passed by the petitioner-Society.
He filed his demand notice after more than four years.
He has not explained the delay by bringing any material on the record.
His empty plea that he had filed an appeal before the Registrar of Co-operative Societies is found to be without any basis.
The workman has himself admitted in his statement before the Labour Court that he had submitted his resignation in writing.
Therefore, the writ petition is allowed and the award of the Labour Court June 2, 1995 is quashed.
No costs.
Petition allowed