D Raju, CJ.
- These two writ petitions have been taken up together at the request made by the learned counsel on either side and also having regard to the fact that it is between the same parties, with overlapping claims for relief.
C.W.P.
No. 732 of 1995 :  2.
The petitioner has filed the above writ petition seeking for a declaration that the conversion of two vacancies of Senior Assistants belonging to Scheduled Tribes category into Scheduled Castes is ultra vires, that the respondents be directed to create special vacancies in the year 1993 and carry forward the same to the subsequent years in consonance with the instructions of the Government of India and direct the respondents to declare the vacancies for the promotion year 1995 along with the carry forward Scheduled Tribes vacancies of the year 1993 and consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion against one of the carry forward posts belonging to the Scheduled Tribes category.
The case of the petitioner in this writ petition is that he belongs to a Scheduled Tribes category, that the Ist respondent while prescribing the promotion policy/norms etc. for its staff and the staff of its subsidiary companies has adopted and made binding the policy laid down by the Government of India and therefore, the same regulates the rights of the parties.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant as against the post reserved for the category of Scheduled Tribe in the 3rd respondent office and posted at the Divisional office at Shimla and joined the same on 1521990.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the category of Scheduled Tribe had been wrongly deprived of atleast two reserved vacancies by converting the same in favour of Scheduled Cases and filling up the same with the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes.
The claim of the petitioner is that he acquired the necessary eligibility for promotion to the post of Senior Assistant in December 1994 under the promotion policy applicable to the respondents and, therefore, the violation in the matter of carrying forward the vacancies due to the Scheduled Tribes of the year 1993 has the consequence of foreclosing of his prospects, immediately on his acquiring the eligibility criteria, and it is on the above claims the relief noticed supra has been sought for.
3.
Notice has been ordered and the writ petition has been thereafter admitted also.
4.
The respondents have filed a reply contending that inasmuch as the petitioner seeks that conversion of the vacancies from Scheduled Tribes to Scheduled Castes and the promotion of Shri Deepak and Shri Ashish Kumar already made is bad in law, the writ petition could not be maintained without making them as party respondent since they have already joined in August, 1993, as Senior Assistants.
It was also contended for the respondents that the petitioner was not eligible for promotion in accordance with the Promotion Policy for clerical and supervisory staff, inasmuch as he joined as Assistant (clerical scale) on 1521990 and had not put in five years service in the cadre when the conversion of posts under challenge has been made and, therefore, is not entitled to claim any relief in this writ petition.
As for the assumption made by the petitioner relating to the vacancies to be earmarked to Scheduled Tribe category and the need to carry forward them in the subsequent years, the respondents have stated as follows in the reply :-  "9......According to para 11 of the Promotion Policy for promotion to the cadre of Senior Assistant, if any Regional Office covers more than one State, the Promotion Zone shall be the State.
However, under orders issued by MD GIC, some of the smaller States under any Regional Office may be clubbed together to form a Zone of promotion.
Although Haryana and Himachal Pradesh States falling under jurisdiction of Chandigarh Regional Office are to be considered as separate Promotion Zones, in the promotion exercise 1993 and for earlier years, these two States were clubbed together to form one Zone and SC/ST roster was maintained for this Promotion Zone of Haryana and Himachal Pradesh together.
As per the Roster out of six vacancies of Senior Assistants declared in the Promotion Exercise 1993, three was reserved for ST comprising one vacancy of 1990 carried forward, 1 of 1991 carried forward and 1 of 1993.
It is also submitted that all the six vacancies were in the offices in the Haryana State and none of the vacancies was in H.P.
There being no reservation for ST in recruitment in Haryana State a demand was made by SC/ST employees Association for interchanging the ST vacancy in the same year without waiting for three carry forward years, so that it would benefit the SC candidates.
The Association also cited the decision taken on this line by one of the other subsidiaries of GIC.
This aspect was again taken up with GIC being our Holding Company and the framers of the Promotion Policy who also agreed for interchanging the vacancy in the same year, which would only benefit the SC community.
On the basis of these advices only and with a bona fide intention to benefit the SC candidates who were eligible and available, the vacancies were inter-changed."
5.
It was further contended that inasmuch as the petitioner was not eligible to be considered even for promotion for the vacancies declared in the year 1993, even on his own admission there is no justification for him to maintain this writ petition on the mere possibility and prospects of his promotion in the future years.
The further factual averment made for the respondents by way of reiteration of the stand taken earlier as noticed above is as follows :  "14......
The statement that vide circular dated 251994, only one post of Senior Assistant belonging to General category for promotion in the year 1994 was declared and that no post was declared for ST, though correct in substance, has no relevance to the claim of the petitioner since he was not eligible for consideration even in the promotion exercise 1994.
The further statement that the ST employees had been wrongly deprived of at least two reserved vacancies is not correct.
It may be mentioned that though in the year 1993 offices in the Haryana State and Himachal Pradesh State put together formed a Promotion Zone under the special dispensation by MD GIC.
From 1994 onwards these two Sates have been made as two independent Promotion Zones as per the normal rule of the Promotion policy.
As already stated in reply to para 13 of the petition, having inter-changed the vacancies in 1993, there was no scope for reversal.
In 1994, when the promotion Zones were separated as Haryana and Himachal Pradesh, only one vacancy of Senior Assistant was identified in offices in Himachal Pradesh State and that vacancy being a single vacancy was treated as general vacancy.
The reply respondents are following the 40 point Roster and the extract of the Model Roster is attached as Annexure R-2, for ready reference."
6.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on either side in the light of the claims and counter claims made by the respective parties in their pleadings as noticed supra.
As a matter of fact, it has to be stated that realising the hurdle in the way of the claim of the petitioner, who could not claim for promotion in the year 1993 or 1994, the claim was not that much seriously pursued in this writ petition and instead the claim was seriously asserted relying upon the points raised in this writ petition also only in the other writ petition, namely, C.W.P.
No. 581 of 1998 and, therefore, the claim of the petitioner in this as well as in the other with reference to the subsequent years when he became eligible for being considered would be considered while dealing with the other writ petition.
Suffice it to state that on the very factual admissions made by the petitioner and in the teeth of the objection taken for the respondents that before completing five years service, the petitioner is not eligible to be considered for promotion, the petitioner is not entitled to be granted any relief in this writ petition and consequently the said writ petition shall stand dismissed on this only ground without expressing any opinion on the merits of the contentions raised therein, on merits.
C.W.P.
No. 581 of 1998 :  7.
The above writ petition has been filed praying that the Corrigendum dated 28.5.1998 filed as Annexure P-5 be declared illegal and the one issued on 28.5.1998 filed as Annexure P-4 be upheld to be just and legal and also set aside the panel for promotion to the cadre of Senior Assistants relating to the Promotion Exercise 1998 filed as Annexure P-8 so far as it related to the Promotion Zone Himachal Pradesh is concerned and consequently direct the respondents to initiate the promotion exercise from the stage of declaration of vacancies made in accordance with Annexure P-4 and consider and recommend the name of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Senior Assistant as against the Scheduled Tribe Category of vacancy with all consequential benefits.
The claim of the petitioner in this writ petition is that he belonged to the Scheduled Tribe and he was appointed as Assistant (Clerical) and joined the Divisional Office of the 3rd respondent at Shimla on 1521990.
The petitioner claims to have passed the Licentious examination of the Insurance Institute of India from the Insurance Institute of Bombay as a departmental candidate and that, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion on the basis of the proceeding dated 28.5.1998 filed as Annexure P-4, according to which so far as Himachal Pradesh is concerned, a vacancy has been notified as being available for the Scheduled Caste category candidates, out of the total three vacancies and that the subsequent corrigendum issued and filed as Annexure P-5 informing that the Scheduled Tribe category had no vacancy reserved for the year 1998 is bad in law.
In tying to vindicate such a claim projected in this writ petition not only reference is made to the earlier writ petition, but the claim projected therein about the need for carrying forward the two vacancies which according to the petitioner are due for the Scheduled Tribes candidates in the year 1993 for the subsequent recruitment years on the terms of the policy governing of carrying forward of such vacancies.
The petitioner also relied upon the communication, which emanated from the 3rd respondent in this writ petition, dated 9101993 marked as Annexure P-1 that though the Ist respondent has now informed that the inter-change should be made in respect of the vacancies of three carry forward years since prior to the said decision, the vacancies have been inter-changed and the ranking list also published and the policy made that it was not possible to reverse the action taken earlier and the said decision and advice would be kept into consideration and followed from and during the next promotion exercise onwards.
The respondents, even relating to the promotion exercise for the year 1997 for the posts of Senior Assistants with particular reference to the promotion Zone Himachal Pradesh have notified the vacancies declaring the same to be one and earmarked the same for general category with no reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, apparently for the reason that being only one vacancy, there could not be any reservation to the said post.
In the representation of the petitioner dated 22.6.1998 with particular reference to Annexure P-5, the petitioner, as in the earlier writ petition filed by him, highlighted that in the year 1993, interchange of vacancies of Scheduled Tribes to Scheduled Castes was made wrongly, that the declaration of one vacancy for the year 1997 for the general category was itself wrong and that since 1994 when the Himachal Pradesh State was declared a new promotion Zone, all the five vacancies so far declared did not have any reservation for the Scheduled Tribes though the 4th point in the roster belongs to the Scheduled Tribe.
It is in such circumstances and since ignoring the grievances and the representations, the panel for 1998 promotions came to the published without declaring any vacancy for Scheduled Tribe category, the present writ petition came to be filed.
8.
The writ petition when came up for orders on 2481998.
While ordering notice to the respondents in CMP No. 1129/98, a Division Bench of this Court passed an interim order to the extent that one post of Senior Assistant in promotion zone of State of Himachal Pradesh in the general category will not be filled a till further orders.
On 24111998, the writ petition came to be admitted with a direction to connect the same with CWP No. 732/95 and both the writ petitions were directed to be posted for final hearing.
9.
The respondents have filed a reply contending that the promotion to the post of Senior Assistant is by way of selection as also on the basis of seniority, the qualification and work record and in the system of appraisal of promotion to the cadre of Senior Assistant including programmers, Stenographers, Assistant (Clerical) and Assistant (Typing), weightage has to be given towards the seniority by 40 marks, for qualification 20 marks and work record 30 marks as per the promotion policy in vogue and the claims to the contrary are not correct.
It is also contended for the respondents that the petitioner was not eligible for promotion in the cadre of Senior Assistant in the year 1993 inasmuch as he joined the Company only in February 1990.
So far as the six vacancies of Senior Assistants declared and as per the roster one vacancy of Senior Assistant for Scheduled Tribe category candidate was interchanged with Scheduled Caste as per the instructions and guidelines and that separate roster is maintained for recruitment and for promotion.
It is also stated that though earlier there was one promotion zone for Himachal Pradesh and Haryana, from 1994 onwards the same was divided and fresh roster for promotion was started from the said year bifurcating Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes vacancies.
It is also contended for the respondents that though there has been interchange of vacancies even before the three carry forward years before the necessary clarification was received from the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes at any rate from the year 1994 onwards there was no such procedure adopted and that the respondents were strictly following 40 point roster for promotion and acting in accordance with guidelines.
It has been urged that as per the guidelines when there is only one vacancy to be filed in, in a particular year, the same has been rightly treated as a general vacancy and, therefore, the proceeding issued by way of corrigendum filed as Annexure P-5 by the petitioner is quite in accordance with law.
By way of explanation, it is also stated that though the total vacancies were three and the total reservation including carry forward was two, the same could be restricted to only one for Scheduled Castes of the year 1994 and as the reservation could not exceed 50% of the total declared vacancies, the current reservation would also be two for general category, one for Scheduled Caste of the year 1994 and nil for the Scheduled Tribe.
It is stated to be in accordance with the judgment of the Apex Court in what is known as Mandal's case.
With reference to the grievance made for the petitioner that the 4th point in the 40 point roster though is for the Scheduled Tribes, the same has not been honoured, the respondents contended that the same cannot be given effect to in the teeth of the number of vacancies and the resultant position emanating would be of making reservation for more than 50%.
It is in the said circumstances, the respondents contended that there has been no violation of either Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution or the reservation policy, bound to be implemented and enforced in these cases.
A sur-rejoinder has been filed with reference to the claim made in the rejoinder filed by the petitioner, the respondents stated as follows :  "Regarding issuing of notice No. XHRO :PER :98 :CIR :43 dated 1781998 promotion to the cadre of Record Clerk Promotion Zone : Himachal Pradesh, vacancies declared is only 1, i.e. General - Nil, Scheduled Caste - 1 and Scheduled Tribe - Nil.
This is also carry forward vacancy (1 of 97).
As per 40 point Model Roster at Point No. 1 is reserved for Scheduled Caste.
Since this is single vacancy, the respondents cannot make 100% reservation.
Point No. 1 has been filled up by General category and carry forward backlog is (1 of 1997).
This point was declared in 1998 and the vacancy has been filled up."
10.
Heard Mr. OP Thakur, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. KD Sood, learned counsel for the respondents.
Though initially, the learned counsel for the petitioner started addressing the grievances as espoused in the other writ petition questioning the legality and propriety of the action of the respondents with reference to the inter-change of the vacancies in the year 1994 onwards, ultimately the claim has to be and came to be confined to the action involved in the proceedings filed as Annexures P-4, P-5 and P-8, in the teeth of the challenge made to the proceedings filed as Annexure P-5 under which for the promotion exercise in 1998 out of the total number of three vacancies in the zone, two have been earmarked for general category.
Substantial and the only relevant issue that came to be argued also at length and which did really arise for our consideration is as to the correctness or the propriety of the reservation made with reference to the total number of vacancies for the year in question, as above.
11.
Mr. OP Thakur, learned counsel for the petitioner placed strong reliance upon the fact that in 40 point roster, the 4th point of reservation has to be in favour of the Scheduled Tribes and that having regard to the earlier conversion and denial of opportunities, the reservation of atleast one vacancy ought to have been made in favour of the Scheduled Tribes in the year in question.
12.
Per contra, Mr. KD Sood, learned counsel appearing for the respondents while reiterating the stand taken in the reply and sur-rejoinder filed contended that the action taken by the respondents is quite in accordance with law and no infirmity can be substantiated which could vitiate the action of the respondents and that, therefore, there is no interference called for in this writ petition.
Both the learned counsel appearing on either side placed reliance upon some of the decisions rendered by the Apex Court in this regard and it will be useful to refer to the same at this stage.
13.
In Arati Ray Choudhary v. Union of India, 1974(1) SCC.
87, it was held that when in a particular year there was a reserved vacancy which was treated as unreserved by the appointment of an open candidate, and if the carry forward rule has to be given any meaning, the vacancy shall have to be carried forward for the benefit of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes until it lapsed and it should be so applied even if subsequently there is only one single vacancy.
14.
In Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar, 1988(2) SCC.
214, while dealing with the modality of reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes candidates, it was held that the posts which do not really belong to the same cadre, but are isolated and separate posts, despite carrying the same pay scale cannot be grouped together for the purpose of applying 50 point roster prescribed by the State of Bihar.
At the same time, it was made clear in the very decision that reservation of posts applying the roster can be made only when there are more then one post and reservation of the only existing post would amount to 100% reservation violative of Article 16(1) and (4) of the Constitution of India.
15.
In RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCC.
745 : 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC), it has been held in the matter of reservation that computation of percentage has to be done in relation to the number of posts comprising the cadre and not in relation to vacancies and the reserved points indicated in the roster have to be filled exclusively from the reserved category candidates.
16.
In Union of India v. Madhav s/o Gajanan Chaubal, 1997(2) SCC.
332 : 1997(1) SCT 399 (SC), it has been held that if the Government has applied the rule of rotation and the roster point to the vacancies that had arisen in the single point post and sought to fill up the candidates belonging to the reserved category at the point on which they are eligible to be considered, such a rule would not be violative of Article 16(1) of the Constitution, and on the facts of the said case it was held that roster point No. 4 for the post of Secretary reserved for the Scheduled Tribes was held to be valid and Constitutional.
A similar view has also been taken by another Bench in a decision reported in Union of India and others v. Brij Lal Thakur, 1997(4) SCC.
278 : 1997(3) SCT 356 (SC).
17.
It may be pointed out at this stage that in Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association, 1998(4) SCC 1 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC), while over-ruling the decisions reported in 1997(4) SCC.
278 and 1997(2) SCC.
332, it was held by a Constitution Bench of the Apex Court that in a single post cadre, reservation at any point of time cannot be applied on account of rotation of roser which is bound and likely to bring about a situation where such a single post in the cadre will be kept reserved exclusively for the members of the reserved category to the exclusion of the general members of the public and that cent per cent reservation for the reserved category is not permissible.
It is necessary to set up the relevant reasoning of their Lordships in this decision in the following terms :  "22.
In Balaji case, AIR 1963 SC 649, the Constitution Bench has held that the reservation should and must be allowed to advance the prospects of the weaker sections of the society, but while doing so, care should be taken not to exclude admission to higher educational standards of deserving and qualified conditions of other communities.
It has also been indicated that reservation under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution must be within a reasonable limit.
The interests of the weaker sections of the society, which are a first charge on the States and the Centre, have to be adjusted with the interests of the community as a whole.
The objective of Article 15(4) is to advance the interests of the weaker elements of society.
If a provision under Article 15(4) ignores the interests of the society, that is clearly outside the purview of Article 15(4).
It is, therefore, quite evident that the Constitution Bench in Balaji case has clearly indicated that in giving effect to reservations for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes, a balance is to be struck so that the interests of the Backward Classes and the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are properly balanced with the interests of the other segments of the society, and in order to safeguard the interests of the reserved classes the interest of the community as a whole cannot be ignored.
In Devadasan case, AIR 1964 SC 179, majority decision of four Judges (Justice Subba Rao dissenting) was to the effect that the carry-forward rule as a result of which the appellants belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes could get more than 50% of the vacancies to be filled up in a particular year, is unconstitutional.
It has also been indicated that Article 14 will not be infringed if a certain proportion of appointments of the State in order to provide the backward classes an opportunity equal to that of the members of the more advanced classes is made, provided that the reservation is not so exercised which would amount to practically denying a reasonable opportunity of employment to the members of the other communities.
It was indicated that under Article 16(4) of the Constitution, reservation of a reasonable percentage for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is valid and within the competence of the States or the Centre.
But it is necessary that a reasonable balance between backward classes and other members of the society is to be struck and maintained.
In the decision of Devadasan case reliance was also placed on the decision in Balaji case and another Constitution Bench decision of this Court in GM, SE Rly.
v. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36.
In the majority decision in Rangachari case it has been held that Articles 16(1) and 16(2) are intended to give effect to Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution and these articles form parts of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
Article 16(1) should, therefore, be construed in a broad and general way, and not in a pedantic and technical way.
When so construed, matters relating to employment cannot mean merely matters prior to the act of appointment nor can "appointment to any office" mean merely the initial appointment but must include all matters relating to employment, whether prior or subsequent to the employment, that are either incidental to such employment or form part of its terms and conditions."
"23.
The short fact in Arati Ray Choudhary case, 1974(1) SCC 87, is that the Railway Board prepared a roster in 1964 by which 125% of the vacancies were reserved for Scheduled Castes and 5% for Scheduled Tribes.
It was also mentioned that if there would be only a single vacancy then it should be treated as undeserved and if on account of that a reserved vacancy was to be treated as unreserved then the reservation would be carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In 1966, a vacancy of Headmistress was treated as unreserved on this basis.
Another vacancy arose in January 1969 and the four Assistant Mistresses were called for selection.
One of the respondents challenged the selection on the ground that the post should be treated as reserved for Scheduled Caste candidate and such a contention was accepted by the High Court.
In 1971 the Railways decided to hold a selection to form a panel of two candidates for filling up one post reserved for Scheduled Caste and another to cover unforeseen requirements.
At that stage, a writ petition was filed challenging such a decision of the Railway Administration and an order of injunction was issued in such a writ proceeding.
In spite of this, the said respondents were called by the Selection Board.
The writ petition was ultimately dismissed not on merits but on the ground that such a writ petition was barred by the principle of res- judicata.
This Court however held that since the previous writ petition was not decided on merits, the principle of res-judicata or analogous to it was not attracted.
Therefore, the Court was competent to consider the case on merits.
In Arati Ray Choudhary case reference was made to the decisions of the Constitution Bench in Balaji case.
Relying on the decision in Balaji case the Constitution Bench in Arati Ray Choudhary case has held that in Balaji decision, this Court had struck down as unconstitutional an order by which 68% of the seats in educational institutions were reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other educationally and socially backward classes.
It was indicated in Arati Ray Choudhary case that following the decision in Balaji case in the majority decision in Davadasan case, it was held that in order to effectuate the guarantee contained in Article 16(1), each year recruitment has to be considered separately by itself and, "the reservation for backward communities should not be so excessive as to create a monopoly or to disturb unduly the legitimate claims of other communities".
It has also been indicated in Arati Ray Choudhary case that the Ministry of Home Affairs issued a memorandum modifying the carry-forward rule so as to comply with the decision in Devadasan case.
By para 2 of the memorandum, the carry-forward rule was amended by providing that (SCC at p. 92, para 16) :  "in any recruitment year, the number of normal reserved vacancies and the `carried forward' reserved vacancies together shall not exceed 45% of the total number of vacancies."
It was however indicated in the said memorandum that (SCC at p. 92, para 16) :  "if there be only two vacancies, one of them may be treated as a reserved vacancy.
But if there be only one vacancy, it shall be treated as unreserved."
The surplus above 45% shall be carried forward to the subsequent year of recruitment, subject however to the condition that the particular vacancies carried forward do not become time-barred due to their becoming more than two years' old.
It has been specifically held in Arati Ray Choudhary case that in the first place each year of recruitment is to be considered separately and by itself as held in Devadasan case so that if there are only two vacancies to be filled in a particular year of recruitment, not more than one vacancy can be treated as reserved.
Secondly, if there be only one vacancy to be filled in a given year of recruitment, it has to be treated as unreserved, irrespective of whether it occurs in the model roster at a reserved point.
The appointment then is not open to the charge that the reservation exceeds 50%, for if the very first vacancy in the first year of recruitment is in practice treated as a reserved vacancy, the system may be open to the objection that the reservation not only exceeds 50% but is, in fact, cent per cent.
But, if on this account, that is to say, if on account of the requirement that the first vacancy must in practice be treated as unreserved even if it occurs in the model roster at a reserved point, the reservation can be carried forward to not more than two subsequent years of recruitment.
Thus, if two vacancies occur, say, within an initial span of three years, the first vacancy has to be treated as an unreserved vacancy and the second as reserved.
It has not been held in Arati Ray Choudhary case that for a single post there can be a reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes.
What has been held in Arati Ray Choudhary is that when there was a vacancy at Adra, according to the model roster, such vacancy was a reserved point and therefore the other vacancy was strictly a reserved vacancy but there being only one vacancy in that particular year of recruitment, such vacancy had to be treated as unreserved and therefore appointment was given to Smt. Biswas, who was not a reserved candidates.
Therefore, it had to be compensated by carrying forward the reservation in two subsequent recruitment years when the vacancy in Kharagpur in the financial year 1968-69 arose w.e.f.
31.12.1968."
"29.
In Madhav case, 1997(2) SCC 332, in support of the view that even in respect of single post cadre reservation can be made for the backward classes by rotation of roster, the Constitution Bench decision in Arati Ray Choudhary case has been relied on.
We have already indicated that in Arati case the Constitution Bench did not lay down that in single post cadre, reservation is possible with the aid of roster point.
The Court in Arati Ray Choudhary case considered the applicability of roster point in the context of plurality of posts and in that context the rotation of roster was upheld by the Constitution Bench.
The Constitution Bench in Arati Ray Choudhary case had made it quite clear by relying on the earlier decision of the Constitution Bench in Balaji case and Devadasan case that 100% reservation was not permissible and in no case reservation beyond 50% could be made.
Even the circular on the basis of which appointment was made in Arati Ray Choudhary case was amended in accordance with the decision in Devadasan case.
Therefore, the very premise that the Constitution Bench in Arati case has upheld reservation in a single post cadre is erroneous and such erroneous assumption in Madhav case has been on account of misreading of the ratio in Arati Ray Choudhary case.
It may be indicated that the later decision of the Constitution Bench in RK Sabharwal case, 1995(2) SCC.
745 has also proceeded on the footing that reservation in roster can operate provided in the cadre there is plurality of post.
It has also been indicated in Sabharwal decision that the post in a cadre is different from vacancies."
35.
Hence, until there is plurality of posts in a cadre, the question of reservation will not arise because any attempt of reservation by whatever means and even with the device of rotation of roster in a single post cadre is bound to create 100% reservation of such post whenever such reservation is to be implemented.
The device of rotation of roster in respect of single post cadre will only mean that on some occasions there will be complete reservation and the appointment to such post is kept out of bounds to the members of a large segment of the community who do not belong to any reserved class, but on some other occasions the post will be available for open competition when in fact on all such occasions, a single post cadre should have been filled only by open competition amongst all segments of the society."
18.
In S Rajendran v. Union of India and others, 1998(3) SCC.
620 : 1998(2) SCT 67 (SC), it was held that where there was a reserved vacancy occurring in 1990 but reserved candidate was not yet eligible and the proposal for de- reservation was not agreed to and a general category candidate therefore promoted on ad hoc basis, since the reserved point was required to be carried forward for three calendar years and reservation was to lapse only after the expiry of three calendar years, the general category candidate promoted on ad hoc basis cannot be held entitled to be regularised, if before the reservation was to lapse the reserved candidate became eligible for promotion and appointment.
It may be noticed at this stage that this decision will have no application to the case on hand since it cannot be said that there was any ad hoc appointment in the case on hand and that the petitioner could take advantage of the principle laid down therein by pointing out the factum of interchange of vacancies in the year 1993, when the Zone was undivided and no vacancy could be specifically pointed out to be earmarked for Himachal Zone, when it was divided into two different Zones and in the teeth of the commencement of a new roster after such division in the year 1994.
19.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on either side in the light of the principles laid down in the above decisions, particularly, one reported in 1998(4) SCC.
1.
Though the learned counsel for the petitioner endeavoured his best to point out that the said decision, on facts related to a single cadre post and the question as to reservation in such single cadre post and therefore cannot be applied to the case on hand which involved plurality of posts in the cadre, we are afraid we can countenance such a distinction to be either a relevant or a reasonable one to exclude the applicability of the ratio of the decision in the matter of consideration of the question raised before us, which though involved cadre having plurality of posts, at the same time having regard to the number of vacancies available for the year in question, if the claim of the petitioner is to be allowed and accepted it would result in the rule of 50% reservation limit or for that matter prohibition of reservation in excess of 50% will stand violated.
The restatement of the principles enunciated in Balaji's case, AIR 1963 SC 649 as also Devadasan's case, AIR 1964 SC 179, which cannot be said to be themselves cases pertaining to a single post cadre will go to show that their Lordships of the Apex Court while re-stating the position of the law declared by the earlier Constitution Benches in those decisions have applied the same to the single post cadre cases also.
The re-statement and reiteration of the principles of law laid down in Balaji's case and Devadasan's case (supra) and the declaration of the principles once again in this decision by way of reiteration and the emphasis, would equally be the law declared and binding on us even to a case of the nature, which is under our consideration, having regard to the total number of vacancies available and declared for the year.
20.
Having regard to the above position of law, out of three vacancies notified for the year 1998, one vacancy has to go to the SC point and out of the remaining two vacancies, if one more is to be reserved for ST point, as claimed by the petitioner, if will definitely offend the principle of reservation in excess of 50% and would be unconstitutional as held by their Lordships of the Apex Court in Balaji's case and Devadasan's case (supra), as also the latest pronouncement in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh case (supra).
Consequently, we see no merit whatsoever in the challenge made to the impugned proceedings filed as Annexures P-5 and P-8 and the writ petition, therefore, fails and shall stand dismissed.
No costs.
21.
In order to see whether the petitioner could be accorded any relief on account of any supervening vacancy having arisen in the very year, we have called the learned counsel for the petitioner to ascertain the position from the office of the respondents.
Initially, the learned counsel for the respondents made available a letter with reference CHRO :PER :99 :3538 dated 1661999 informing the position that there was no new vacancy arising in the year 1998 and that the only vacancy that remains unfilled was the one earmarked for the general category, which was prohibited from being filled, by the interim order passed by a Division Bench of this Court, at the time of issuing notice in the writ petition.
If that be the position, we are unable to give any direction to the respondents to reserve any vacancy in the year 1998 for the Scheduled Tribes category so as to accommodate the petitioner for that year.
Subsequently, on 25.6.1999, the learned counsel for the respondents Mr. KD Sood made available another copy of the communication in CHRO :PER :99 dated 25.6.1999 informing this Court that for the promotion exercise for the year 1999 in the Himachal Pradesh Region, five vacancies have arisen, out of which one has been earmarked for Scheduled Tribes category.
If that be the position, it is for the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner in accordance with law with reference to the said vacancy.
CWP No. 1129/98 :  22.
In view of the dismissal of the writ petition, this application is also dismissed and the interim order dated 2481998 is vacated.
Petition dismissed.