Swatanter Kumar, J - Ex.Head Constable Kirpal Singh filed a suit for declaration with a prayer that order dated 24101991 passed by the Commandant, 13th Battalion, Punjab Armed Police, Jalandhar Cantt was arbitrary, illegal, unconstitutional to the specific rules and regulations and against the principles of natural justice.
The plaintiff had further prayed that he be reinstated and permitted to continue in service with effect from 24101991 with all consequential benefits.
The plaintiff had joined the Punjab Police department as Constable on 1391982.
He worked hard with great sincerity.
During the course of his service, he passed the lower training course from the Police Training College, Phillaur in September, 1988 and was promoted as Head Constable in April, 1991.
While the plaintiff was posted in 13th Battalion, P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantt, he proceeded on casual leave for 1011991, which was duly sanctioned.
He was to report back on duty on 1241991, but he failed to report back on duty on that date due to sickness, which he had informed the department.
He had submitted the application for leave on medical ground.
As no rejection was received by him, the plaintiff rightly presumed his leave sanctioned.
On 24101991 when he was declared fit by the doctor, he joined the duty.
The plaintiff was considered as absent from duty with effect from 1241991.
A departmental inquiry was conducted by Inspector Gurdev Singh, who was appointed by Santokh Singh, Assistant Commandant of 13th Battalion, P.A.P., Jalandhar Cantt.
The inquiry was conducted without any information and notice to the plaintiff and as a result of the finding arrived at by the Inquiry Officer, the plaintiff was dismissed from service vide order dated 24101991 without affording him any opportunity of hearing.
Resultantly, the plaintiff filed the suit to challenge the impugned order.
2.
The suit was contested by the State of Punjab, who filed the written statement and took preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of the suit.
It was also stated that notice under section 80 of CPC had not been served upon the defendants, which was a condition precedent to the suit.
On merits, it was stated that the plaintiff never reported for duty on 24101991 nor did he produce any medical certificate.
The plaintiff was requested to join the duty vide various memos, but the plaintiff failed to join his duty.
He was placed under suspension.
Inquiry was conducted in accordance with law.
The plaintiff had received the notice from the inquiry officer personally but still failed to co-operate with the departmental inquiry.
Ultimately based on the report of the Inquiry Officer, a notice to show cause dated 9th February, 1991 was served upon the plaintiff.
It was denied that the plaintiff was promoted as Head Constable by the Inspector General of Police.
It was stated that Deputy Inspector General was the approving authority for the Head Constables.
It was conceded that the absence of the plaintiff was treated as leave without pay.
On these facts, the State stated that the plaintiff was not entitled to any relief from the Court and the suit was liable to be dismissed.
3.
The learned trial court framed the following issues on the pleadings of the parties.
1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
3.
Whether notice under section 80 CPC is not legal and valid ?
OPD.
4.
Relief.
4.
Vide detailed judgment and decree dated 31st May, 1995, the learned trial Court answered issues No. 1 and 2 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
Issue No. 3 was also answered in favour of the plaintiff as it was not pressed by the defendant as the plea with regard to the maintainability of the suit on account of notice under section 180 of C.P.C. was given up.
Resultantly, the learned trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff by setting aside the order of dismissal with all consequential benefits.
The judgment and decree of the learned trial court dated 31st May, 1995 was assailed in appeal, of course, unsuccessfully by the State.
The learned first appellate court vide its judgment and decree dated 11th April, 1997 affirmed the findings of the learned trial court and held as under:  "In the plaint the case of the plaintiff is that he was promoted as Head Constable.
In the written statement, the case of the defendants is that the plaintiff completed lower school courses from PTC, Phillaur and was promoted as Officiating head constable in the year 1991.
The impugned order of dismissal from service has been passed on 24101991 by the Commandant, 13th Battalion, PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
The enquiry file was summoned which shows that the plaintiff was promoted as officiating head constable w.e.f.
1971989 by the order of Sh. Sarbjit Singh, IPS, Inspector General of Police PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
The order passed by the Inspector General of Police further shows that the plaintiff was previously allotted No. 27/450, 27th Battalion and on promotion he was allotted No. 13/45, 13th Battalion.
The order of dismissal from service has been passed after more than two years of the promotion of the plaintiff from Constable to Head Constable.
In the ruling reported in 1996(2) SLR 431 Sh. Jagjit Singh, ASI was promoted as officiating SI by DIG.
Order of dismissal in the said case was passed by the Superintendent of Police which is an authority lower in rank than the appointing authority.
The order of dismissal was held to be illegal.
The reliance in the said ruling was placed on the ruling reported in 1973(1) SLR 765.
The impugned order is liable to be set aside on this ground alone.
10.
In the order dated 24101991, no finding has been recorded that the plaintiff has committed gravest act of misconduct as envisaged by rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
The absence period of the plaintiff was treated as leave without pay.
It has been held in the ruling reported in 1988(2) CLR (CCr.
& Rev.)
21 titled as State of Punjab v. Chanan Singh that where the observation made by the punishing authority in the order of dismissal that the period of absence shall be counted as leave without pay amounts to regularising absence and charge of absence no more survives.
The termination of the respondent was set aside in the said case.
The lower court has not committed any illegality while recording its finding on issue No. 1 and the (sic) case are affirmed."
5.
Aggrieved from the concurrent judgment passed by the learned courts below, the State has preferred this Regular Second Appeal.
The learned counsel for the State while assailing the judgments of the learned courts below argued (a) an unauthorised absence per se is a misconduct of grave nature and the findings in this regard by the learned courts below are erroneous; (b) while referring to exhibits P2 and P.3 he contended that the plaintiff had been terminated by the competent authority and by whom he was promoted as Head Constable; and (c) By treating unauthorised absence as leave without pay does not condone the (sic) authority and as such the findings recorded on issues No. 1 and 2 are liable to be interfered with by this Court.
6.
In order to support the above contentions, the learned counsel for the State placed reliance upon the cases of State of Assam and another v. Mahendra Kumar Dass, 1970 SLR 444 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Harihar Gopal, 1969 SLR 274.
7.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the respondent contended that there had been a clear violation of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India and as such the respondent herein had been dismissed from service by the authority lower in rank than the appointing authority.
He relied upon the judgments of this Court in the cases Man Singh, Assistant Sub Inspector v. The State of Punjab and others, 1973(1) SLR 365, and The State of Punjab and others v. Jagjit Singh (SI), 1996(2) SLR 431 and also the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases Krishna Kumar v. Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer and another, 1979(2) SLR 291 and State of Punjab and others v. Bakshish Singh, JT 1998(7) SC 742 : 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC), to contend that regularisation of unauthorised absence would have effect of rendering the authority ineffective and therefore, the order of dismissal would be liable to be set aside.
In order to appreciate the rival contentions raised on behalf of the parties, it will be pertinent to refer to exhibit P.3 which is the letter of appointment of the respondent issued by the State on 21st July, 1989.
Relevant part of the said order exhibit P.3 reads as under :  "ORDER<<CENTER< center>>P> The names of the following Constables who have been declared to have passed the Lower School Course from Police Training College, Phillaur for the term ended March, 1989 are hereby approved for admission to promotion list (1) w.e.f.
141989.
They are further approved for promotion to the rank of Offg.
Head Constable w.e.f.
1971989.
On promotion they are posted to the Battalion mentioned against each and they are allotted Regtl.
No. as under  1 to 29  xx xx xx xx xx  30.
Ct. Kirpal Singh 27/450 27th Bn.
13th Bn.
12/45.
xx xx xx xx xx  The Constables who are on deputation will continue to work on deputation of promotion as Offg.
Head Constables and their lien is adjusted to the Battalions to which they have been posted on promotion.
Formal orders in this respect will be issued only by the Battalion Commandants concerned, if they are not facing any departmental enquiry or criminal case.
A copy of this order, so issued will be sent to the undersigned.
Sd/- Sarbjit Singh, IPS, Inspector General of Police, PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
No. 5307-16/CB-SA-2 dated Jull.
Cantt.
the 21.7.1989.
Copy of the above is forwarded to the following for information and n/action :  1.
Deputy Inspector General of Police, PAP, BHG, Patiala.
2.
Principal PTC/Phillaur.
3.
Commandants, 7th, 13th, 27th, 75th and 80th Bn.
PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
4.
Commandants 36th and 82nd Bn.
PAP, BHG, Patiala.
5.
Posting Clerk.
For Inspector General of Police, PAP, Jalandhar Cantt."
The language of exhibit P.3 clearly indicates that the respondent was in fact promoted to the rank of officiating Head Constable by the Inspector General of Police.
Further, it is clear that even appointment to the respective place of posting of the promoted Head Constable was made by the Inspector General of Police and copy was sent to the Commandant for information and necessary action.
the Commandant 13th Battalion had also received the copy of the said order for information and necessary action.
The Inspector General of Police had particularly used the expression that formal order in this regard will be issued only by Battalion Commandants concerned.
In face of this language there could be no dispute with the concurrent findings recorded by the learned courts below holing that the appointing authority of the respondent was the Inspector General of Police while order of termination admittedly had not been passed by the same authority.
It cannot be further disputed that the Commandant who had passed the order of dismissal was admittedly lower in rank than the Inspector General of Police.
No rule has been brought to the notice of the Court to show that the Commandant was the appointing and disciplinary authority of the Head Constable at the relevant time.
Reference to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Krishan Kumar (supra), at this stage, would be relevant where the Court held as under:-  "Whether or not an authority is subordinate in rank to another has to be determined with reference to the state of affairs existing on the date of appointment.
It is at that point of time that the constitutional guarantee under Art. 311(1) becomes available to the person holding, for example a civil post under the Union Government that he shall not be removed or dismissed by an authority subordinate to that which appointed him.
The subsequent authorisation made in favour of respondent 1 in regard to making appointments to the post held by the appellant cannot confer upon respondent 1 the power to remove him.
On the date of the appellant's appointment as a Train Lighting Inspector respondent I had no power to make that appointment.
He cannot have, therefore, the power to remove him."
8.
In Man Singh and Jagjit Singh's cases (supra) the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court was followed and squarely applies to the case of the present kind.
In the case of Mahindra Kumar Dass's (supra) it has rightly been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent that the delinquent was confirmed by the Superintendent of Police in his rank from which he was dismissed from service as is clear from paragraph 9 of that judgment.
As the facts of that case are clearly distinguishable and would not apply to the facts of the present case, consequently, I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the order of dismissal has rightly been set aside by the learned courts below for the aforesaid reasons.
There is no merit in the contention raised on behalf of the State that unauthorised absence by itself is a misconduct of great (grave ?)
nature.
9.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a recent case titled as State of Punjab and others v. Bakshish Singh, 1997(3) RSJ 522, so held.
This has also been followed by different Division Benches of this Court, as such it will not be correct to affirm the finding that the misconduct was not of grave nature.
However, still respondents were obliged to make compliance to the other provisions of rule 162(1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
The disciplinary authority was obliged to take into consideration the service record of the delinquent official and apply its mind in relation to the quantum of punishment and other subsequent benefits at the time of passing the order of dismissal.
This has apparently not been done and to that extent the findings arrived at by the learned courts below are also liable to be affirmed.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondent to support the judgment in this favour also made a reference to the violation of principle of natural justice inquiry being without notice, inquiry report having not been furnished to the delinquent official as well as the fact that regularisation of the alleged unauthorised absence as leave without pay rendering the authority ineffective and inconsequential.
For this purpose, he heavily relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Bakshish Singh (supra).
I have already held that the impugned order has been rightly set aside by the concurrent judgments of the courts below, which are based on findings of fact as well as the correct proposition of law and do not call for interference.
I do not, thus, see (need) to discuss the merit of this third contention.
The impugned order is vitiated being violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and being not in accordance with the provisions of 162(1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
Thus, this appeal has no merit and is liable to be rejected.
11.
Before concluding, I would like to make a reference to the principles reiterated by the Hon'ble Apex Court more than often that the jurisdiction of this Court to interfere in the concurrent findings of fact and judgment of the Courts below is a very limited one.
The Court would interfere in the concurrent view only if such view was illegal, unsustainable or finding recorded was palpably erroneous.
In this regard reference can be made to the case of Ramanuja Naidu v. V Kanniash Naidu and another, JT 1996(3) SC 164 : 1996(2) R.R.R.
554.
The present case does not fall apparently in either of aforesaid categories.
The view expressed by the learned court below is in consonance with the settled principle of law and passed upon the correct appreciation of evidence.
The inevitable result is that the appeal of the State is dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.