RS Mongia, J - The petitioner, Surinder Singh Bajwa, claims himself to be special correspondent of a newspaper "Akali Patrika".
He further claims that he represents the fields of public information as he is accredited correspondent to Punjab Government.
2.
This petition has been filed as a Public Interest Litigation alleging that there has been misuse and abuse of their position by the highly placed officials of the Government for personal gains.
The prayer made is to direct the Central Bureau of Investigation (in short CBI) to enquire into the allegations which appeared in "The Daily Tribune" dated November 6, 1997 and November 7, 1997 under the heading "BUMPER PADDY CROP ALLOWED TO ROT, Paddy Muddle" and the case be registered against a senior IAS officer Mr. Sarvesh Kaushal, who was the then Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Punjab Region.
The petitioner arrayed the following persons as respondents:-  1.
Union of India through Secretary to Government, Department of Food, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.
The Cabinet Secretary, Government of India, Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi.
3.
The Food Corporation of India, Head Office 16-20, Barakhamba Lane, New Delhi, through its Managing Director.
4.
The Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), North Block, New Delhi.
5.
The State of Punjab, through Chief Secretary, Punjab Government, Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh.
6.
Mr. MD Asthana, IAS, Secretary to Government of India, Planning Commission, Yojna Bhawan, New Delhi.
7.
Mrs. Sarita Dass, IAS, C-II/30, Tilak Lane, New Delhi.
8.
Mr. Sarvesh Kaushal, IAS, Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Punjab Region, Sector 34, Chandigarh.
9.
Mr. RK Ranga, IAS, care of Chief Secretary to Haryana Government, Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh.
10.
The Tribune, Chandigarh, through its General Manager.
Notice of motion was issued.
Separate written statements on behalf of respondents No. 1, 3, 5 and 8 have been filed.
Before dealing with the allegations made in the writ petition, it may be observed that almost identical writ petition was filed by the petitioner (C.W.P.
No. 12749 of 1997), in which apart from Food Corporation of India, Mr. Sarvesh Kaushal was impleaded by name, who was then holding the office of Senior Regional Manager of the Food Corporation of India, Regional Office, Punjab and Chandigarh.
That writ petition was also with the identical prayer and the allegations were based again on some news item which appeared in some newspapers regarding alleged multi-crore paddy, wheat, gunny bag scam.
In that petition, it was alleged on the basis of some news items that wheat meant for free sale in open market in the State of Punjab was illegally sold to some non-existent and defunct firms and traders who further sold the same to unauthorised dealers outside the State of Punjab and huge quantity of wheat was exported to other countries in contravention of the Government scheme known as Open Market Sale Scheme (Domestic).
It was alleged that a report was published in the Indian Express on July 3, 1997, according to which rice worth Rs. 1400 crores was missing from the Public Distribution System and that there were discrepancies of 24 million tonnes of rice between the figures of the Food Ministry and the Food Corporation of India.
The news item further reported that Cabinet Committee on Prices had ordered a special audit involving physical verification of the entire rice stocks in the Central Pool including that of the FCI and the States.
A Special Task Force had been set up under the Chairmanship of the then Cabinet Secretary Shri TSR Subramaniam to investigate the discrepancy and fix responsibility and that the Comptroller and Auditor General was likely to conduct an emergency audit of the country's rice stocks.
When notice was issued to the respondents, in that case an affidavit was filed on behalf of the Union of India by Shri BK Devvarma, Director, Government of India, Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies, New Delhi mentioning therein that the news item as appeared in the Indian Express was not correct inasmuch as no such task force has been set up under the Cabinet Secretary, Shri Subramaniam.
It was further stated that the Cabinet Committee on Prices in its meeting held on June 24, 1997, directed that the CAG be requested to carry out a special audit into the entire matter on all India basis within a specified time.
When C.W.P.
No. 12749 of 1997 had come up for hearing on May 10, 1999, the report was yet to be submitted.
So far as the allegations regarding the wheat meant for free sale was concerned, the respondents had filed the reply to the following effect :-  "As regards the wheat which was meant for free sale in the open market in the States of Punjab and Haryana, it is stated that this Court had given some directions in CWP 915 of 1997 and that on the basis of the inquiries conducted by the Deputy Commissioners the CBI has registered some cases which are likely to be filed in Court.
It is pleaded that no rice stocks are missing as alleged though some discrepancies have been noticed in the stock statistics of the State Governments and their agencies as reported by the Ministry of Food and that a special audit of the stocks had been ordered and the CAG is taking action in the matter."
3.
That writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of May 10, 1999, wherein it was observed that in view of the directions issued by this Court in CWP No. 915 of 1997 Court of its own Motion v. State of Haryana and others, decided on July 26, 1997, the CBI had registered cases in the States of Punjab and Haryana and the investigations were almost complete and in view of that, no further directions were necessary as the erring person would be dealt with in accordance with law.
As regards paddy scam, it was observed by the Division Bench as under:-  "As regards the paddy scam, the newspaper report which appeared in the Indian Express is not true.
It is clear from the additional affidavit filed by Shri BK Devvarma that no task force had been set up under the Chairmanship of the then Cabinet Secretary as was reported in the news item (Annexure P-9 with the writ petition).
However, the Cabinet Committee on Prices directed that CAG should carry out a special audit into the entire matter on all India basis.
That audit is still in progress and the final report has not yet been submitted.
At one stage, we had adjourned the hearing of this case to await that report but since that is taking time, we decided to proceed with the matter.
That report will be submitted in due course of time and we are sure that if any irregularity is pointed out the Cabinet Committee on Prices will direct suitable action to be taken against the erring officers/officials/parties.
There is, thus, no need for us to issue any directions at this stage."
In the present writ petition, the petitioner did not mention about filing a previous writ petition CWP No. 12749 of 1997 almost on similar allegations.
In view of the disposal of the previous writ petition - CWP No. 12749 of 1997 on May 10, 1999, we do not find what more public interest would be served by issuing any further directions in this case.
Respondent No. 8 in his reply had alleged in para 1 of the preliminary objections as under :-  "Actually this petition is only an effort on the part of the petitioner to try to pressurise and coerce the answering respondent into meeting some of the extraneous demands of the petitioner.
It is submitted that the petitioner's daughter is undergoing imprisonment after being convicted of murdering one Jagbir Singh.
The petitioner has all along been making efforts to secure her release.
For this purpose he had been trying to approach the answering respondent and pressurise him.
This writ petition is yet another step towards that end.
It is submitted that not only does the petitioner disclose no cause of action but it is also a totally malicious effort on the part of the petitioner to pressurise the answering respondent to concede to some of the illegal pressure of the petitioner."
No replication has been filed by the petitioner.
The averment made by respondent No. 8 prima facie seems to be correct that the petitioner has some axe to grind as he is filing one petition after another with some ulterior motive.
Recently, the Apex Court in the case of Captain Satish Sharma (Review Petition (C) No. 98 of 1997 in CWP No. 26 of 1995 Common Cause, a Registered Society v. Union of India and others : 1997(1) SCT 24 (SC), while dealing that the officers who run the administration should not always be under some fear or threat of being proceeded against in a Court of law, observed as under:-  "Executive, under the Constitution, consists of Prime Minister, Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Civil Services comprising of high administrative officers on the top down to the clerical level.
They have an important role to play in the governance of the country as the Judiciary or Legislature.
The Executive, in running the administration of the country, should not be cowed down and should be allowed to have full confidence in its own existence so that its decision-making process is not, in any way, affected.
They must feel independent and keep themselves in an excellent frame of mind so that the administrative files are cleared in time and the Officers dealing with those files are not hesitant even in taking bold decisions which have sometimes to be taken in the interest of administration.
It is true that the fear of being proceeded against in a court of law for tort of misfeasance in public office may keep them on the right path and they may not falter, but there is already the fear of departmental action or proceedings being initiated against them departmentally which itself is a safeguard for proper administration.
Departmentally, they are answerable for their lapses; Ministers, or, for that matter, even the Government is answerable to Parliament.
If they were constantly under the fear or threat of being proceeded against in a Court of law for even slightest of lapse or under consistent fear of exemplary damages being awarded against them, they will develop a defensive attitude which would not be in the interest of administration."
4.
Dealing with the question of giving directions to the CBI to investigate as to whether a particular officer (Captain Satish Sharma) had committed any offence, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "Obviously, direction for investigation can be given only if an offence is, prima facie, found to have been committed or a person's involvement is prima facie established, but a direction to the CBI to investigate whether any person has committed an offence or not cannot be legally given.
Such a direction would be contrary to the concept and philosophy of "LIFE" and "LIBERTY" guaranteed to a person under Article 21 of the Constitution.
This direction is in complete negation of various decisions of this Court in which the concept of "LIFE" has been explained in a manner which has infused "LIFE" into the letters of Article 21."
xxxxx xxx xxxxx  "A man has, therefore, to be left alone to enjoy "LIFE" without fetters.
He cannot be hounded out by the Police or CBI merely to find out whether he has committed any offence or is living as a law-abiding citizen.
Even under Article 142 of the Constitution, such a direction cannot be issued.
While passing an order under Article 142 of the Constitution, this Court cannot ignore the substantive provision of law much less the constitutional rights available to a person (See: Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India & ors, 1998(4) SCC 409 : AIR 1998 SC 1395)."
In view of what has been observed above, especially when similar matter has been dealt with by another Division Bench on a writ petition filed by the petitioner himself, we find no ground to interfere or give any directions as prayed for by the petitioner in the writ petition.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.