DP Kundu, J - Heard the learned advocate for the parties.
Perused the averments made in the writ application.
In this writ proceeding the petitioner has questioned legality of Annexure `C' of the writ application which is Memo No. 702(6) dated March 5 of 1998 issued by the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, Maldah District Primary School Council.
2.
Before initiating the present writ proceeding the writ applicant initiated another writ proceedings for non-holding of examination by the Medical Board and PC Ghosh, J on 3101997, inter alia, passed the following order :-  "Let the District Medical Officer Health, Maldah examine the writ petitioner by a Medical Board and if he is satisfied that the petitioner is unfit for service, he should issue necessary certificate to that effect and should submit the same to the concerned school positively within two weeks from the date of communication of this order and the authority concerned in such case would appoint the petitioner's son in the post of primary teacher if the petitioner's son has got the requisite qualification positively within three months from the date of submission of such certificate by the CMOH, Maldah and also observing all formalities.
The authority concerned in such case would also release all retirement benefits to the petitioner as would be entitled to him by approving the voluntary retirement under the law positively within the said period of three months as aforesaid."
3.
It appears from Annexure `C' of the writ petition that consequent upon the aforesaid order dated 3101997 passed by the PC Ghosh, J, the competent authority examined the writ petitioner on 6th February, 1998 and the writ petitioner was declared permanently incapacitated by the competent medical board.
The said Annexure `C' contains the name of seven persons out of which serial No. 4 is the writ petitioner.
Annexure `C' is dated 5th March, 1998 which, inter alia, communicated as follows :-  "Proposals for appointment of wards of the teachers appearing as Sl.
Nos. 1-3 (preferably in a single-teacher or two teacher school) may be sent to the undersigned for taking further action at his end.
Prayers for appointment of wards of the teachers appearing at Sl.
Nos. 4-7 cannot be considered compassionately in terms of Education Department Notification No. 768-Edn(1) dt. 22111991 (effective since 1331995) since they were declared permanently incapable beyond 58 years of age."
(Emphasis added) 4.
The learned Advocate for the petitioner submits that the notification No. 768-Edn(p) dated 22111991 had not been followed by the respondents in some of the earlier cases and, therefore the said notification cannot be relied upon by the respondents to deny appointment on compassionate ground in case of the petitioner.
In support of his contention the learned Advocate for the petitioner referred to Annexure `D' of the writ application which contains names of five persons.
It appears from the said Annexure `D' that those five persons were declared medically unfit on various dates, namely, 1911995 and 17.11.1995 but their wards were given compassionate appointment.
They were medically unfit at the age more than 58 years.
The learned advocate for the petitioner also placed before me Annexures `E', `F', `G', `H' and `I' of the writ application.
It appears from the Annexure `E' that NK Mitra, J, (as His Lordship then was) by order dated December 29, 1997, inter alia directed that the petitioners in WP 30499(W)/97 should also be allowed to enjoy voluntary retirement benefits becasue two other teachers were allowed to enjoy voluntary retirment benefits even though they were examined medically after crossing 58 years as would appear from Annexure `D' of that writ proceeding.
5.
From Annexure `F' of the writ application it appears that NK Mitra, J (as His Lordship then was) on 11.9.1998, inter alia, passed the following order :-  "The Director of School Education, Govt. of West Bengal, who is present in court to-day is directed to approve the writ petitioner's voluntary retirement and to direct the concerned council to give appointment to the ward of the writ petitioner positively within 24th of this month and also to comply with my order which is the subject-matter of the contempt application.
I, however, make it clear that this order will not create any precedent in the matter and this order is passed in view of the special facts and circumstances of the case in presence of the parties."
(emphasis added) 6.
The learned Judge made it clear that the said order dated 11.9.1998 would not create any precedent in the matter and the order was passed in view of the special facts and circumstances of the particular case.
7.
Annexure `G' to the writ application only shows that in compliance of the order dated 11.9.1998 passed by NK Mitra, J, the eleven applicants were appointed on compassionate ground.
From the remaining annexures also it appears that pursuant to the order dated 29121997 passed by NK Mitra, J, the sons of the other writ petitioners were also appointed on compassionate ground.
8.
It does not appear from the order dated 3101997 passed by PC Ghosh, J and the order dated December 29, 1997 passed by NK Mitra, J, (as His Lordship then was) that the attention of the Courts was drawn to Notification No. 768-Edn(p) dated 22nd November, 1991.
At least no reference of that Notification could be found out from both the orders annexed to the writ application.
It is incredible to believe that even though attention of both the Courts was drawn to the said Notification yet the Courts preferred not to refer to the said Notification in their orders.
9.
A copy of the said notification No. 768 Edn.
(p) dated 22nd November, 1991, has been produced by the learned advocate for the respondents before me.
It appears from the said notification that in exercise of the power conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 106 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973, the Governor, for the purpose of clause (K) of sub-section (1) of Section 60 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 was pleased to make Rules after previous publication as required by sub-section (1) of Section 106 of the said Act.
Such Rules are known as Rules regulating the Recruitment and Leave of Teacher in Primary Schools in West Bengal (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules).
After perusing the said notification, I am of the view that the said Rules are statutory Rules framed by the Governor and have statutory force of law.
10.
Rule 14 of the said Rules in the relevant Rule and more particularly Rule 14(b) of the said Rules applies in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
For the convenience, the Rule 14 is quoted hereinbelow :  "Appointment on compassionate ground.
- The Council may appoint primary teachers with the approval of the Director on compassionate ground in the following cases where in the opinion of the Council, the cases deserve compassionate consideration :- (a) when a teacher dies-in-harness before the date of his superannuation leaving a family which, in the opinion of the Council, shall be in extreme economic hardship;  (1) the unemployed widowed wife, or (2) the unemployed son, or (3) the unemployed unmarried daughter, of the deceased primary teacher possessing required educational qualifications as laid down in sub-rules (a) and (b) of rule 6 and found eligible to teach, may make within two years from the date of such death a prayer in writing to the Council for appointment as primary teacher on compassionate ground, provided that only one member of a deceased primary teacher's family may be appointed on compassionate consideration; (b) when a primary teacher is declared permanently incapacitated by the competent medical board set up according to the procedure laid down in the government order and he has been allowed to retire at least two years before he attains the age of superannuation and his family is in extreme economic hardship after such retirement, (1) the unemployed wife, or (2) the unemployed son, or (3) the unemployed unmarried daughter, of the incapacitated and prematurely retired primary teacher possessing the required qualifications as laid down in sub-rules (a) and (b) of rule 6.
Educational qualifications and found eligible to teach, may make within two years from the date of such retirement, a prayer in writing to the Council for appointment as primary teacher on compassionate ground : Provided that only one member of the family of the incapacitated and prematurely retired primary teacher possessing the required educational qualifications and found eligible to teach, may be appointed on compassionate ground."
(emphasis added) 11.
Aforesaid rule 14(b) clearly lays down that when a primary teacher is allowed to retire on the ground of being declared permanently incapacitated crossing 58 years of age, then such teacher is not entitled to any benefit provided by the said rule 14(b).
There is no dispute that sixty years is the age of superannuation and the petitioner was found permanently incapacitated crossing the age of fifty-eight years.
Therefore, petitioner is not entitled to any benefit as provided by aforesaid Rule 14(b) and his ward cannot be appointed on compassionate ground.
Merely because in some case the wards of primary teachers who were declared medically incapacitated crossing the age of fifty-eight years could get appointment on compassionate ground, these by themselves do not create any right in favour of any other similarly situated person to claim appointment in violation of statutory provisions.
I am of the view, that the petitioner fails to make out any prima facie in the instant case.
12.
The directions, referred to and relied upon by the petitioner, were passed by the Courts oblivious of the said Rule 14(b) which has statutory force of law.
Those directions are "per incurium" because those were passed by the Courts in ignorance of forgetfulness of said Rule 14(b).
Those decisions are inconsistent with the mandate of said Rule 14(b) which was binding on the courts concerned and thus making the said directions of the Courts demonstrably wrong.
Said Rule 14(b) does not conceive of any appointment on compassionate ground where the primary teacher is declared permanently incapacitated by the competent medical board after the teacher crosses the age of fifty eight years.
Admittedly the age of superannuation of a primary teacher is sixty years.
The effect of the words "at least two years before he attains the age of superannuation" in said Rule 14(b) is that if the primary teacher is declared permanently incapacitated before attaining the age of fifty eight years then only question of appointment on compassionate ground would arise.
In a case where primary teacher is declared permanently incapacitated after attaining the age of fifty eight years question of appointment on compassionate ground shall not arise at all.
Court is not bound to follow a decision if it is satisfied that the decision was given per incurium or the attention of the court was not drawn to the relevant statutory provision.
Therefore, I am not prepared to follow the aforesaid directions referred to and relied upon by the petitioner on the ground that those directions are "per incuirum".
I have high regards for the learned Judges who passed the aforesaid directions but only for the reason I cannot follow those directions which are "per incurium".
Bhakti Cult is inept in the critical field of law.
Judicial discipline and decorum also do not compel to follow decisions or directions which are "per incuriam".
13.
In my opinion, so long a statutory provision remains in force and not stayed or kept in abeyance by a competent authority including Court, no Court, if such statutory provision is brought to the notice of the Court, can, shall or is empowered to pass an order directing government or any other authority or any person to act in a manner which is prohibited or forbidden by such statutory provision.
If Court chooses to pass such order then such order suffers from inherent lack of jurisdiction of the court to pass such order, because such order would amount to rewriting the statutory provision by usurping legislative power and the Court is not at all competent to do so.
Court, in the guise of judicial review, cannot and should not also usurp the exclusive function because it is not competent to do so.
Courts are creatures of law and they too are subordinate to law and not above law.
Every function of a Court is controlled by law.
True, the arms of Courts are long enough but the same can be stretched no further than the sleeves of Courts would reach and the sleeves of Courts are tailored by statutory provisions.
Court's order must not only be consistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by Constitution, but it cannot even be inconsistent with the substantive provisions of the relevant statutory laws.
Court cannot act like "the monarch" of all it surveys.
Court cannot do whatever it likes ignoring the statutory provisions.
This is "the supremacy of law".
These principles are well settled but required to be restated to keep them alive in the mind.
14.
Under these circumstances, I am of the view that this writ application is devoid of any merit.
It does not make out any prima facie case to call for affidavits from the respondents.
Under these circumstances the writ application is dismissed.
15.
If urgent xerox certified copy of this order is applied for, that may be issued to the learned advocate for the parties as early as possible.
Application dismissed.