Satyabrata Sinha, J - The added applicants are the appellants.
2.
The respondents Sib Charan Musher and others who are said to be the licensed Porters, filed a writ application before this Court claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "(a) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents, their servants, Agents and/or Subordinates to act in accordance with law and further commanding them to engage the petitioners as Porters to carry Railway Parcel Goods and Passengers' Luggage in the Station premises at Barharwa Railway Junction under Malda Division, Eastern Railway;  (b) A writ in the nature of Certiorari directing the respondents to certify and/or transmit all the records relating to the matter before the Hon'ble Court; (c) A writ in the nature of Prohibition prohibiting the respondents, their servants, Agents and/or Subordinates from engaging any unlicensed persons as Porters to carry Railway Parcel Goods and also Luggage of Passengers in the Station Premises of Barharwa Railway Junction, Eastern Railway under Malda Division."
3.
According to the said respondents, as they are licensed Porters engaged at Barharwa Railway Junction in Malda Division and had been paying monthly licence fee to the authority concerned, they should have been allowed to work in handling Railway Parcels, goods and/or luggage.
The terms and conditions of the licensed Railway Porters are stated in Annexure `B' to the writ application.
4.
They filed a writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India being CO No. 3049(W) of 1993 and UC Banerjee, J (as His Lordship then was) disposed of the said writ application by an order dated 2211993 by directing the Railway Authorities to consider their representation in accordance with law and undertaking was allegedly given before this Court that the respondents should not engage any unlicensed porters within the Station premises.
5.
The appellants herein claiming themselves to be casual workers filed a writ application which was subsequently transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, which was marked as TA No. 22 of 1989 and by an order dated 1061993 their cases were also directed to be considered upon screening by a competent officer which is in the following term :-  "In view of the above, we dispose of this application with the following order : `That the respondent No. 2 General Manager, ER, shall depute an appropriate DPO or any other competent Officer for the purpose of screening the present applicants to ascertain as to whether they have worked as parcel handling porters at Barharwa Station for a period of 120 days and more, and if so, they shall be properly screened and placed in the appropriate screening list of casual workers and shall be given the appropriate jobs as parcel handling porters on casual basis as long as such work is available for them and shall be paid in accordance with the rules of payment of casual workers and if they are entitled to get the temporary status, they shall be so given.
In the meantime the applicants shall accept whatever payments are offered to them for the past service and they shall accept it without prejudice.
But after they are properly screened and appointed as casual workers they shall have to be paid as casual workers according to the relevant Railway Circulars.
Till such time the status quo shall be maintained as on today.
The screening has to be completed within a period of three months from the date of communication of this judgment to the General Manager.'
6.
It is stated that an appeal was taken from the said order before the Supreme Court of India which was dismissed on 25.4.1994.
7.
The writ petitioners-respondents, however, filed another writ applications, wherein an interim order was passed on 5.9,1994 restraining the Railway-respondent from engaging any unlicensed porters to carry railway parcels and/or goods in the Station premises.
As the said order was allegedly not complied with, a contempt application was filed and therein an order was passed on 28101998 directing the railway authorities to comply with the said order of injunction on 591994.
8.
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said order, the Divisional Railway Manager, Eastern Railway, Maldah directed the Station Manager of Barharwa by a letter dated 1881998 that until further orders no unlicensed Porter should be engaged to carry railway parcels.
It was alleged that the appellants herein did not come out with success upon screening which was communicated by the Divisional Commercial Manager by a letter dated 3181998.
Again an application was filed by the appellants herein before the Central Administrative Tribunal questioning the report of the Screening Committee as also the said letter dated 1881998 but no interim order was passed therein where against, a writ application has been filed before this Court being WPC.T.
No. 448 of 1998.
Admittedly the said application is still pending.
However, in view of the aforementioned letter dated 1881998 the appellants filed an application for impleading themselves as parties in the writ application and the said application was allowed.
However, the application for vacation the stay filed by them was rejected by a learned Judge of this Court in terms of an order dated 22121998, although the Railway authorities had also filed an application for vacating the stay.
9.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, inter alia, submitted that the appellants have been prejudicially affected by the order dated 591994 as the circular letters issued by the Railway Board in terms whereof the licences were directed to be confined only to handling the passengers' luggage had not been brought to the notice of this Court.
It has further been averred that the Railway authorities had issued a circular to the effect that as they had been granted licence for carrying passengers luggage only and in case they are to be engaged for handling parcels they should surrender their coolies licenses which is to the following term :-  "Kindly refer to you letter No. 2218/WAT/Pt dated 1061997 requesting the Board to grant post facto sanction for engaging the licensed porters for 8 hours a day for handling the Railway parcels, consequent to the judgment of High Court/AP on WP No. 13364/94.
The matter has been examined in Board's office in the light of court judgments on similar cases and their implications.
It has been decided in supersession to the board's instructions of even No. dated 2691970, that the licensed porters should not be utilised for parcel handling work as they are granted licenses for carrying passengers' luggage only.
In case they are to be used for handling parcels they should surrender their coolies licenses."
10.
It has further been submitted that the writ application was not maintainable in view of the provision of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and, thus, this Court had no jurisdiction to entertain writ jurisdiction.
The appellants have contended that they had been working since 1974 as casual labourers and in terms of circular letter dated 1591980 they had acquired a temporary status, as such they are entitled to regulrisation in view of various decisions of the Supreme Court of India.
11.
It further appears that in the contempt application, an order dated 28101998 had been passed wherein it was held that the Railway authorities had committed contempt of the court by wilfully and deliberately violating the order dated 1591994.
However, before the learned trial Judge the said contemnors stated that they were ready and willing to comply with the order of the court.
The learned Judge, however, upon considering the pleas taken by the contemnors awarded a sentence of fine of Rs. 3,000/- each but directed suspension of the said sentence till 18111998 if they comply with the order by the said date.
12.
By an order dated 22121998 the learned single Judge passed the following order :  "Considering the fact that the applicants are the unlicensed porters and upon screening, the concerned authority, pursuant to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, the said applicants were not given any fresh employment or allotted with any job, the interim order already made in this writ petition cannot be vacated at the instance of the said applicants.
However, the rights of the said applicants for being employed by the authority concerned will be considered at the time of the disposal of the writ petition.
13.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has referred to various decisions on the question that the porter/workers who had been engaged through the Co-operative Societies and had been working with the Railways for the last 10 years should be regularised or absorbed by the Railways subject to being found medically fit and being below the age of superannuation.
Reference in this connection has been made to National Federation of Railway Porters, Vendors and Bearers v. Union of India reported in AIR 1995 SC 1617 : 1995(3) SCT 580 (SC).
It appears that the Apex Court has passed a similar direction on 16101998 in Railway Parcel and Goods Handling Mazdoor Union v. Union of India reported in 1999(1) PLJR 55 (SC).
14.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that as the rights of the writ petitioners-respondents are yet to be adjudicated upon, the learned trial Judge ought to have considered the application for vacation the stay on its own merits.
Although, prima facie, it appears that the license granted to the writ petitioners as contained in Annexure `D' to the writ application is not confined only to handling of the passengers' goods but it was obligatory on the part of the learned trial Judge to consider the validity of the circular issued by the Railway authorities as contained in Annexure `D' to the writ application.
If a policy decision has been taken by the Railway authorities as a result whereof the licensed porters are allowed merely to handle the passengers' luggage and not the parcels, the writ application at their instance was not maintainable.
From a perusal of the order passed by the learned trial Judge it also does not appear that the question as to whether this writ application is maintainable in view of the provision of the Administrative Tribunal Act had also been taken into consideration.
We, however, hasten to add that we do not mean to say that this court has no jurisdiction but we only wish to point out that the question posed by the appellants herein as also the authorities of the railway administration require consideration at the hands of the learned trial Judge.
15.
It may be true that unless an order of regularisation is passed or the rights of the appellants herein are adjudicated upon by a competent court of law as regard their claim of regularisation they may not have a right to continue to work but thereby only, their right to work could not have been taken away unless and until the courts come to a positive finding that the circular letters issued by the Railway authorities are bad in law.
In any event, the ad-interim order could not have been passed as a result whereof the rights of others would be affected although they were not parties in the writ application.
16.
It has not been disputed before us that the appellants herein have been disengaged in terms on the Divisional Railway Manager Maldah's letter dated 1881998 only in view of the order dated 2.1.1993 passed by this court.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge should not have refused to recall the interim order of injunction.
The order of interim injunction dated 591994 should have been vacated only on that ground.
The order of interim injunction should be passed keeping in view the parameters laid down by the Apex Court in Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund v. Kartick Das reported in 1994(4) SCC 225, which reads thus :-  "As a principle, ex-parte injunction could be granted only under exceptional circumstances.
The factors which should weigh with the court in the grant of ex-parte injunction are -  (a) whether irreparable or serious mischief will ensue to the plaintiff; (b) whether the refusal of ex-parte injunction would involve greater injustice than the grant of it would involve; (c) the court will also consider the time at which the plaintiff first had notice of the act complained so that the making of improper order against a party in his absence is prevented; (d) the court will consider whether the plaintiff had acquiesced for some time in such circumstances it will not grant ex-parte injunction; (e) the court would expect a party applying for ex-parte injunction to show utmost good faith in making the application; (f) even if granted, the ex-parte injunction would be for a limited period of time; (g) General principles like prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable loss would also be considered by the court."
17.
A bare perusal of the order dated 591994 clearly shows that the order of interim injunction has been passed without assigning any reason.
The tenor of the said order shows that the learned trial Judge was aware that the unlicenced Porters were carrying railway parcels, goods and luggage of the passengers at Barharwa Railway Junction as otherwise a restraint order could not have been passed.
Such an interim order has been passed in absence of the appellants herein and on the very first day of moving the application.
18.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances and keeping in view the fact that there are conflicting claims, we allow this appeal, set aside the order dated 22121998 and vacate the interim order dated 591994.
19.
We, however, direct that the matter be considered afresh upon hearing the parties and upon considering the materials on the records as also the observations made herein.
However, we may observe that the learned trial Judge may also consider the desirability of disposing of the writ application as expeditiously as possible and preferably within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order.
If the appellants as also the Railway authorities have not filed affidavit-in-opposition, they should do so within two weeks from date.
Appeal allowed.