GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to quash the order dated 23111996 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, District Rupnagar (hereinafter described as respondent No. 3) terminating the petitioner's service by way of discharge.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner joined service in the Police Department of the State of Punjab w.e.f.
20.10.1992 on his appointment as Cook as a part of the Contingent Fund Staff.
On 19111996, the respondent No. 3 issued notice Annexure P.2 for initiation of disciplinary action against him on the allegation of absence from duty and violation of the discipline.
To this, he submitted reply Annexure P.3 (dated nil) and on 23111996, the respondent No. 3 issued the impugned order terminating the petitioner's service.
3.
Shri DK Singla pleaded for invalidation of the impugned order on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice and Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
He submitted that the petitioner has been punished in the garb of discharge simplicitor and, therefore, the Court should lift the veil of innocuous and declare the impugned order as nullity.
4.
We have given serious thought to the submission of the learned counsel but are unable to agree with him.
In our opinion, it is not a proper case for exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution because the petitioner has not only availed the remedy by filing civil suit but has withdrawn the same without permission to file a fresh suit or a writ petition.
A bare perusal of Annexure P.5 shows that the petitioner filed Civil Suit No. 675 dated 1671997 in the Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ropar for grant of a declaration that he is entitled to salary and other service benefits w.e.f.
1111996 and also for issuance of a mandatory injunction to the defendants (respondents herein) to allow him to mark attendance from 111997 onwards and also for restraining the defendants from suspending, retrenching or terminating his service.
The suit was withdrawn by him on 7.5.1998 without seeking permission to institute a fresh suit or to file writ petition in the High Court for challenging the termination of his service by way of discharge.
In view of this, it is not possible to entertain the petitioner's plea for invalidation of the impugned order.
5.
In Sarguja Transport Service v. State Transport of Appellate Tribunal, Gwalior and others, AIR 1987 SC 88, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that even though the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure do not strictly apply to the proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, the policy underlying the provisions of Order 23 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure can be applied to the writ petitions.
In Karan Singh v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 12084 of 1998 decided on 481998, this Court has held that after withdrawing one petition, the petitioner cannot be allowed to institute another petition on the same cause of action.
For reference purposes, some of the observations made in that order, are extracted below :  "It is a matter of common knowledge that many a time when counsel arguing for the petitioner finds that the Court is not inclined to entertain the writ petition or is not likely to pass a favourable order, then he requests for withdrawal of the same.
A Court which is not willing to admit the writ petition may agree to permit withdrawal thereof without giving liberty to file fresh writ petition.
In such situation, the petitioner cannot be permitted to file second petition on the same subject matter for grant of similar relief.
It is a sound public policy to discourage a litigant from indulging in bench hunting, which he is bound to indulge it it is held that after withdrawing writ petition without liberty to file fresh one, the litigant can institute a fresh petition.
We are also of the opinion that the withdrawal of a petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution without permission to file fresh petition should be treated as abandonment of the claim by the petitioner and he cannot be allowed to resurrect the same on finding that a favourable bench is available after some time.
Therefore, it is in larger public interest and in the interest of administration of justice to extend the principle underlying under Order 23 Rule 1 to cases of withdrawal of writ petitions."
6.
Applying the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Sarguja Transport Service v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Gwalior and others (supra) and of this Court in Karan Singh v. State of Haryana and others (supra), we hold that the petitioner cannot invoke writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution after withdrawal of the suit filed by him for seeking invalidation of the action taken by the respondents.
The mere articulation of the prayer made in the civil suit cannot be allowed to be used as a camouflage for avoiding the consequences of withdrawal of suit without liberty to file a fresh suit or to file a writ petition.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.