Harjit Singh Bedi, J - Whether the State can, and if so, to what extent, make reservations in favour of local resident candidates in admission to educational Institutions, is the core question that has been raised in this writ petition.
2.
This question arises out of the following facts :  The Director of Technical Education Haryana issued an Information Brochure for the Diploma Entrance Test (Management), 1998 to the various institutions in the State of Haryana, including the Institute of Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition at Panipat (hereinafter called "the Institute").
The conditions of eligibility for taking the test were also laid down in the Information Brochure.
The petitioner being eligible thereunder, took the test and on the declaration of the result was placed at over all merit position No. 6.
The Director of Technical Education of Haryana, thereafter issued a prospectus for admission to the Government/Aided/Private Polytechnics/Technical Institutes in the State of Haryana and those candidates who had qualified the entrance test were given a choice of various courses of study.
The petitioner applied for admission to the Diploma Course in Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition at the Institute (in which there were forty seats in all) against one of two seats available in the open general category, as he was a resident of Chandigarh and, therefore, not a domicile of Haryana State.
The admissions were made for this category on 22nd August, 1998 and the petitioner fell at merit No. 3.
Two candidates, who were at position Nos. 1 and 2, namely, Rahul Gupta and Hemant Kumar Suhag, were granted admission whereas the petitioner remained unsuccessful.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court claiming that as only 10% of the general category seats had been left for the open category instead of the 15% postulated by the Supreme Court, he was entitled to admission on that basis.
3.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and 5.
It has been pleaded that the reservation of seats had been made as per the policy of the State Government and that out of a total of 40 seats, 20 seats had been reserved for SC/ST/BC-A&B/ESM/Sports Category candidates and that two seats left open for all candidates would come to 10%, which was justified in law.
4.
It would be seen that the matter in issue is a purely legal one and the decision either way would have serious repercussions on the methodology of admissions to educational institutions in the States of Punjab and Haryana and in the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
I had accordingly requested Mr. Anupam Gupta Advocate to assist the Court as Amicus Curiae and am indeed grateful for the effort that he has put in.
The counsel for the parties as also Mr. Gupta have been heard at length on the points raised.
As the matter stands concluded by various judgments of the Supreme Court, this judgment would, of necessity, be largely a digest of the case law cited at the Bar.
Moreover, if I might take courage to say that they have been so lucidly and eloquently written, that it would be presumptuous of me to use my words more than absolutely necessary.
5.
The matter would have to be examined in the light of the Constitutional provisions as also judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the point.
The first judgment on the question of reservation being made on the ground of residence of a candidate is DP Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and another, AIR 1955 SC 334.
In this case the petitioner, a resident of Delhi, had challenged the instructions issued by the State of Madhya Bharat, whereby students from other Stats studying in the State Medical College were called upon to pay a capitation fee of Rs. 1500/- per annum.
The Constitution Bench in the course of an elaborate discussion on the question of the concept of bona fide resident and domicile, which was argued before it observed that "the object of the classification underlying the impugned rule was clearly to help to some extent students who are residents of Madhya Bharat in the prosecution of their studies, and it cannot be disputed that it is quite a legitimate and laudable objective for a State to encourage educational within its borders.
Education is a State subject, and one of the directive principles declared in part IV of the Constitution is that the State should make effective provisions for education within the limits of its economy.
(Vide Article 41).
The State has to contribute for the upkeep and the running of its educational institutions.
We are in this petition concerned with a Medical College, and it is well-known that it requires considerable finance to maintain such an institution.
If the State has to spend money on it, is it unreasonable that it should so order the educational system that the advantage of it would to some extent at least enure for the benefit of the State ?
A concession given to the residents of the State in the matter of fees is obviously calculated to serve that end, as presumably some of them might, after passing out of the College, settle down as doctors and serve the needs of the locality.
The classification is thus based on a ground which has a reasonable relation to the subject matter of the Legislation, and is in consequence not open to attack.
It has been held in State of Punjab v. Ajaib Singh, AIR 1953 SC 10(G), that "a classification might validly be made on a geographical basis.
Such a classification would be eminently just and reasonable, where it relates to education which is the concern primarily of the State.
The contention, therefore, that the rule imposing capitation fee is in contravention of Article 14 must be rejected."
The matter came up before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kumari N Vasundara v. The State of Mysore and another, AIR 1971 SC 1439 once again dealing with admissions to the MBBS Course, Rule 3 which was challenged is reproduced below :-  "No person who is not a citizen of India and who is not domiciled and resident in the State of Mysore for not less than ten years at any time prior to the date of the application for a seat, shall be eligible to apply : Provided that this provision shall not apply (a) in the case of persons applying for seats referred to in Clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of Sub- rule (1) of Rule 4, (b) in the case of children of Central Government employees serving on duty in the State on the date of making the application, and (c) in the case of children of Mysore Government employees including children of members of All India Services borne on the mysore State Cadre who -  (i) are serving or have served outside the State of Mysore on deputation during the relevant period, and  (ii) are in the service of the State on the date of making the application or have retired from service not more than four years prior to the date of making the application."
6.
The Hon'ble Bench relied on the decision in DP Joshi's case (supra) and came to the conclusion that the word "domicile" in Rule 3 had been used to convey the idea of an intention to reside or remain in the State of Mysore and that the object of framing the rule was to be seen as an attempt to impart medical education to the best talent available out of the class of persons who were likely, so far as it could reasonably be foreseen, to serve as doctors, in the State of Mysore.
It was accordingly observed that young students, both boys and girls, were likely to be gainfully employed and also to serve the State and this benefit to the State fully justified the reservation and it could not be challenged as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The matter came up once again before the Supreme Court in Dr. Jagdish Saran and others v Union of India and others, AIR 1980 SC 820 in which a Bench of three Hon'ble Judges for the first time struck a somewhat discordant note with regard to the decisions in the earlier two cited cases.
In this case the petitioner's father, an officer in the Central Government, was transferred to Delhi.
The petitioner applied for admission to the post-graduate medical course in Dermatology in Delhi University.
He qualified the common entrance test, but was turned down for admission because of a rule reserving 70% of the seats, at the post graduate level, for Delhi graduates, while retaining only 30% seats open to all, including graduates of Delhi.
The petitioner accordingly contended that the reservation for local residents was excessive and was, therefore, open to challenge as being violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
The Hon'ble Bench speaking through Krishna Iyer J, noted that Delhi being the capital of India, had a national complexion and catered to a population drawn from all parts of the country because of the vast official, political, parliamentary, judicial, educational, commercial and other gravitational pulls which the capital of the country inevitably exerted and that "this national demographic composition is relevant to the examination of the reservation problem".
The Hon'ble Bench further observed that as there appeared to be similar reservations in Universities throughout the country, one university could not be singled out and denied the right to admit students on the basis of residence and that this reservation had been recognised as good in DP Joshi's and others cases, but a balance was nevertheless required to be struck between reservation for local candidates and admissions made on merit.
It was accordingly concluded as under :  "A caveat or two may be sounded even in this approach, lest exception should consume the rule.
The first caution is that reservation must be kept in check by the demands of competence.
You cannot extend the shelter of reservation where minimum qualifications are absent.
Similarly, all the best talent cannot be completely excluded by whole-sale reservation.
So, a certain percentage, which may be available, must be kept open for meritorious performance regardless of university, State and the like.
Complete exclusion of the rest of the country for the sake of a province, wholesale banishment of proven ability to open up, hopefully, some dalit talent, total sacrifice of excellence at the alter of equalisation - when the Constitution mandates for everyone equality before and equal protection of the law - may be fatal folly, self defeating educational technology and anti-national if made a routine rule of State policy.
A fair preference, a reasonable reservation, a just adjustment of the prior needs and real potential of the weak with the partial recognition of the presence of competitive merit - such is the dynamics of social justice which animates the three egalitarian articles of the Constitution," and  while winding up the discussion it was observed "that blind and bigoted local patriotism in xenophobic exclusivism is destructive of our Freedom and only if compelling considerations of gross injustice, desperate backwardness and glaring inequality de-considerate such a purposeful course can protective discrimination gain entrance into the portals of college campuses."
As a consequence of the discussion and in the absence of any rule having been fixed for that purpose, the Bench directed that the reservation of 70% for local candidates was excessive and that a committee of experts be appointed to investigate the matter in depth and to give a justification on the quantum of reservation at the post-graduate level for local candidates.
The issue was once again raised in Dr. Pradeep Jain etc. etc. v Union of India and others, AIR 1984 SC 1420.
The question posed was "whether, consistently with the constitutional values admission to a medical college or any other institution of higher learning situate in a State can be confined to those who have their domicile within the State or who are resident within the State for a specified number of years or can any reservation in admission be made for them so as to give them precedence over those who do not possess domicile or residential qualification within the State, irrespective of merit".
Before embarking upon a discussion as to the law, the Hon'ble Court speaking through Bhagwati, J expressed its unhappiness with the situation that existed and observed that the concept of domicile and residential qualifications had given encouragement to divisive and fissiparous tendencies and had undermined the unity and integrity of the country; and the slogan of benefits for `sons of the soil' which had a popular appeal seriously endangered the social and political fabric of the nation.
The Court then considered the entire matter in this and the background of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution and pointed out that Article 15(2) clearly barred discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them and that the use of the word `domicile' as a pre-requisite for admission to a medical college in that State was improper as Article 5 of the Constitution recognised only one domicile in India, namely, "domicile in the territory of India".
The Court remained fully cognizant of the situation that though the demand for admission to medical colleges outstripped the availability of seats there was nonetheless an acute paucity of doctors in rural areas as medical students who generally came from urban areas were reluctant to be posted outside.
The Court affirmed the observations in Jagdish Saran's case (supra) that the Constitution guaranteed equality of opportunity to all for the purpose of admission to medical colleges irrespective of his/her background and any deviation from this principle would frustrate the concept of equality before the law, and held as under :- "The philosophy and pragmatism of universal excellence through equality of opportunity for education and advancement across the nation is part of our founding faith and constitutional creed.
The effort must, therefore, always be to select the best and most meritorious students for admission to technical institutions and medical colleges by providing equal opportunity to all citizens in the country and no citizen can legitimately, without serious detriment to the unity and integrity of the nation, be regarded as an outsider in our constitutional set up.
Moreover, it would be against national interest to admit in medical colleges or other institutions giving instruction in specialities, less meritorious students when more meritorious students are available, simply because the former are permanent residents or residents for a certain number of years in the State while the latter are not, though both categories are citizens of India.
Exclusion of more meritorious students on the ground that they are not resident within the State would be likely to promote sub-standard candidates and bring about fall in medical competence, injurious in the long run to the very region.
It is no blessing to inflict quacks and medical midgets on people by wholesale sacrifice of talent at the threshold.
Nor can the very best be rejected from admission because that will be a national loss and the interests of no region can be higher than those of the nation.
The primary consideration in selection of candidates for admission to the medical colleges must, therefore, be merit.
The object of any rules which may be made for regulating admissions to the medical colleges must be to secure the best and most meritorious students."
7.
The Court noted that this was the consideration which had weighed with it in Minor P Rajendran v. State of Madras, AIR 1968 SC 1012 in striking down the rule made by the State of Madras allocating seats in medical colleges on a district-wise basis as being too restrictive.
The Court agreeing with the observations of Krishna Iyer, J, in Jagdish Saran's case, highlighted the position in the following words :  "If potential for rural service or aptitude for rendering medical attention among backward people is a criterion of merit - and it, undoubtedly, is in a land of sickness and misery, neglect and penury, wails and tears - then, surely, belonging to a university catering to a deprived region is a plus point of merit.
Excellence is composite and the heart and its sensitivity are as precious in the case of educational values as the head and its creativity and social medicine for the common people is more relevant than peak performance in freak cases.
Merit cannot be measured in terms of marks alone, but human sympathies are equally important.
The heart is as much a factor as the head in assessing the social value of a member of the medical profession.
This is also an aspect which may, to the limited extent possible, be borne in mind while determine merit.
For selection of candidates for admission to medical colleges though concededly, it would not be easy to do so, since it is a factor which is extremely difficult to judge and not easily susceptible to evaluation".
8.
The Court then observed that though the principle of equality of opportunity for admission to the medical colleges was sacrosanct, there were two considerations which could justify or departure from this principle and these were identified as being (1) State interest as recognised in DP Joshi's and N Vasundra cases (supra) and (2) the region's claim to backwardness.
The Bench dilated on the second consideration and justified it on the premise that it was intended to create a semblance of equality amongst candidates who were unequals, as in the absence of any preferential treatment, candidates from these areas would have no possibility of gaining admission to a medical college.
It was accordingly concluded that "if the State in such a case seeks to remove the absence of opportunity for medical education and to provide competent and adequate medical services in such backward region by starting a medical college in the heart of such backward region and reserved a high percentage of seats there to students from that region, it may not possible to castigate such reservation or preferential treatment as discriminatory.
What is directly intended to abolish existing disparity cannot be accused of discrimination."
9.
The Court then went on to examine the question as to the extent to which such a reservation could be made and concluded that till such time as a proper decision was made after an indepth examination of an extremely complex issue, the extent of reservation could not exceed the outer limit of 70% of the total number of seats after taking "into account other kinds of reservations validly made".
The matter once again came before the Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar and others v. Molilal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad and others, AIR 1986 SC 1877.
The Court once again noted the apparent inconsistencies and wide discordance in the policy of the different States with regard to reservations that could be made and observed that as there was no system of reciprocity between them, it was proper that at least 15% of the total number of seats for the M.B.B.S./B.D.S.
Course and not less than 25% of the total number of seats for the post-graduate courses in the medical colleges or institutions should be made available for admission, on merit, on the basis of an All India Entrance Examination.
Dr. Dinesh Kumar's case (supra) was a sequel to the main judgment in Dr. Pardeep Jain's case and a broad distinction is discernible between the two inasmuch as that in the latter case it had been laid down that reservation should not exceed the outer limit of 70% of the total number of seats after taking into account other kinds of reservations validly made, whereas in the former case it was stipulated that the reservations could not exceed 85% of the total number of seats.
10.
The latest judgment in point of time cited by the learned Counsel for the parties is Mohan Bir Singh Chawla v. Panjab University, Chandigarh and another, AIR 1997 SC 788, wherein a weightage of 10% marks given by the Panjab University to students who had passed the qualifying examination from the University was challenged.
The Court held that the weightage of marks was permissible although the addition of 10% marks was somewhat excessive.
The Court then examined the various judgments, including those rendered in Jagdish Saran's and Dr. Pardeep Jain's cases (supra) and concluded that "the rule of preference on the basis of domicile/requirement of residence is not bad provided it is within reasonable limits, i.e., it does not result in reserving more than eighty five percent seats in graduate courses and more than seventy five percent seats in post-graduate courses".
This is where the matter rests as of today.
11.
The facts of the case in hand have to be examined in the light of the law digested above.
It bears notice that in the Information Brochure which had provided for admission to the entrance test, it had been notified that reservation of seats for various categories would be available in the prospectus to be issued by the Department of Technical Education, Government of Haryana, and that unless otherwise specified the seats reserved for various categories would be for the bona fide residents of Haryana State only, whereas of the remaining seats meant for the open category candidates, 90% seats to be reserved exclusively for the Haryana domicile candidates and 10% for other candidates, including those from Haryana and the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
This Information Brochure also provided that the status as a Haryana resident was to be determined in accordance with Chief Secretary's letter dated 3101996 and that admission was to be made against the seats in terms of clauses 9(a) and 20 of the Prospectus.
These clauses are reproduced below :  9(a) The admission against reserved seats be made on the basis of merit in the respective groups.
Seats mentioned from column 6 to 12 above reserved for bona fide residents of Haryana State only.
20.
The admission is open to :  (i) The bona fide National of Indian Union for seats under Col. 13 or bona fide residents of Haryana State, Seats reserved for Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes/Servicemen/Children, Wards of Armed Forces Personnel/Ex-servicemen, Outstanding Sportsmen/Women and sons and grandsons of Freedom Fighters are for candidates of Haryana domicile only.
(ii) Some seats are reserved at Jhajjar and Sirsa for candidates belonging to Jammu and Kashmir States and at Haryana Polytechnic, Nilokheri for Nationals of South and South East Asia Regions."
The prospectus envisaged above was thereafter issued by the Directorate and it provided for admission to Government/Aided/Private Polytechnics/Technical Institutes, and 40 seats were accordingly provided at the Institute and they were to be distributed as under :  1., Name of the Diploma Course......... HOTEL MANAGEMENT, CATERING AND NUTRITION., (40) 2., Sanctioned intake 3., Nationals of South and East Asia 4., Refugee Indian Origin from Abroad 5., Candidates from Jammu and Kashmir........... (7+1)....8 seats............. 6., Scheduled Castes Tribes 20% (1% from ESM of this category) 7., Backward Classes................. 6. seats................ Block A 16% (1% for ESM of this category) 8., Backward Classes ................  4. seats...............Block B 11% (1% for ESM of this category) 9., Sportsmen 1%.........................  1. seat....................... 10., Sportswomen 1%.................... 11., ESM...................................  1. seat................... 12., Haryana Domicile ........................... 18. seats............ @ 90 of the balance seats.
13., Open Category..................... 2. seats................ 14.
NRI......................... 12.
It is evident from the above discussion and more particularly, the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar's and Mohan Bir Singh Chawla's cases (supra) that the extent of reservation could not exceed 85% of the total number of seats.
In the reply filed by the respondents, the positive stand is that of the 40 seats available for admission, 20 seats were in the reserved category of SC, ST etc.; and the provision of 2 seats for open candidates of all States, including Haryana and Union Territory of Chandigarh candidates being 10% of the seats (after deducting the reserved seats) and as the petitioner had himself staked a claim to 15% of this number, the difference of 5% being marginal could be ignored.
This stand is untenable as in determining the extent of reservation, the total of 40 seats were required to be taken into account and a reservation beyond 85% of the total number of seats could not be justifiably made.
In that event the seats available for open category candidates could not have been less than six in number.
It is evident, therefore, that had this reservation been adhered to, the petitioner being at position No. 3 in the open category, would have been entitled to admission.
13.
It is true that the observations made by the Supreme Court and referred to above, were with respect to admissions to Medical Colleges and other Institutes of higher learning, but the background and reasons which impelled the Supreme Court in reading its conclusions cannot be ignored even while applying the principles aforesaid to the facts of the present case.
I would, therefore, venture to suggest that these principles would apply to all institutions which provide specialised courses at the graduate level and above where the demand for admission outstrips the availability of seats.
14.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the reservation beyond 85% of the total seats is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondent-State of Haryana to grant admission to the petitioner in the Institute forthwith.
It is further directed that the petitioner's lectures would be calculated from the date that he actually gets admission in the Course.
It is also directed that in view of the fact that the admissions have long since been made to the various institutions mentioned in the Information Brochure and the Prospectus, this judgment will have no effect on those admissions.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.