VS Aggarwal, J (Oral) - Petitioner-Pritam Singh seeks quashing of the award of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda dated 11111994.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda had held that the petitioner-workman is not entitled to any relief.
2.
Services of the petitioners were terminated vide order dated 1421991 on the ground that he had committed a fraud of Rs. 190/- while on duty with bus No. PJO-3456.
He defrauded the Punjab Roadways by way of charging the requisite fee from the passengers but not issued the tickets in lieu of fare charged.
After the enquiry his services were terminated.
3.
The petitioner had raised an industrial dispute.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court.
He had asserted that no fair or proper enquiry had been held.
The assertions as such were denied.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court held that the enquiry was held, personal hearing was given and that the report of the Enquiry Officer was based on evidence.
In short it was held that fair and proper enquiry had been conducted.
The request of the petitioner for a lenient view was not accepted.
Hence, the present writ petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the findings of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court cannot be sustained because Dalip Singh was one of the witnesses produced.
He had not checked the cash amount with the petitioner and, therefore, it cannot be termed that the petitioner had committed a fraud of Rs. 190/-.
It was urged that some of the passengers had lost the tickers.
There are findings of fact arrived by at the Labour Court.
The findings are based on evidence.
Unless it is shown that the same are erroneous or there is misreading of evidence in exercise of the extra ordinary jurisdiction, the High Court will not interfere in those findings.
In the present case it is not shown to be otherwise.
Therefore, there is no ground to upset those findings.
5.
The main argument advanced by the petitioner's learned counsel was that under Section 11-A, of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Labour Court should have exercised its discretion and a lenient view should have been taken.
In support of this contention, he relied upon two decisions of this court in the case of Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and another, Civil Writ Petition No. 2020 of 1985, decided on 1511990 and Rajesh Kumar Dutta v. Presiding Officer, Civil Writ Petition No. 10765 of 1990, decided on 511995 : 1995(4) SCT 197 (P&H);  6.
In the case of Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd (supra), there was a lapse of amounting to Rs. 30,000/-.
The Labour Court had held that the evidence did not warrant a conclusion of the element of dishonesty.
The workman was earlier employed in the Indian Army.
He was too simple for the job of store-keeper.
Thus, a lenient view was taken.
7.
In the case of Rajesh Kumar Dutta (supra) it had been held that it was a case of negligence on the part of the workman and, therefore, the Labour Court was justified in reinstatement of the workman.
8.
Facts of both the cases speak volume.
In both the cases guilty intention to embezzle was missing.
This court did not think it appropriate to interfere in the discretion so exercised by the Labour Court.
9.
That is not so in the present case.
In the present case, it has been found that the petitioner had embezzled the amount of Rs. 190/-.
He charged the amount from the passengers but did not issue the tickets.
The Court will not come to the rescue of such a person.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court has exercised the discretion and has considered the said fact.
Compassion will not come to save persons who have misappropriated the funds and departed from the path of virtue.
Therefore, there is no ground to upset the said award.
For these reasons, the writ petition must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.