V Gopala Gowda, J - The petitioner who was aged about 40 years at the time of passing the peculiar order of termination by the competent authority in exercise of his powers under Paragraph 22 of State Bank of India Officers (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979 (in short `the Order') is before this Court seeking for issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the same in which termination order it has been illegally declared as he has voluntarily abandoned/voluntarily resigned from service with effect from 5111990 and further sought for a direction declaring that, he has been deemed to be in continuous service as he has never resigned or abandoned the services urging the following legal contentions:  The petitioner belongs to ST (Kondakapu).
He joined the services of the respondent Bank on 28121974.
He has served in the different circles of the respondent-Bank in its different branches.
He had rendered 18 years of continuous service and has got unblemish service record.
The first respondent-Bank is a premier Bank in India.
It has employed 1000s of employees throughout the country and it is governed by the provisions of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (in short `the Act').
Therefore, it is an `Authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
At Paragraph 4 of the Writ Petition, it is stated that, when he was working at Bidar Branch he developed severe back pain, and he had undergone treatment from 25.8.1988 to 15.7.1989.
He was in-patient in JB National Hospital, Hyderabad.
He also suffered from high temperature infected by malaria.
Further, he also suffered from chronic appendicitis and ultimately he had undergone operation on 1751989.
Further, the petitioner was transferred from Bidar Branch to Humanabad Branch.
Due to illness he could not report to Humanabad Branch for which he had sent telegrams that he was taking treatment at Hyderabad for illness and he would report for duty after recovery.
He reported for duty on 15101990 at the Humanabad Branch and worked upto 5111990.
When he developed temperature, the doctor advised him to take rest and accordingly petitioner sent a leave application on 5111990 addressed to the Regional Manager, Hubli Branch though Branch Manager, Humanabad Branch.
It is stated, petitioner received a notice on 18121990 from Humanabad Branch asking him to report for duty and give explanation for his absence.
Petitioner contends that it was falsely mentioned in the letter that petitioner did not report for duty in response to the previous notice dated 8.10.1990 even though he had reported for duty on 15101990 and worked upto 5111990.
It was also mentioned in that notice that if the petitioner did not report for duty, it would be presumed that he had voluntarily abandoned duty or resigned without giving requisite notice.
2.
It is contended that, when the notice was received the petitioner was seriously ill and was undergoing medical treatment.
He sent telegram on 28.12.1990 requesting for extension of sick leave.
He also sent a reply letter on 28.12.1990 stating that he was prevented from reporting to duty because he was suffering from jaundice and was treated by doctors.
He has produced necessary certificate in this regard.
He further requested for extension of sick leave from 2531991.
The Bank did not refuse to grant leave for the period from 5111990 to 15.6.1991 till the date of filing of this petition.
The Bank issued one more notice on 351991 directing the petitioner to report for duty within three days failing which it would be presumed that he had "voluntarily abandoned his duties or resigned from service without giving notice."
The petitioner states that he had sent reply telegram to this notice on 851991 a true copy of which is also produced by the petitioner to the effect that, that he would report for duty by the month end as his mother was hospitalised.
Petitioner also telephoned to the Branch Manager, Humanabad Branch on 1751991, the Branch Manager informed him to report only to the Regional Manager, Region III, State Bank of India, Hubli Zonal Office.
The petitioner therefore went to Hubli to report for duty to the Regional Manager, Region III on 1761991, but, the Regional Manager did not give him proper hearing and asked him to put in writing whatever he wanted to say and did not permit him to report for duty.
It is further stated that, at this stage, the petitioner went to the Bank's Medical Officer on 1761991 and got examined and further, the Medical Officer issued fitness certificate.
Thereafter, the petitioner received a letter dated 2491991 from the Chief General Manager stating that petitioner did not respond to the notices issued to him as referred to above.
3.
The petitioner is seeking the relief on various ground particularly, the action of the respondent-Bank in presuming that the petitioner had voluntarily abandoned his services or voluntarily resigned from his services from 5111990 even though he has submitted medial certificates, telegraphic and telephonic communications regarding his sickness and various requests for leave and extension of leave and not permitting him to report for duty is manifestly illegal and mala fide.
The act of the Bank in presuming that the petitioner voluntarily abandoned or voluntarily resigned is untenable, unjust and unsustainable in law.
Further, the action of the Bank is violative of principles of natural justice as the Bank did not issue any show-cause notice nor conducted any enquiry for the alleged absence in accordance with the service rules of the Bank.
Thereby it had deprived the petitioner the reasonable opportunity of referring to all the leave applications, medical certificates, telegrams.
The petitioner prays for grant of relief on the ground that the impugned order is illegal and void.
4.
A detailed counter has been filed by the respondent-Bank traversing various averments made in the Writ Petition referring to Rule 92 of the State Bank of India (Supervisory Staff) Service Rules (in short `the Rules') stating that power has been exercised by the Bank.
Various allegations are denied, but, there is no specified denial in the counter with reference to the leave letters, extension for sick leave, telegrams and the letter dated 1761991 acknowledgement produced by the petitioner at Annexures KK and LL are not specifically denied.
This circumstance further goes to show how the respondent-Bank has taken evasive stand in controverting the averments made in the Writ Petition.
This is the kind of assistance rendered by the respondents to this Court in determining the rights of the parties.
Therefore, this Court has to view the attitude of the respondent-Bank, which being the Nationalised Bank very seriously.
Further, at paragraph 6 it is stated with regard to Annexure FGHK and L without making any comment with regard to those documents whether they are disputed or admitted.
At paragraph 14 it is stated with regard to co-employee had taken the petitioner to the Doctor but it is alleged that medical certificate has not been produced to that effect.
At paragraph 17 of the Court it is stated that, the petitioner suppressed the fact that Humamabad Branch Manager addressed a letter to the petitioner on 23.11.1990 advising him that his leave application dated 5111990 was rejected and that his absence was treated as sick leave as per his request.
The respondents have specifically stated in the counter that, no relief is admissible to the petitioner in exercise of writ jurisdiction by this Court as the Petitioner has approached this Court with unclean hands and it is prayed that Writ Petition may be dismissed with costs.
5.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the petitioner and the respondents and having perused the petition averments, the statement of objections and the various documents produced in support of respective contentions, following points have to be considered by this Court:  (i) Whether, the order of voluntary abandonment/resignation could have been passed by the respondent-Bank in exercise of its owner under paragraph 20(2) of the Order, 1979 and whether, respondent-Bank could have passed such an order in the absence of issuing notice of resignation by the petitioner to the Bank expressing his willingness that, on the expiry of three months from the service of notice upon the Bank in writing.
(ii) whether impugned order be treated as either voluntary abandonment of service or voluntary resignation from the service of the Bank by the petitioner is the question required to be considered.
6.
Regarding Point No. 1 it is an undisputed fact that petitioner has not tendered resignation by notice in lieu of three months' notice three months salary was also not paid by the petitioner to the Bank.
If it were to be so, what is justified on the part of the competent officer to invoke the power under the said paragraph 20(2) of the Order, 1979 is not forthcoming in the counter.
What is sought to be justified is with reference to Rule 92 of the Rules.
Admittedly, the impugned order of termination has not been passed in exercise of powers under the said Rule.
The justification sought to be made out with reference to the abovesaid Rule by the respondent-Bank cannot be permitted in view of law declared by the Apex Court in this regard.
The Apex Court in the case of Lakshmi Devi Sugar Mills v. Nanda Kishore Singh, AIR 1957 SC Page 7 in un-equivocal terms has been laid down to the effect that, an order of termination upon dismissal should be justified on the grounds on which the said order is passed.
Admittedly, the order of termination is passed in exercise of its power under paragraph 20(2) of the Order, 1979.
Therefore, the respondent-Bank should not be allowed to justify its action with reference to Rule 92 of the Rules.
Rule 92 of the Rules is extracted hereunder for reference:  "92.
An employee who overstays his leave, except in circumstances beyond his control, shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance for the period of his absence without leave and shall also be liable to forfeiture of his appointment or to any of the penalties specified in rule 49."
To consider the issue framed and the relevant paragraphs of Order, 1979, the relevant paragraphs 20(1) and (2) of the Order, 1979 are extracted hereunder: Termination of service:  20(1) The Bank may terminate the services of any officer other than a Probationary Officer by giving him three months previous notice in writing or three months' emoluments in lieu thereof.
(2) No officer shall resign from the service of the Bank otherwise than on the expiry of three months from the service on the Bank of a notice in writing of such resignation: Provided that a Probationary Officer who has entered the service of the Bank as such shall not be entitled to give notice or leave the service of the Bank until the expiration of the stipulated period of probation and any breach of this proviso shall entitle the Bank to proceed in accordance with the provisions of sub-para (3) of paragraph 14: Provided further that the competent authority may, at its discretion, permit an officer to resign without notice or forfeiture of security deposit, or payment in lieu of notice or may reduce the period of notice.
7.
It is an undisputed fact that petitioner never tendered his resignation by issuing notice as contemplated under sub-para (2) of paragraph 20, in this view of the matter, was it permissible for the respondent-Bank to justify the order of termination in exercise of its power under paragraph 20(2) of the order of 1979 and also placing reliance under Rule 92 of Rules as contended in the counter statement for the reason that the respondent-bank has not passed an order invoking the power referring to Rule 92 of Rules as contended in the counter statement.
8.
Further submission has been made by the learned Counsel placing reliance upon Rule 92 of the Appeal Rules to justify the order of termination passed against the petitioner for the reason that the Bank has not passed the impugned order in exercise of its powers under the said Rule.
Therefore, it is not open for the petitioner to place reliance upon Rule 92.
Hence, the contention in this regard urged by the learned Counsel for the petitioner is untenable in law.
9.
This Court has examined as to whether respondent-Bank exercised its power bona fide or mala fide in view of the fact that the order is not referable to any provisions of either order of 1979 or service rules referred to above.
The order cannot be termed as legal and valid.
10.
With reference to the pleadings of the party and the impugned order passed by the respondent-Bank with reference to the service rules and the order of 1979 and this Court is of the view that, order is not referable to the abovesaid order and the Rules.
Hence, the impugned order cannot be said that it is passed in bona fide exercise of power by the second respondent, but the same is passed in mala fide exercise of power.
11.
It is not the case of the Management that he has overstayed and further, the respondents have not considered the leave applications and the medical certificate submitted by the petitioner on 1761991 and no decision was taken by the competent office as on the date of passing the order.
In this regard no record is made available by the respondent-Bank except making reference to letter dated 1761991.
No mention is made with regard leave applications, telegrams except mentioning in the counter statement.
In this case non- consideration of leave applications, telegrams, medical certificate sent by him referred to in the preceding paragraphs of this order clearly establish the fact that they weren't considered.
Despite this fact, invoking of power by the respondent's Bank under paragraph 20(2) of Order, 1979 is bad in law as it entails serious civil consequences upon the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondent-Management that the order of termination is justifiable under Rule 92 of he Rules is not sustainable in law for the reasons stated in the preceding paragraph.
Further, the order of termination passed by the respondent-Bank in exercising its power at paragraph 20(2) of the Order, 1979 is also unsustainable in law.
12.
For the reasons stated in the preceding paragraphs of this order, this court is of the view that the points No. 1 and 2 formulated by this Court cannot be termed as either voluntary abandonment or voluntary resignation by the workman.
13.
Further, the power is entrusted with the competent officer who is the Chief General Manager is a trust that power should have been exercised by him for the purpose for which it is conferred upon him, if power is exercised by that Authority other than the purpose for which it is conferred upon such Authority such exercise of power and such action of the Authority would tantamount to legal mala fides.
In this regard, the Apex Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Gurudayal Singh, AIR 1980 SC 319 dealing with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act Sections 4 and 6 examining the power entrusted with the authority and considering the various aspects regarding entrustment of power has laid down the law at paragraph 9 explaining jurisprudence of law has laid down as hereunder:  "The question then, is what is mala fides in the jurisprudence of power ?
Legal malice is gibberish unless juristic clarity keeps it separate from the popular concept of personal vice.
Pithily put, bad faith which invalidates the exercise of power - sometimes called colourable exercise or fraud on power and often times overlaps motives, passions and satisfactions - is the attainment of ends beyond the sanctioned purposes of power by the simulation or pretension of gaining a legitimate goal.
If the use of the power is for the fulfilment of a legitimate object the actuation or catalysation by malice is not legidical.
The action is bad where the true object is to reach an end different from the one for which the power is entrusted, goaded by extraneous considerations, good or bad, but irrelevant to the entrustment.
When the custodian of power is influenced in its exercise by considerations outside those for promotion of which the power is vested the Court calls it a colourable exercise and is undeceived by illusion.
In a broad, blurred sense, Benjamin Disraeli was not off the mark even in law when he stated, "I repeat....that all power is a trust - that we are accountable for its exercise - that, from the people and for the people all springs, and all must exist."
Fraud on power voids the order if it is not exercised bona fide for the end designed.
Fraud in this context is not equal to moral turpitude and embraces all the cases in which the action impugned is to affect some object which is beyond the purpose and intent of the power, whether this be malice-laden or even benign.
If the purpose is corrupt the resultant act is bad.
If considerations, foreign to the scope of the power or extraneous to the statute, enter the verdict or impels the action mala fides or fraud on power vitiates the acquisition or other official act."
14.
The law declared by the Apex Court in the said case with reference to the facts of this case the power has been exercised by the Chief General Manager of the respondent-Bank who is the competent authority has passed the impugned order which action of him is a colourable exercise of power it is an arbitrary and mala fide exercise of power and the same is not exercised to attain the ends for which purpose the power is entrusted with him particularly in the absence of resignation notice in writing required to be given by the petitioner to the respondent-Bank.
In a casual and cavalier manner, the Chief General Manager has played with the life and livelihood of the petitioner and his family members.
The purpose for which the power is entrusted with the Chief General Manager of the respondent-Bank is being mis-used in the instant case.
Therefore, this Court has to hold that the order of termination is not legal and valid.
On the other hand, it is a colourable, mala fide and arbitrary exercise of power by the second respondent and therefore it should not be allowed to sustain.
15.
Further, submission is made by the learned Counsel appearing for the respondents relying on the Judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1997(2) L.L.N.
1007 and Judgments of this Court reported in 1997 ILR 612 and 1997 ILR 628 to justify their stand that the petitioner for the reasons explained in the order of termination has voluntarily abandoned his services.
The Apex Court has stated, in such circumstances, this Court should not exercise its power under Article 226 of Constitution of India.
Mr. Subramanyam, learned Counsel appearing for the respondents further submits that this is a case of voluntary abandonment of service attracted the service order of 1979 and Service Rules.
This submission of the learned Counsel is unfounded as the same is contrary to law laid down by the Apex Court referred to above and the reliance placed on the Judgments referred to above are misplaced for the reasons that in fact this Court has already recorded a finding that there is no voluntary abandonment or voluntary resignation both on facts and in law and further these Judgments have no application to the facts of this case.
16.
I have carefully examined both orders and the rules.
There is no provision regarding voluntary abandonment of service.
In my view, this is not a case of voluntary abandonment at all.
Apex Court in the case of GT Ladd v. Chemicals & Fibers of India, 1979(1) LLJ 257 has laid down the principle that abandonment means terminating the relationship of master and the servant permanently.
In the instant case, if it were to be the case of voluntary abandonment as contended by the respondent-Bank, the petitioner would not have repeatedly sent the leave letters, medical certificates, telegrams and the letter dated 1761991 to the respondent Bank requesting for sanctioning leave on the grounds mentioned in those letters.
Hence, the submission of the learned Counsel for the Bank in this regard is rejected.
On the other hand, various judgments are referred to by the learned Counsel for the petitioner Mr. Rajanna to substantiate the contention taken by the respondents regarding the alleged voluntary abandonment is not legal and valid, same need not be referred to in this order as this Court has come to the conclusion that, order of termination is mala fide exercise of power having regard to the facts of this case and the impugned order passed by the Bank is not legal and valid either under the provisions of the Orders 1979 or under the service rules referred to above.
17.
Having come to the conclusion that, impugned order of the respondents in bad in law, now the question for consideration is what relief should be granted to the petitioner keeping in view the agony and the hardship caused to the petitioner and his family members on account of his unemployment at the instance of the second respondent.
In this regard, it is appropriate to recover the damages from the person who has passed the order of termination.
The Chief General Manager of the respondent-Bank has, in a casual and cavalier manner passed the impugned order thereby he has played with the life and livelihood of the petitioner and his family members.
The competent officers who are in service of the Bank, who are entrusted with the disciplinary power may take note of the above said observations for their future guidance that they have to carefully exercise their powers cautiously while taking disciplinary action against its officer/employees.
For the reasons stated supra this is a proper and fit case, where this Court has to grant full backwages with interest on the amount of back wages in favour of the petitioner.
Therefore, I pass the following order:  Writ Petition is allowed.
Rule made absolute.
Impugned order of voluntary abandonment/voluntary resignation of service passed by the respondent-Bank dated 2491991 (Annexure-MM) is hereby quashed.
Respondent-Bank is hereby directed to re-instate the petitioner forthwith and pay full back wages with 9% interest thereon from the date of termination.
Further, respondent-Bank is directed to consider the leave applications and medical certificates submitted by the petitioner for the period referred to in the order and dispose of the same keeping in view the power conferred under Rule 92 of the Rules.
Petition allowed.