DP Kundu, J - The petitioner is an employee of Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd, a Govt. of India Undertaking (hereinafter referred to as respondent No. 1).
While the petitioner was working as Senior Assistant Security Officer by a chargesheet dated 28th June, 1993 issued by Manager Administration (hereinafter referred to as the respondent No. 3) certain charges were levelled against the petitioner.
Initially, the petitioner only challenging the said charge-sheet and the departmental proceeding initiated against him in view of the aforesaid chargesheet instituted the present writ proceeding being C.O.
No. 17377(W) of 1993.
On 1491993 Susanta Chatterji, J, (as his Lordship then was), inter alia, passed the following order :  "Having heard the learned Advocates appearing for the respective parties and considering the materials on record, I pass the following order : Respondents shall carry on disciplinary proceedings, but shall not give effect to any order that may be passed in the disciplinary proceedings without the leave of the Court.
The disciplinary proceedings should be carried on in conformity with the rules of natural justice and the petitioner shall get assistance of a defence assistant.
The petitioner is personally present in Court to-day and the same be treated as leave by the authority and no action shall be taken against him for the same leave."
Pursuant to the aforesaid order dated 1491993 passed by the Court the respondents proceeded with the departmental proceeding which was initiated against the petitioner.
After completion of the enquiry the respondent No. 1 preferred an application praying for leave of the Court to give effect to the order of dismissal.
While the aforesaid application of the respondent No. 1 praying for leave of the Court was pending the petitioner preferred an application for amendment of the writ application.
On 931998 after hearing the ld.
Advocates for the parties the Court passed the following order :  "Heard the learned Advocates for both the parties.
Amendment application preferred by the writ petitioner is allowed.
The writ petitioner is directed to file a copy of the writ application incorporating the amendments allowed to-day by 12th March, 1998.
A copy of such application incorporating the amendments including the annexures should be served upon the learned Advocate for the respondents by 12th March, 1998 positively.
I make it clear that in case the writ applicant fails to serve a copy on the respondents by 12th March, 1998 as directed above, the interim order shall stand vacated.
The respondents are directed to file affidavit-in-opposition within 23rd March, 1998 and reply thereto, if any, be filed within 26th March, 1998.
Let this matter come up on 30th March, 1998 as Item No. 1 irrespective of any other matters.
With the above observations, the amendment application filed by the writ petitioner and the application filed by the respondent No. 1 on 20.12.1996 are disposed.
The learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the both the parties to take down the gist of this order for communication."
In compliance with the aforesaid order dated 931998 the writ petitioner filed a copy of the writ application incorporating the amendments allowed by the Court on 931998.
2.
In the writ application as amended the petitioner has challenged the charge-sheet, the enquiry proceeding, the finding of the Enquiry Officer and the order of dismissal.
In view of the Court's order dated 1491993 the respondents could not give effect to the order of dismissal.
Therefore, the writ petitioner is still in service of respondent No. 1.
3.
The ld.
Advocate appearing for the writ petitioner argued the following points :  1.
The charge-sheet had not been issued by the competent authority as envisaged in Rule 26 of the Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules.
2.
Charge-sheet had been issued with a closed mind, therefore, the charge- sheet had been issued with initial bias.
3.
Complainant was senior in rank to the Enquiry Officer and for that reason the enquiry is vitiated.
4.
During the enquiry a principal witness for the company viz. PW5 read out from a written statement which was seriously objected to at the time of enquiry but the Enquiry Officer permitted the said witness to give his evidence reading from the written statement and for this reason the enquiry is vitiated.
5.
There was a preliminary enquiry in respect of the subject matter of the charge-sheet where the witnesses made statements but these statements were never disclosed to the writ petitioner, for this reason the enquiry is vitiated.
6.
Standing orders and rules governing the service condition and conduct, discipline and appeal do not contemplate the misdemeanors alleged to have been committed by the writ petitioner as misconduct.
7.
The punishment of dismissal sought to be imposed on the writ petitioner is shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of the charges levelled against the petitioner.
8.
In the enquiry report the Enquiry Officer recorded "defence could not disprove the charge" this shows that the approach of the Enquiry Officer was wrong and not good in law vitiating the entire enquiry.
9.
Enquiry report was submitted by the Enquiry Officer after his retirement with a back date and this action of the Enquiry Officer has vitiated the enquiry proceeding.
4.
In course of hearing large number of decisions were cited by the learned advocates for both the parties.
It is not necessary to refer to all those decisions because this case can be disposed of on Point Nos. 2 and 6 which go to the very root of the matter and Point No. 9.
5.
By my judgment and order dated 931998 in C.O.
No. 15653(W) of 1996 (Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Officers' Association and another v. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited and others) I held that the respondent No. 1 is a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
At the time of hearing of this case I wanted to know from the ld.
Advocate appearing for the respondents whether he disputes that respondent No. 1 is a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents stated that he is not disputing that the respondent No. 1 is a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Since the respondent No. 1 is a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India Part-III and Part-IV of the Constitution apply in every action of the respondent No. 1.
(Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487, All India Sainik Schools Employees' Association v. The Defence Minister-cum-Chairman, Board of Governors, Sainik School Society, AIR 1989 SC 88).
In the matter of a disciplinary proceeding against an employee of a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, touching the livelihood of the employee all actions of the `State' should pass the test of both Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
6.
By catena of decisions of Supreme Court scope of judicial review has now become well settled.
Suffice it to refer to M/s. Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of India reported in AIR 1990 SC 1277.
Paragraph 49 of the reported decision of M/s Shri Sitaram Sugar Co Ltd's case (supra) is quoted hereinbelow :-  "Where a question of law is at issue, the Court may determine the rightness of the impugned decision on its own independent judgment.
If the decision of the authority does not agree with that which the Court considers to be the right one, the finding of law by the authority is liable to be upset.
Where it is a finding of fact, the Court examines only the reasonableness of the finding.
When that finding is found to be rational and reasonably based on evidence, in the sense that all relevant material has been taken into account and no irrelevant material has influenced the decision, and the decision is one which any reasonably minded person, acting on such evidence, would have come to, then judicial review is exhausted even though the finding may not necessarily be what the Court would have come to as a trier of fact.
Whether an order is characterised as legislative or administrative or quasi judicial, or, whether it is a determination of law or fact, the judgment of the expert body, entrusted with power, is generally treated as final and the judicial function is exhausted when it is found to have "warrant in the record" and a rational basis of law : Rochester Tel.
Corp. v. United States, 1938(307) US 125 : 83 Law Ed. 1147.
See also Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation, 1948(1) KB 223."
7.
I by my judgment and order dated 15.6.1998 in C.O.
No. 13764(W) of 1989 (Prasanta Das & others v. M/s Webel Video Devices Ltd & another) held :  "It is now well settled that the proper legal effect of a proved fact is essentially a question of law.
Whenever an inference is drawn from certain conclusion of facts, that inference is a question of law in its essential nature.
(Nafar Chandra v. Shukur, reported in 45 Indian Appeal 183 at page 187).
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Ram Gopal v. Shamskhaton reported in 19 Indian Appeal 228(C) at page 232 observed : "the facts found need not be questioned.
It is the soundness of the conclusions from them that is in question and this is a matter of law."
This view had been approved by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Lakshmi Dhar Misra v. Ranglal reported in 76 Indian Appeal 271 at page 276.
In my opinion, while exercising power of judicial review, High Court can and should examine the soundness of the conclusions from the facts found in the departmental proceeding because that is a matter of law, which is very much within the power of judicial review of the Court."
Re.
Point Nos. 2 and 6.
8.
By a charge-sheet dated 28th June, 1993 issued by Manager (Administration) certain charges were levelled against the petitioner.
For proper understanding of the charges levelled against the petitioner, the relevant portion of the charge-sheet is quoted hereinbelow:-  "SHRI TAPAN KUMAR SINGHA,  SR. ASSTT.
SECURITY OFFICER,  Man No. 007969,  SECURITY DEPARTMENT (MAIN WORKS),  G.R.S.E.
Limited  It has been reported against you as under :-  1. that 7th June, 1993 was a day of Bangla Bandh and you were detailed for duties at G.R.S.E.
Main Workshop that day and as such you were asked to report in the night of 6th June, 1993.
Accordingly, you came to Main Works at about 2130 hours on 6th June, by a Scooter driven by you and parked the said Scooter in the Parking space adjacent to gate No. 1.
2. that as the local situation appeared to be more or less normal in the evening of 7th June, 1993, Sri MK Bhattacharyya, Sr. Security Officer, advised you to be off from your duty and to go back home, if possible, and to report for duty on the next day ie 8th June, 1993 in your routine `B' shift positively as there was shortage of security officers to be available on duty in the Department on that day.
You as such left the Main Works at about 1715 hours on 7th June, 1993 on a Scooter driven by you through Gate No. 1 giving a lift of Sri TP Makal, Asstt.
Security Officer, who was also off from his duty on completion of General shift at that time and who happens to be residing nearby your locality.
3. that you had submitted two (2) Taxi Bills both dated 8th June, 1993 to Sri MK Bhattacharyya, Sr. Security Officer, claiming for reimbursement of Taxi fare for Rs. 35/- and Rs. 40/- for undertaking journeys by Taxi for coming in the Main Works on 6th June, 1993 and for return journey to home on 7th June, 1993 respectively.
4. that though you had undertaken the above journeys by a Scooter driven by you yet have claimed Taxi fares for reimbursement of the expenses for the said journeys falsely.
5. the above acts alleges to have been committed by you amount to misconduct under the following Rules of Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules of the Company applicable to you :-  (i) Sub-rule 1 of Rule 5  "Theft, fraud or dishonesty in connection with the property of the Company within the premises of the Company."
(ii) Sub-rule 5 of Rule 5  "Acting in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the Company."
(iii) Sub-rule 20 of Rule 5  "Commission of any act subversive of discipline or of good behaviour."
6.
You are, hereby directed to submit you explanation in writing in respect of charges levelled against you, within 10 days from the date of receipt of this letter as to why disciplinary action should not be taken against you.
7.
Should you fail to submit your explanation as advised, it will be presumed that you have no explanation to offer and further action will be taken as per the Rules of the Company in this regard."
9.
The petitioner by his letter dated 16th July, 1993 submitted his explanation in respect of the charges levelled against him.
In his said explanation, the petitioner had, inter alia, stated as follows :  "I am stating all above because I feel and when an officer is not only questioned on his submitted Taxi-fare claim but a charge-sheet is issued for its explanation particularly when as per TA/DA rules for officers of the company "Taxi" covers car, scooters, rickshaws, cycle rickshaws, tangas etc.
Hence the taxi claim preferred for journey by scooter on hire and rickshaw on hire by the said amount over and above the taxi on hire is well within the Rules of Reimbursement of the taxi hire charges by the company and thus no false claim was preferred by me.
However, in any event as the taxi bills are not yet reimbursed to me, nor I have received the same till date, by no stretch of imagination it can be alleged that I have committed any act of theft, fraud or dishonesty and in the facts of this case none are attracted.
............. Having made the claim for reimbursement for taxi fare strictly in terms of TA/DA Rules for Officers (effective 1st August 1988) of the company I have neither committed any theft or fraud or dishonesty in connection with the property of the company, within the premises of the company nor I have acted in a manner prejudicial in the interest of the company nor it tantamounts to commission of any act subversive of Discipline or good behaviour."
(Emphasis added) Therefore, it is clear from the aforesaid explanation of the petitioner that he claimed for reimbursement for taxi fare and in terms of TA/DA Rules for Officers (effective 1st Aug 1988) of the Company.
May be, the provisions of the aforesaid TA/DA Rules have no manner of application in the facts and circumstances of the case but at best that would only make the claims of the petitioner liable for rejection.
At no stretch of imagination can such claims be treated as theft, fraud or dishonesty in connection with the property of the company nor can it be said to be an act in any manner prejudicial to the interest of the company nor it tantamounts to commission of any act subversive of discipline or good behaviour.
It is not disputed that claims have not yet been reimbursed to the petitioner.
It is important to note that Rule 2(9) of the TA/DA Rules of 1988 clearly lays down that the term `Taxi' shall cover cars, scooters, rickshaws, cycle rickshaws, tangas etc.
The petitioner in his explanation dated 16th July, 1993 (reply to the charge-sheet) clearly stated that he made the claims for reimbursement for taxi fare strictly in terms of TA/DA Rules for Officers effective from 1st August, 1988.
There remains no doubt that while making claims under and strictly in terms of the TA/DA Rules, 1988 the peritioner did not commit any wrong by mentioning `Taxi' instead of `scooter' in view of Rule 2(9) of the aforesaid TA/DA Rules, 1988.
If the subject matter of the claims made by the petitioner is not covered by the aforesaid TA/DA Rules, 1988 then the petitioner would not get the reimbursement but such claims for reimbursement under TA/DA Rules, 1988 cannot be viewed as misconduct of any nature.
If it is viewed as misconduct then that would be too unreasonable, unfair, irrational and arbitrary necessitating judicial intervention by judicial review.
From the enquiry report it does not appear that there is any other set of rules dealing with TA/DA of Officers.
No mention had been made in the enquiry report about any such other TA/DA Rules.
The learned advocate appearing for the respondents in course of his argument also did not refer to any other TA/DA Rules for officers.
Therefore, an officer covered by the said TA/DA Rules 1988 can claim for reimbursement only under the provisions of TA/DA Rules 1988.
A claim for reimbursement under the said TA/DA Rules 1988 if not maintainable is liable to be rejected but no disciplinary proceeding can be legally initiated against the claimant on the allegations of misconduct of any nature for making such claims and if any such disciplinary proceeding is initiated that would amount to (a) absolute arbitrary exercise of power and (b) gross abuse or misuse of power and authority, rendering such initiation of disciplinary proceeding null and void.
Ordinarily, "arbitrary" is synonymous with bad faith or failure to exercise honest judgment and an arbitrary act would be one performed without adequate determination of principle and one not founded in the nature of things.
(Huey v. Davis, Tex.
Civ.
App.
556 S.W.
2d 860, 865).
10.
In the report submitted by the enquiry officer it was, inter alia, recorded as follows :-  "Shri MK Bhattacharyya asserted further that TKS made futile attempt to get the applicability of TA/DA Rules extended for journey from and to his residence after distorting the said rule which is well within the jurisdiction of Calcutta Corporation.
And also by taking the extended meaning of `taxi' to scooter and rickshaws.
Sri Bhattacharyya asserted further that those meant for a place of out station duty at least eight Km.
away from the Head Quarters.
Hence applicability of TA/DA Rules in respect of false Taxi reimbursement claims are totally unjustified."
It appears from the enquiry report that Sri MK Bhattacharyya, Sr. Security Officer of the Security Department besides appearing as a prosecution witness also acted as presenting officer.
From the above quoted recording of the enquiry officer it is evident that the disciplinary authority was very much aware that the petitioner made his claims under and in terms of TA/DA Rules of 1988.
11.
It is not in dispute that the claims in question made by petitioner were connected with his official duty.
Right from the explanation to the charges the petitioner maintained his stand that he submitted those claims under and in terms of TA/DA Rules of 1988.
Rule 2(9) of the TA/DA Rules 1988 laid down that the term `Taxi' in TA/DA Rules 1988 includes "Scooter", "Rickshaw" etc.
Therefore, the petitioner while submitting his claims under and in terms of TA/DA Rules 1988 did not commit any misconduct by claiming Taxi charge.
If TA/DA Rules 1988 are not applicable for journey from and to his residence, the claim might have been rejected and the matter would have ended there.
12.
That apart mere submission of claims in question itself did not make the petitioner entitled to get the reimbursement.
Before payment could be made claims were to be sanctioned or recommended by the Chief Security Officer.
The enquiry officer in his report recorded the case of the disciplinary authority, inter alia, as follows :-  "TKS submitted in the afternoon two taxi reimbursement claims for recommendation of CHSO and forwarding subsequently to the Transport Officer for proceeding (processing ?)
for cash reimbursement."
13.
What are the provisions for reimbursement of claims of officers in force in Respondent No. 1 ?
As stated earlier in this judgment, except TA/DA Rules of 1988 no other provision has either been referred to in the enquiry report or produced before the Court during hearing of the case.
Therefore, it is apparent that except TA/DA Rules of 1988 there is no other provision which enables an officer to claim reimbursement for travelling.
Whenever an officer wants to make a claim for reimbursement he has to submit his claim under and in terms of TA/DA Rules of 1988 and that is what the petitioner did.
There was nothing in it not to speak of misconduct.
14.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove I am of the opinion that initiation of the disciplinary proceeding under challenge was arbitrary, whimsical, fanciful, unreasonable, unfair and irrational.
I am also of the opinion that the said disciplinary proceeding was initiated in gross abuse or misuse of power and authority.
I am of the opinion that entire disciplinary proceeding under challenge is null and void.
15.
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents referred to Probodh Kumar Bhowmick v. University of Calcutta reported in 1993(2) CLJ 456 wherein it was held by SB Sinha, J that in absence of any provision of statute an employer has inherent right to initiate a disciplinary proceeding as against its employees.
It was held that it is beyond anybody's comprehension that although an employee might have committed a serious misconduct like defalcation, theft, misbehaviour with a lady or similar other matter he cannot be punished.
It was held that misconduct, inter alia, envisages breach of discipline although it would not be possible to lay down exhaustively as what would constitute misconduct and indiscipline.
It is wide enough to include wrongful omission or commission whether done or omitted to be done intentionally or unintentionally.
I have already held hereinabove that the claims made by the petitioner for reimbursement under TA/DA Rules of 1988 may not be maintainable making them liable to rejection but under no stretch of imagination can those be construed as misconduct committed by the petitioner.
Therefore, I am of the view that Probodh Kumar Bhowmick's case (supra) does not help the respondents.
16.
No doubt a disciplinary authority has power and authority to initiate a disciplinary proceeding against an employee by issuing charge-sheet.
But such power or authority should not be exercised arbitrarily, irrationally, unreasonably and unfairly.
The disciplinary authority when acts as a servant of a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India is bound to act justly, fairly, rationally, reasonably and not arbitrarily.
If he fails to act accordingly, the action of the disciplinary authority shall violate the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution Application of mind is not only a requisite condition but a condition precedent.
Before initiating any disciplinary proceeding, the disciplinary authority should with an open mind consider the relevant materials ignoring the irrelevant one and should honestly form an opinion that a disciplinary proceeding should be initiated by issuing charge-sheet.
The disciplinary authority cannot arbitrarily initiate a disciplinary proceeding injuring the dignity of an employee.
Dignity of the individual has been assured in the preamble of our Constitution.
Disciplinary authority only because of its status and authority cannot arbitrarily, whimsically, fancifully initiate a disciplinary proceeding against an employee.
I am of the view that arbitrary, fanciful and whimsical initiation of disciplinary proceeding is not only violative of Article 14 of the Constitution but also injures the dignity of the employee.
In our social system when disciplinary action is initiated arbitrarily, fancifully or whimsically against an employee on the allegation of misconduct like theft, fraud etc. then not only the employee concerned but also members of his family suffer from indignity.
Power is there with the disciplinary authority but that power should not be abused or misused.
Such power should be exercised honestly keeping the mind open and without any bias.
Such power should not be exercised arbitrarily, fancifully or whimsically.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove I am of the opinion that the initiation of the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner, which is subject matter of the present litigation, was arbitrary, fanciful and whimsical and violated Article 14 of the Constitution and injured the dignity of the petitioner.
No prejudice need be proved for enforcing the fundamental rights.
Violation of a fundamental right itself renders the impugned action void (AR Antulay v. RS Nayak, AIR 1988 SC 1531).
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents referred to Arun Kr.
Mitra v. Central Vigilance Commission reported in 1986(1) CHN 390 wherein SR Roy, J (as he then was) held that no fixed principle can be laid down for determining whether a charge-sheet was issued with a bias and/or closed mind or not.
It was held that every case has to be distinguished on its own peculiar facts and circumstances.
It has been pointed out by me hereinabove that the disciplinary authority without applying his mind initiated disciplinary proceeding arbitrarily, whimsically, fancifully, irrationally and unfairly against the petitioner and that was possible because the disciplinary authority had closed mind at the time of initiating the departmental proceeding.
The disciplinary authority was biased against the petitioner and as consequence of such bias the disciplinary authority without applying his mind initiated disciplinary proceeding arbitrarily, whimsically, fancifully, irrationally, and unfairly.
The enquiry officer in his enquiry report recorded (at page 90 of the writ petition) as follows :-  "On 2161993 the matter was reported to C & MD through the then Manager (Admn.).
On the basis of such report and relevant documents, Manager (Admn.)
issued charge-sheet No. `illegible' dated 2861993 to TKS" But that is not the correct recording of the state of affairs.
The Chief Security Officer in his letter dated 21st June, 1993 addressed to the Chairman and Managing Director stated :  "G.M.
(CM & IE) and Manager (Admn.)
have agreed to issue show cause to Shri Singha."
This letter of the Chief Security Officer dated 21st June, 1993 clearly indicates that even before the said letter was written by the Chief Security Officer the Manager (Admn.)
agreed to issue show cause to Shri Singha.
Therefore it is incorrect to say that on the basis of the report dated 21st June, 1993 issued by the Chief Security Officer and relevant documents, Manager (Admn.)
issued charge-sheet dated 2861993 to the petitioner.
It is apparent from the letter dated 21st June, 1993 issued by the Chief Security Officer that Manager (Admn.)
had already committed to issue charge-sheet against the petitioner without having any record before him and without applying his mind to the records.
Thus it is clear that even before the relevant materials were placed before the Manager (Admn.)
for the purpose of deciding whether a disciplinary proceeding should be initiated or not, the Manager (Admn.)
agreed to issue charge-sheet and therefore at the time of taking decision he was biased and not keeping an open mind.
Therefore, Arun Kr.
Mitra's case (supra) does not help the respondents.
17.
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents also referred to Ram Ch.
Ram v. Union of India & others reported in 94 CWN 574.
The questions involved in Ram Ch.
Ram's case (supra) are different from the questions involved in the present case and therefore, Ram Ch.
Ram's case (supra) does not help the respondents.
18.
Under these circumstances I am of the opinion that the initiation of the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner is null and void.
Re.
Point No. 9  19.
Conduct, discipline and appeal of the petitioner are governed by Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1977 (hereinafter referred to as DAR).
Rule 23 of DAR lays down the penalties which may be imposed on an employee for misconduct committed by him or for any other good and sufficient reasons.
Penalties have been divided into two categories (1) minor penalties and (2) major penalties.
Dismissal and removal from service have been classified as major penalties.
Rule 26 of the DAR laid down the procedure for imposing major penalties.
The ld.
Advocate for the respondents argued that DAR have no statutory force of law.
Assuming arguendo that DAR have no statutory force of law even then respondent No. 1 and his officers are bound to comply with the provisions of DAR.
By virtue of DAR the respondent No. 1 laid down the standards by which it professes its action to be judged.
It is well settled rule of administrative law that an executive authority must be rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its action to be judged and it must scrupulously observe those standards on pain of invalidation of an act in violation of them.
20.
In Votarelli v. Seaton, 359 US 535, 3 L ed 2d 1012, 79 S ct 968.
Justice Frankfuter in his separate opinion (at page 1012) laid down the following principle :-  "An executive agency must be rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its action to be judged.
See Securities & Exch.
Com.
v. Cheneray Corp, 318 US 80, 87, 88, 87 L ed 626, 632, 633, 63 S ct 454.
Accordingly, if dismissal from employment is based on a defined procedure, even though generous beyond the requirements that bind such agency, that procedure must be scrupulously observed.
See Service v. Dulles, 354 US 363, 1 L ed 2d 1403 77 S Ct 1152.
This judicially evolved rule of administrative law is now firmly established and, if I may add, rightly so.
He that takes the procedural sword shall perish with the sword.
Therefore, I unreservedly join in the Court's main conclusion, that the attempted dismissal of Vitarelli in September 1954 was abortive and of no validity because the procedure under Department of the Interior Order No. 2738 was invoked but not observed."
(Emphasis added) 21.
The above quoted principle laid down by Mr. Justice Frankfuter has been accepted as applicable in India by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in AS Ahluwalia v. Punjab State, AIR 1975 SC 984, Sukhdev v. Bhagatram, AIR 1975 SC 1331, Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628, BS Minhas v. Indian Statistical Institute, AIR 1984 SC 363.
Rule 26(16) of DAR reads as follows :  "After the completion of the production of the evidence, the employee and the Presenting Officer may file written briefs of their respective cases within 15 days of the date of completion of the production of evidence."
22.
In course of argument the ld.
Advocate for the petitioner vehemently argued that the enquiry officer submitted his enquiry report after his retirement from service on and from 1st July, 1996.
On behalf of the respondents two supplementary affidavits have been filed.
One supplementary affidavit was affirmed by Shri Beni Madhab Saha, the Director (Personnel) of the respondent No. 1 on 18th April, 1998.
In the said supplementary affidavit affirmed on 18th April, 1998 the Director (Personnel) of respondent No. 1 in paragraph 4 and 5 stated as follows :-  "I confirm and assert that I had no knowledge about the submission of Report by the Enquiry Officer on the material date of affirmation of Affidavit-in- opposition on 7th June, 1996.
But subsequently it transpired that the Enquiry Officer had already submitted his report in a sealed cover with the endorsement `Confidential' addressed to Chairman and Managing Director.
Since this was in a closed sealed cover I had no way to know the contents thereof when I made the earlier affidavit on 761995.
I further say as head of the Personnel Department that there cannot arise any question of submission of Report by the Enquiry Officer after his retirement or by ante-dating the same.
This type of practice is not allowed by our organisation."
23.
Another supplementary affidavit was affirmed by Pralay Kanti Sarkar, Enquiry Officer, on 18th April, 1998.
In paragraphs 2 and 3 of the supplementary affidavit said Shri Pralay Kanti Sarkar stated as follows :-  "I was appointed as Enquiry Officer to enquire into the charges levelled against Shri Tapan Kumar Singha by charge-sheet dated 28th June, 1993.
I conducted the enquiry from 27th August, 1993 to 17th May, 1996 and I submitted my Report on 28th May, 1996 before my retirement.
I have been shown paragraph 19 of an Affidavit affirmed by Shri Tapan Kumar Singha on 26th March, 1998 and I have gone through the same.
I confirm that I submitted my Report in a closed confidential cover to Shri Birendra Nath Mukherjee, PA to General Manager (Pers.)
for onward transmission to the Chairman and Managing Directorate's Secretariat on 28th May, 1996 itself and the allegation of submission of Report after retirement by ante-dating the same is totally baseless."
From the Enquiry Report submitted by the Enquiry Officer it also appears that the enquiry was concluded on 1751996.
I accept the statement of the Enquiry Officer that he conducted the enquiry from 27th August, 1993 to 17th May, 1996 and submitted his enquiry report on 28th May, 1996.
From the enquiry proceeding also it appears that witnesses were examined before the enquiry officer on 17th May, 1996.
Therefore, the petitioner, in view of above quoted Rule 26(16) of DAR, had right to file written briefs of his case within 15 days from the date of completion of production of evidence.
True that Rule 26(16) does not make it obligatory to file written briefs within 15 days of the date of completion of the production of evidence but the petitioner was entitled to file written briefs within 15 days of the date of completion of the production of evidence.
This procedure is consistent with the principle of fairness in action.
Since the Enquiry Officer submitted his enquiry report on 28th May, 1996 i.e. well before the 15 days from the date of completion of production of evidence, the petitioner had been deprived of the opportunity to file written briefs.
Following the above quoted principle laid down by Mr. Justice Frankfuter I am of the view that the proposed dismissal of the petitioner from the service of respondent No. 1 is abortive and of no validity because the procedure under DAR was invoked but Rule 26(16) of DAR was not observed.
24.
In view of the discussions made hereinabove, I set aside and quash the entire disciplinary proceeding including the charge-sheet and the proposed order of dismissal.
Since I find that the grounds stated hereinabove are sufficient to set aside the entire disciplinary proceeding initiated against the petitioner including the charge-sheet and the proposed order of dismissal, I am not dealing with the other points argued by the ld.
Advocate for the petitioner.
The writ application is then disposed of.
However, there shall not be any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.