Mohd.
HS Ansari, J - The petitioner had earlier filed a Writ Petition No. 2175(W) of 1997 which was disposed of by this Court by order dated 341997 with a direction that if the petitioner makes an application for correction of date of birth, the same shall be considered and disposed of by a reasoned order.
2.
In compliance with the aforesaid orders the Block Development Officer by his order dated 2851997 rejected the request of the petitioner for correction of his date of birth in the Service Records.
This order dated 2851997 passed by the Block Development Officer, Goghat has been assailed in the above writ application.
3.
The petitioner is a Gram Panchayat Karmee.
According to the petitioner his correct date of birth is 17th August, 1948.
In the Service Record of the respondent, however, the same has been recorded as 491939.
The petitioner relies upon an affidavit of his aunt affirmed before a Notary Public on 19.2.1996, a certificate issued by the Headmaster of the School and his horoscope in support of his contention that he was born on 17th August, 1948.
The respondent authority considering the documentary evidence relied on by the petitioner observed as under :  "It appears that the Admission Register of Nabasan Board Free Pry.
School was damaged by white ant and the then Teacher-in-charge prepared a new Register from 2.1.1974 where he wrote only the name of the petitioner on the top side of a page, which is not reasonable in favour of correction of date of birth as prayed for by the petitioner"  and in that view rejected the request of the petitioner.
4.
Age of an employee and as entered in the Service Record is a significant term of employment in relation to the date of superannuation of such employee.
As a proposition of law one may not dispute that a Civil Court will have no jurisdiction to alter a contract of service unless authorised by law, nevertheless, an employee can seek a declaration regarding his correct date of birth.
The question relating to correct date of birth is a matter relating to one's status and also as to his civil rights and, therefore, a Civil Court would have jurisdiction to so adjudicate and thereafter declare the date of birth when a dispute in that behalf is raised.
5.
The Supreme Court in Ishar Singh v. National Fertilizers & another, AIR 1991 SC 1546 considered the scope of section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure in relation to the question of maintainability of a suit with reference to the bar under section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and held as under :  "The scope of section 9 has been the subject matter of a long series of decisions and it is difficult to contend and Mr. Ashwini Kumar has, therefore, fairly accepted the position that a suit for correcting the date of birth in the record would be maintainable.
In fact, asking for a correction of that type may be for various purposes and need not necessarily be confined to the question of claiming the relief available under the Industrial Disputes Act."
and it was further observed in paragraph 5 of the said judgment thus :  "The other question which Mr. Ashwini Kumar has raised is as to whether the Civil Court would have jurisdiction to give injunction against superannuation or the other ancillary reliefs contemplated to a workman against his employer.
Law is equally settled that if for part of the relief the suit is maintainable in the forum where it has been laid, it is not open to the forum to shut out its doors to the suitor.
In that view of the matter, so far as the relief of rectification of the record relating to date of birth is concerned, the Civil Court had jurisdiction and the High Court was not right in saying that the suit was not maintainable at all."
6.
Unless statute or any rule or regulation so provides for alteration/correction of the date of birth the employee cannot compel the employer to correct the date of birth in its Service Record.
A writ of mandamus can be issued to a statutory authority to compel it to perform its statutory obligation.
No such provision is brought to the notice of this Court so as to compel the respondent authority by a mandamus to correct the date of birth of the petitioner.
The petitioner, however, is not without remedy as noticed above, it is open to the petitioner to seek appropriate declaration by a properly constituted suit before a Civil Court to which the employer is made a party.
The petitioner thus has an efficacious alternative remedy to have the determination of his correct date of birth.
7.
As regards the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner as to the power of judicial review vested in this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution suffice it to reiterate that the same is concerned not to the decision but to the decision making process.
This Court can only examine if there was any infirmity in the decision making authority or in the decision making process, that is, whether the impugned order is contrary to any law or is vitiated by taking into consideration any irrelevant factors or neglecting to consider relevant factors or it is so manifestly unjust or unreasonably made such a decision.
These are the parameters which circumscribe the jurisdiction of the Court in exercise of the power of judicial review.
The Writ Court does not sit to act as an appellate authority.
8.
The order, impugned in the instant case, judged in the light of the above, does not warrant any interference except to observe that the same does not conclusively decide the issue as to the correct date of birth of the petitioner.
No such finality can be attributed to the other in the absence of a statutory provision, rule or regulation.
Date of birth is a question of fact and can be appropriately decided by a Civil Court based upon evidence oral or documentary adduced in accordance with law.
This Court will not go into disputed question whether the date of birth put forth by the petitioner is his correct date of birth when the petitioner has an efficacious alternative remedy for ventilating his grievance.
9.
What is the evidentiary value of the entry in the School Register, original of which has been destroyed by white ants or the certificate of Pradhan need not be considered in the proceedings, in the view that this Court has taken, as above.
10.
For the reasons aforestated this Court is not inclined to entertain the above writ application and the same is accordingly dismissed with liberty, however, to the petitioner to file a suit before a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction, if so advised.
Application dismissed.