THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable in the Police Department on 19111962 and he was promoted as Head Constable in 1973 and again promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in the year 1986.
He also passed the Upper School Course.
He made a representation for further promotion as Sub Inspector which was rejected on 16.6.1992.
His Efficiency Bar was withheld for one year.
Adverse remarks were conveyed to him on 561993 and a departmental inquiry was held and a warning was issued to him.
He submitted a representation on 27.7.1993 against the adverse remarks which was rejected.
Subsequently he was compulsorily retired from service on March 3, 1994.
Challenging the same, the petitioner filed a writ petition in CWP No. 4303 of 1994.
The said writ petition was allowed by this Court on 24101994 quashing the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
However, it has been left to the respondents to put up the matter again before the Director General of Police for necessary action, if so advised.
Thereafter the matter was placed before the Director General of Police, who by the impugned order dated 9.6.1995 (Annexure P-12) passed an order retiring the petitioner compulsorily in public interest under Punjab Police Rule 9.18(2).
Challenging the said order, the petitioner filed this writ petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the same.
2.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that no prior approval was obtained before passing the order of retirement and the petitioner earned more than 70% good reports, but on the basis of one adverse entry, he cannot be made to retire.
He further contended that Rule 131 of the Punjab Police Rules has been violated.
He also submitted that the petitioner has been placed in category-B.
Therefore, the order of compulsory retirement (Annexure P-12) is liable to be quashed.
3.
It is, on the other hand, contended by the learned Counsel for the respondents that taking the over all conduct of the petitioner, he was retired compulsorily under rule 9.18(2) of the Punjab Police Rules and the order of Director General of Police is well reasoned and speaking order and there are no grounds to quash the same.
Therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4 There is no dispute of the fact that the Inspector General of Police may retire any police officer compulsorily with prior approval of the State Government if the officer has completed 25 years of qualifying service without giving any reason.
5.
The first contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner was that prior to the passing of the order dated 9.6.1995, the authority has not obtained the approval of the State Government.
Therefore, the impugned order of compulsory retirement cannot be sustained in law.
But the fact remains that the approval of the State Government has already been obtained prior to passing of the order dated March 3, 1994.
It is no doubt true that the order of compulsory retirement passed on 331994 has been set aside, but this Court set aside the order of compulsory retirement dated 331994 on the ground that the order of compulsory retirement was not passed by the competent authority.
When the approval was obtained before passing of the order dated 331994, it still remains in force and the competent authority i.e. Director General of Police, who is also Inspector General of Police, can pass a valid order if he is satisfied that the circumstances warrant that the officer is liable to be retired compulsorily.
The order of this Court in CPW No. 4303 of 1994 does not nullify the effect of the approval given by the Government on a consideration of the material placed before it.
After obtaining approval, it is for the Director General of Police (i.e.
Inspector General of Police under the rules) to pass the order of compulsory retirement.
But since the matter was never placed before the Director General of Police, this Court set aside the order of compulsory retirement.
It was further made clear in the order of this Court dated 24101994 that it is open to the respondents to put up the matter again before the Director General of Police for necessary action, if so advised.
Therefore, the matter was placed before the Director General of Police, who by the impugned order, considered the case of the petitioner at length in detail and after considering the entire conduct of the petitioner during his tenure in the Police Department, the Director General of Police came to the conclusion that the petitioner has outlived his utility as police officer and he is not fit to be retained in service henceforth and, therefore, the order of compulsory retirement has been passed by the Director General of Police on 9.6.1995.
It is not for this Court to substitute its opinion to that of the Director General of Police.
No inquiry need to be conducted while passing the order under rule 9.18(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
It has been held by the Apex Court in Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, 1992(2) SLR 2 : 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) that compulsory retirement is not a punishment and the principles of natural justice have no place and that the High Court would not examine the matter as an Appellate Court and the interference with the order of compulsory retirement can only be on the satisfaction by the Court that the order passed is mala fide or it is based on no evidence or it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person will come to the conclusion which the authority had taken.
A reading of the impugned order (Annexure P12) shows that the Director General of Police has taken into account the ACRs of the petitioner from 1984 to 1988 and also the several punishments awarded to him before passing the order of compulsory retirement.
No mala fide have been attributed to the Director General of Police, who passed the impugned order though the petitioner tried to make out a case of mala fide against the Deputy Inspector General of Rohtak Range.
The mala fides have to be attributed to the authority, who passed the impugned order, but the petitioner has not attributed any mala fides on the part of the Director General of Police.
It is also not a case of no evidence.
6.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there are no grounds warranting interference with the impugned order.
The writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
7.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.