OP Sharma, J - The petitioners who are four in number were promoted as Deputy Conservator of Forest by Govt. Order No. 290-FST of 1994 dated 2091994 during the pendency of this petition.
The order of their promotion carried the stipulation that although they will be deemed to have been promoted on notional basis with effect from 1271985, the date their juniors were promoted, but they would not be entitled to draw arrears of pay on account of notional promotion.
As a consequence of this order the relief claimed by the petitioners stood granted except the arrears of pay.
So the petitioners filed amended petition seeking quashment of the stipulation denying them the arrears of pay from 1271985 to 2091994 i.e. the date when promotion order was issued.
2.
The question involved is whether petitioners could be denied arrears of pay for the period they were promoted on notional basis.
It is not disputed that petitioners' services are regulated under J&K Forest Services (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1970.
Under the Recruitment Rules promotion to the post of Deputy Conservator of Forest requires six years service as Assistant Conservator of Forest.
Since petitioners were appointed in the year 1984, therefore they were not qualified for the post and as such could not be promoted in the year 1985 when their junior Asgar Inayatullah was promoted.
3.
Mr. Kotwal appearing for the petitioners submits that the petitioners were wrongfully denied appointment when those figuring lower in the select list of the Public Service Commission were appointed on 411978 and 841981 ignoring the merit of the petitioners.
This action of the respondents was challenged by them in a writ petition, but before the same could be decided, petitioners were also appointed Assistant Conservator of Forest by Govt. Order No. FST-208 of 1984 dated 2421984.
He further submitted that the question of seniority of those appointed out of the select list on different dates was set at rest by the judgment of this court dated 1081988 in Writ Petition Nos. 306, 307 and 326 of 1988 filed by the petitioners, holding that the inter se seniority will be determined not on the basis of date of appointment but according to the merit determined by the Public Service Commission.
4.
The question of seniority of the petitioners and those appointed out of the select list furnished by the Public Service Commission is not in dispute because as per Govt. Order No. 71-FST of 1991 dated 2531991, petitioners along with four others were given notional appointment with effect from 411978 though without arrears of pay and allowance.
They had not actually held the post.
In case notional appointments from 411978 as Assistant Conservator of Forest can be counted as actual service, they would be eligible for the post of Deputy Conservator of Forest, not otherwise.
The petitioners having not claimed pay for the period they were denied appointment have accepted the fact that they were not entitled to the arrears.
Since they were appointed in the year 1984 they became eligible for the post only in the year 1990 when they completed six years of service as Assistant Conservator of Forest.
Thus they could not have been promoted to the post of Deputy Conservator of Forest in 1985 when their juniors were promoted.
No doubt they became eligible in 1990 but eligiblity by itself is not a ground for promotion which depends upon the vacancy.
It is not the case of the petitioners that the vacancies were available before they came to be promoted in 1994.
So while no arrears can be granted for the period they were ineligible for promotion, they are not entitled to the same for the period they were not promoted for want of vacancies.
So it is not a case of denial of promotion but their ineligibility for promotion that stood in the way of their promotion on due date.
Moreover there was a dispute about the seniority of those appointed on different dates between 1978 and 1984 as Assistant Conservator of Forest on the basis of the same select list.
This court in its judgment dated 1081986 (supra) had directed that seniority of the petitioners be fixed in accordance with Rule 24 of Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1956.
Similarly while deciding SWP No. 1040/1985 filed by Mohammad Hussain Shah decided on 2871989, a Single Judge of this court directed that petitioner be deemed to have been appointed for purpose of seniority on 411978, the date on which Shri Asgar Inayatullah though figuring much below him was appointed.
The dispute about seniority was finally resolved by Government Order No. 71-FST of 1991 dated 2531991 when the official respondents for the first time accepted, that irrespective of the date of appointment, the seniority of the Assistant Conservator of Forest appointed on the basis of a common select list furnished by the Public Service Commission in the year 1978 shall be determined under Rule 24 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1956.
Rule 24(1)(b) provides that :  "in the case of those recruited direct except those who do not join their duties when vacancies are offered to them according to the positions attained by and assigned to them in order of merit at the time of competitive examination....." So it took the government more than a decade to settle the seniority while implementing two separate judgments of this court.
It was thus only thereafter that petitioners could be promoted to the next higher grade.
The Apex Court in State of Haryana and others v. OP Gupta and others, 1996(7) SCC 533 ; 1996(2) SCT 294 (SC), the facts of which were almost similar to the facts of this case, held that : "6.
Havind regard to the above contentions, the question arises whether the respondents are entitled to the arrears of salary ?
It is seen that their entitlement to work arises only when they are promoted in accordance with the Rules.
Preparation of the seniority list under Rule 9 is a condition precedent for consideration and then to pass an order of promotion and posting to follow.
Until that exercise is done, the respondents cannot be posted in the promotional posts.
Therefore, their contention that they are willing to work, they were not given the work after posting them in promotional posts has no legal foundation.
The rival parties had agitated their right to seniority.
Ultimately, this court had directed the appellant to prepare the seniority list strictly in accordance with Rule 9 untrammelled by any other inconsistent observation of the Court or the instructions issued in contravention thereof.
Since the order had become final in 1990, when the appeal had been disposed of by the Court by the above directions, the State in compliance thereof prepared the seniority list in accordance with the Rules and those directions and promotions were given to all eligible persons and postings were made accordingly on 1121992.
In the interregnum some had retired.
As stated earlier, though the deemed date has been given as 111983, the respondents cannot legitimately claim to have worked in those posts for claiming arrears and, as a fact, they did not work even on ad hoc basis.
7.
This Court in Paluru Ramkrishnaiah v. Union of India, 1989(2) SCC 541 considered the direction issued by the High Court and upheld that there has to be "no pay for no work", i.e., a person will not be entitled to any pay and allowance during the period for which he did not perform the duties of higher posts, although after due consideration, he was given a proper place in the gradation list having been deemed to be promoted to the higher post with effect from the date his junior was promoted.
He will be entitled only to step up the scale of pay retrospectively from the deemed date but is not entitled to the payment of arrears of the salary.
The same ratio was reiterated in Virender Kumar, GM, N Rlys.
v. Avinash Chandra Chadha, 1990(3) SCC 472."
5.
This applies to the facts of the case on all fours.
The petitioners are, therefore, not entitled to arrears of pay for the period they had not discharged the duties of Deputy Conservator of Forest not because they were wrongly denied promotion but because they were not eligible at the time their juniors were promoted.
6.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition which is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.