NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition, under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, by the Director, Haryana Institute of Rural Development, Nilokheri, District Karnal, for quashing the award announced by the Labour Court on March 6, 1998, whereby termination of the services of respondent No. 2, Gopal Singh, was held to be bad.
2.
The petitioner-Institute is a registered society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
It is a research-cum-training Institute and is concerned with the rural development activities.
Respondent No. 2 was engaged by the Institute as a Chowkidar on daily wages with effect from June 1, 1993.
His services were regularised with effect from April 29, 1994.
His services were de-regularised by order dated December 13, 1994 as it was noticed that his services had been regularised in contravention of the Government instructions.
Subsequently, his services were terminated with effect from July 1, 1996 as his acts and conduct were not found good.
3.
Respondent No. 2 sent a demand notice, whereupon the following dispute was referred to the Labour Court :-  "Whether the termination of services of Gopal Singh is illegal and unjustified ?
If so to what relief he is entitled to besides reinstatement with back wages."
The Labour Court framed the following issues :-  "1.
Whether termination of services of Gopal Singh is illegal and unjustified, if so to what relief he is entitled ?
OPW 2.
Relief."
The termination of services of respondent No. 2 was held, on March 6, 1998 by the Labour Court, to be bad and the workman was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service and back wages.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner-Institute was not an "Industry" within the meaning of clause (j) of Section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, "the Act") and, therefore, the award was invalid.
He has argued that the Institute organises training courses, research, conferences, seminars and workshops in rural development and undertakes various activities to promote and co-ordinate analytical studies and publication of research papers, books etc.
Expenditure is met from the grants made by the State Government of Haryana.
The Institute imparts training to all the officers of the State Government working in the field of rural development.
Since the Institute is not an "industry", being a research organisation and is not carrying on any trade or business, respondent No. 2 is also not a workman within the meaning of Clause (s) of Section 2 of the Act.
It has been contended that Section 25F of the Act is not attracted in the case of termination of the services of respondent No. 2.
It is also pointed out that the services of respondent No. 2 were not allowed to continue as he was involved in a criminal case registered by the police.
He was also taken in custody by the police.
5.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has, on the other hand, argued that the services of the workman were terminated wrongly and illegally, without giving one month's notice or one month's salary in lieu of notice.
No retrenchment compensation was paid.
Certain workmen, junior to the respondent, were appointed as daily wage Chowkidars.
A new appointment to the post of Chowkidar was also made after the termination of the services of respondent No. 2.
Learned counsel has, therefore, argued that the provisions of Sections 25F, 26G and 25H were violated and, therefore, the award of the Labour Court did not suffer from any illegality.
6.
On a consideration of the controversy, it is noticed that the Labour Court has not considered and decided the question whether the Institute was an "Industry" within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act, though a specific plea was taken by the Institute in Para 4 of the reply filed in the Labour Court.
Para 4 reads as under:-  Para 4 :-  "That the management is a registered society and not a statutory body, as such the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act are not applicable in this case."
A question, whether the employee was a "workman" or not under the Industrial Disputes Act, must be examined on the basis of the pleas of the parties and the evidence on record.
Rajasthan High Court in SL Soni v. Rajasthan State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, Jaipur, 1986 Lab.
IC 468, had an occasion to examine a matter where a plea had been raised as to whether the employee was a workman.
It was held that the question could not be decided in a writ petition.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-Institute has placed reliance on Physical Research Laboratory v. KG Sharma, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 1855 : 1997(2) S.C.T.
492.
That was a case where Physical Research Laboratory, which was an Institute under the Government of India's Department of Space, was held to be not an industry.
It was observed in Para 13 as under :-  "It was nobody's case that PRL is engaged in an activity which can be called business, trade or manufacture.
Neither from the nature of its organisation nor from the nature and character of the activity carried on by it, it can be said to be an undertaking analogous to business or trade.
It is not engaged in a commercial industrial activity and it cannot be described as an economic venture or a commercial enterprise as it is not its object to produce and distribute services which would satisfy wants and needs of the consumer community.
It is more an institution discharging Governmental functions and a domestic enterprise than a commercial enterprise.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that PRL is not an industry even though it is carrying on the activity of research in a systematic manner with the help of its employees as it lacks that element which would make it an organisation carrying on an activity which can be said to be analogous to the carrying on of a trade or business because it is not producing and distributing services which are intended or meant for satisfying human wants and needs, as ordinarily understood".
Learned counsel for the workman-respondent No. 2 has drawn our attention to another decision of the Supreme Court reported in JT 1997(9) SC 234, General Manager, Telecom v. S Srinivasan Rao and others, wherein it was observed that following the seven-Judge Bench view in the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board case, 1978(2) SCC 213, it is not permissible for a three-Member Bench to take a view contrary to that decision which was rendered long back in 1978.
8.
In the case of General Manager, Telecom v. S Srinivasan Rao and others (supra), the controversy related to the Telecom Department of the Union of India.
The question before the Court was whether that Department is an industry within the meaning of the definition of Section 2(j) of the Act.
It was held, following the seven-Judge Bench judgment in the Bangalore Water Supply's case that the Telecom Department was an industry.
9.
The question in the present writ petition before us is, however, different.
The petitioner-Institute is a research organisation.
In the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in Physical Research Laboratory's case (supra), it would be necessary to examine the various activities carried out by the petitioner-Institute.
10.
On a consideration of the matter, we find it appropriate that the matter be examined by the Labour Court, on this aspect, after recording evidence of the parties so as to ascertain from the activities carried on by the petitioner-Institute whether it is an `industry' within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
11.
The writ petition is allowed.
Award of the Labour Court dated March 6, 1998 is set aside.
The matter is remitted to the Labour Court to frame an issue on the plea whether the petitioner-Institute is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
The Labour Court shall decide the issue after affording due opportunity to both the parties to lead evidence on this issue.
12.
Both the parties are directed, through their respective counsel, to appear before the Labour Court on January 6, 1999.
Petition allowed.