TS Doabia, J - Six months ad hoc tenure in pursuance of an order passed on 28th October, 1983 followed by another similar tenure was sought to be recognised as regular service vide order pased on 19th May, 1989.
This was challenged immediately.
Writ petitions were filed.
Interim relief was not granted.
Later on an order came to be passed by the State government on 9th July, 1998.
By this order Sarv Shri GA Bhat and RS Sodhi, Assistant Directors, J&K Fire Services came to be posted as Deputy Directors in their own pay and grade for a period of six months or till the posts are formally filled up through the Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission or the Departmental Promotion Committee is constituted, whichever is earlier.
This is being challenged in Writ Petition No. 1592/1998.
The further fact is that this order has been passed without prejudice to the rights of others and was also subject to adjudication, which is to be made in six writ petitions enumerated in the order referred to above.
So far as order dated 9th July, 1998, is concerned it has been challenged basically on the ground that even though this has been termed as ad hoc arrangement, for all intents and purposes, this is a final arrangement.
It is further submitted that this cannot be permitted to be done.
It is submitted that this would lead to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Had this been the only argument, the petition could have been disposed of summarily However, other questions which have been raised in other petitions are also required to be gone into.
This is essential with a view to put an end to the controversy arising in this petition and other petitions enumerated in order dated 9th July, 1998.
Accordingly, other issues which are subject matter of other writ petitions are also noticed at this stage.
Petitioner in writ petition (SWP No. 1592/98) came to be promoted as Assistant Director, J&K Fire Services.
This happened on 28th October, 1983.
Copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure "A".
This arrangement has been described as ad hoc and was to last for a period of six months or till regular selection is made by the Departmental Promotion Committee or the Public Service Commission whichever is earlier.
So far as order dated 28th October, 1983 is concerned, it was not challenged in any forum.
This ad hoc tenure was extended by another six months.
Thereafter no express order exist by which ad hoc tenure was extended.
It is, however, stated that petitioner was allowed to perform the duties of higher assignment i.e. on post of Assistant Director, Fire Services.
Later on, an order came to be passed.
This happened on 19th May, 1989.
By this order, Sarv Shri RP Khajuria and GN Sofi were promoted as Assistant Directors with effect from the date they had been officiating.
This date was mentioned as 28th October, 1983.
It is this order passed in the month of May 1989 which came to be challenged in this Court.
Two writ petitions bearing Nos. 680/1989 and 824/1989 came to be filed by S/Shri GA Bhat and RT Dubey.
The stand taken by the petitioners in the aforementioned two writ petitions was that the State by first making ad hoc promotions and later on regularising the same, has not acted fairly and as a matter of fact, this amounted to circumventing the rule of equality as contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was also urged that S/Shri RP Khajuria and GN Sofi who were given ad hoc appointment on 28th October, 1983 never came to be appointed to the service.
The service is J&K Fire Services (Gazetted) Service.
It is accordingly submitted that unless and until a person is appointed to the service in terms of Rule 6 of the Rules and is placed on probation in terms of Rule 8, he cannot derive any benefit of the Rules in question.
Another fact which has been projected is that there is a quota fixed for direct recruits and promotees.
60% of the posts in the service are to be filled by promotion and 40% are to be filled by direct recruitment.
It is submitted that if a person is to be given benefit of officiating service and he is allowed to reap that benefit, then the rights of the direct recruits are going to be directly affected.
It is stated that in October, 1983, there were three officials working as Assistant Directors, J&K Fire Services.
Taking into consideration this fact, the State Government thought it apt to make appointments of direct recruits also.
Two vacancies were so notified.
It is stated that this was the obvious reason as to why a saving clause which was to the effect "the arrangements ordered above will be on ad hoc basis tenable for a period of six months or till regular selection is made by the DPC/PSC whichever is earlier" came to be incorporated in the order dated 28th October, 1983 making ad hoc appointments.
It is further stated that this six months ad hoc arrangement was extended by another six months and thereafter this arrangement was not extended.
This factual submission that the said arrangement was not extended beyond a period of two six-monthly tenures is specifically mentioned in the counter filed by the State.
See reply given in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the counter.
The categoric stand taken is that the ad hoc tenure of the incumbents who were the beneficiaries of the order dated 28th October, 1983 was not extended beyond 28th April, 1984.
It is accordingly projected that the State Government acted contrary to the Rules when it made a stipulation in the order dated 19th May, 1989 that the benefit of officiating service shall be given w.e.f.
28th October, 1983.
The above is the brief factual resume.
So far as the statutory position is concerned this be noticed.
The service is governed by the Rules called as J&K Fire Services (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1977.
Rule 3(d) defines the service as J&K Fire (Gazetted) Service.
The qualifications and method of recruitment is indicated in Rule 6.
Rule 8 lays down the period of probation.
A person who is appointed; whether direct or by promotion, to any class or category has to remain on probation for a period of two years and his confirmation in the service has to be regulated under the provisions of J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
If Governor so desires, a person appointed to the service can be asked to undergo training also.
Rule 11 deals with residuary matters.
It is indicated that if any matter is not governed by the Rules of 1977, then other service Rules and Regulations can be looked into.
So far as seniority is concerned it is specifically indicated in Rule 12 that the same shall be determined in accordance with the provisions contained in J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
To summarise :-  i) The petitioners Shri RP Khajuria and Shri GN Sofi were members of non- gazetted service.
ii) They were given assignment of the post of Assistant Director, J&K Fire Services on ad hoc basis.
Copy of this order is annexure `A'; iii) That on 19th May, 1989, an order was passed by which the intervening period from 28th October, 1983 to 19th May, 1989 was sought to be treated as regular service; iv) That the order dated 19th May, 1989 came to be challenged in two writ petitions.
These are SWP Nos. 680/1989 and 824/1989.
The challenge was made on the following grounds:- a) That effort to regularise the officiating period would operate to the prejudice of the direct recruits; b) That the officiating period cannot be counted, as this would amount to virtual negation of the scope of the proviso added in the order dated 28th October, 1983; c) That by giving effect to the order w.e.f.
28th October, 1983 Shri RP Khajuria and GN Sofi are sought to be adjusted against the posts which were meant for direct recruits; d) That the appointment which was initially made for a period of six months was again extended for a period of six months.
After that there was no formal order issued with a view to extend the service.
That the learned counsel for the petitioner who is challenging the order dated 9th July, 1998 and while defending the order dated 19th May, 1989 issued in his favour by which officiating service w.e.f.
28th October, 1983 was regularised, has argued that the course adopted by the State Government in treating the officiating service for the purpose of seniority is a course to which no exception can be taken.
He submits that the order came to be passed under the Rules of 1977, and in any case it is submitted that if Rule 11 which deals with the residual matters is taken note of then this order would be protected by Rule 14 of the J&K CS (CC&A) Rules, 1956 and Regulation 85 of the J&K Civil Service Regulations.
While placing reliance on the decision given by the Supreme court in the case reported as Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) Supreme Court Cases 715, it is urged that even if initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down in the Rules but where an appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till regularisation of his service in accordance with Rules, the period of officiating service has to be counted.
Reliance is also placed on a decision given by the Supreme Court in the case titled as Delhi Water Supply and Sewerage Disposal Committee and others v. Shri RK Kashyap and Others, reported as 1989 SC Service Rulings Vol-I Page 313.
On the basis of the above decision it is urged that ad hoc appointment followed by regularisation of service, would enable the appointee to get his ad hoc service counted for the purposes of seniority.
Reliance is also being placed on another decision given by the Supreme Court in case GP Doval and others v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP and others, reported as 1984(4) Supreme Court Cases 329.
It is urged that this decision lays down that continuous officiation followed by approval by the Public Service Commission to the temporary appointment would relate back to the date of initial appointment.
Another decision on which reliance is being placed is DK Mitra and others v. Union of India and others, 1985 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 243.
The above decision is to the effect that length of continuous officiating service can be taken into consideration for determining the seniority.
Thus the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that ad hoc appointment was made in terms of the Classfication, Control and Appeal Rules, and also in terms of Service Regulations referred to above.
This as per the counsel is permissible under Rule 11 of the Service to which appointment was made.
It is further submitted that even if it be presumed that the appointment was not made in accordantee with law, even then the officiating service can be counted in view of the decision referred to above.
The learned counsel for the respondents in writ petition 1592/1998 and for writ petitioners in SWP 680/1989 & 824/1989 submits that the service of the petitioner was never continuous.
He was first given ad hoc anointment for six months only.
Thereafter, this was extended for another six months.
There is no further order of extension.
In this situation, it is stated that even if the decisions of the Supreme Court and on which reliance is being placed by counsel for the writ petitioner in writ petition No. SWP 1592/1998 are taken note of, still no benefit can be derived.
It is further stated that unless and until there is an appointment made in terms of Rule "6" of 1977 Rules, a person does not become member of the Service.
It is urged that appointment has to be through Public Service Commisison.
The petitioner is said to be a member of the Non-gazetted service.
He was to be inducted into a Gazetted Service in terms of the Rules of 1977.
This according to the respondents would require submission of papers and reference being made to the Public Service Commission.
Unless and until this happens, there can be no appointment to the service.
It is submitted that seniority is to be counted only when a person becomes member of the service.
Reliance has been placed on a decision reported as RN Pandit, Officiating Superintending Engineer & others v. KB Vig, X-EN Irrigation, 1984 S.L.R.
Vol-III page 344.
In this case a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court concluded that a promotee appointed on officiating basis on a post without first becoming a member of the service cannot get his service rendered on officiating basis counted for purposes of determining seniority.
Another decision on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner is Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra and others (supra).
The respondents are placing reliance on conclusion `A' as indicated in para 47.
This is to the effect that "Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation."
The further observation made by the Supreme Court and on which emphasis has been laid is to the effect "the corollary of the above rule is that where the initial anointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
Keshav Chandra Joshi & Ors v. Union of India & others, 1992 (Suppl.
I) SCC 272 is another decision on which reliance has been placed by the respondents.
This decision lays down that before a service can be counted, it must be shown that the incumbent was in fact member of the service in which he wants officiating service to be counted.
It has been observed that unless and until an order is passed by which a person is made member of the service he cannot get the period of officiating service counted for the purposes of seniority.
The other decisions in which similar view was expressly given by the Supreme Court in AK Saigal and others v. N Nagrajan, 1993(3) SCC page 42; State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey & Ors. 1993(3) SCC 371 : 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC); are also being relied for the same purpose.
Much stress is laid on the view expressed in `State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey & Ors'.
In this decision, it has been indicated that ad hoc service followed by regular service cannot be counted if appointment was in violation of the Rules.
It is also urged that the decision given in Direct Recruits Case stands explained in `State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey and Others'.
It is urged that if a case falls within the scope of proposition enumerated in para `A' then what was said in the aforementioned judgment, in para `B' would stand excluded.
For this, specific reference has been made to paragraph 22 of the judgment.
This para is being reproduced below :-  "22.
There can be no doubt that these two conclusions have to be read harmoniously, and conclusion (B) cannot cover cases which are expressly excluded by conclusion (A).
We may, therefore, first refer to conclusion (A).
It is clear from conclusion (A) that `to enable seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post has to be initially appointed according to rules'.
The corollary set out in conclusion (A), then is, that `where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.'
Thus, the corollary in conclusion (A) expressly excludes the category of cases where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules, being made only as a stop-gap arrangement.
The case of the writ petitioners squarely falls within this corollary in conclusion (A), which says that the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for counting the seniority."
Another judgment on which reliance has been placed as said in a judgment given by the Supreme Court reported as Kedar Nath Etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1991 SC 1224.
From the perusal of the factual and legal submissions made above, it becomes apparent that if a person wants his officiating service to be counted, then it must be established as a fact that he has continued to work on officiating basis.
It also must be established that the initial appointment was made in terms of the Rules.
In the present case, the case of the respondents (in SWP 1592/1998) is that in the year 1984, three persons were already working as promotees.
A reference was made by the State Government for filling the quota of direct recruits.
Two vacancies were notified.
It was during the currency of this period, ad hoc appointment was made by which the petitioner of writ petition No. 1592/1998 and another person Shri GN Sofi came to be appointed as Assistant Director Fire Services.
It has also come on record that the initial appointment was for a period of six months only.
It was extended by another period of six months and thereafter there was no order issued by the State Government with a view to extend the ad hoc tenure.
All that has been stated is that the petitioner continued to work.
Under what authority he so worked has not been elaborated.
Express order by which the tenure was extended beyond the initial two periods, has not been placed on the record.
The argument raised is that even in the absence of an explicit and express order when the petitioner and GN Sofi were allowed to work by the State Government, the petitioner and Shri GN Sofi should be deemed to have been allowed to continue in accordance with law.
Even if this argument is accepted, it would not advance the case of the petitioner.
Such arrangement would not be said to be an arrangement in terms of the Rules of 1977.
If this be the position, then the judgments on which reliance has been placed by the respondents would be squarely attracted to the facts of the present case and officiating period cannot be permitted to be counted for the purpose of regular service.
Another argument which has been raised is that in the order by which ad hoc appointment was made, it has been categorically mentioned that the said arrangement would continue till the expiry of six months or till selection is made.
Even if this reasoning is accepted even then no advantage is gained.
Two direct appointments came to be made from the direct recruitment quota.
Thereafter the temporary ad hoc arrangement ceased to exist.
If this be the position, then the stipulation in the order dated 19th May, 1989 which is to the effect that the previous period is to be counted, is a stipulation which is not based on factual realities.
Another aspect of the matter which has been projected by the learned counsel for the petitioner of SWP 1592/1998 is that if the minutes of the proceedings of the Public Service Commission are perused, it becomes apparent that the two incumbents had continued to continuously perform the duties of the Assistant Directors.
It be seen that there has to be a distinction between a service rendered under the Rules and service rendered otherwise that is beyond the Rules.
At the most the service which was rendered when there was initial order issued, could have been said to be a service rendered under the Rules (even this is doubtful) but after the ad hoc tenure was not extended, it cannot be said any service was rendered by the petitioners under the Rules.
Therefore, the decisions on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents would be directly attracted to the facts of this case.
Even the further argument that the service should be deemed to have been rendered in terms of provisions of Article 14 of the J&K CS (CC&A) Rules, 1956 and this should be treated as a service rendered under the Rules, cannot be accepted, because there is no order by which earlier tenure was sought to be extended.
The scope and ambit of interference in Writ Petition No. 1592/1998 be examined.
The respondents in the above writ petition have been appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the posts are formally filled up though J&K Public Service Commission or the Departmental Promotion Committee.
This arrangement appears to have been arrived at because of pendency of other writ petitions including the two writ petitions referred to above.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that system of making appointments on ad hoc basis for indefinite periods is discriminatory and violative of constitutional protection.
The policy of ad hocism for a long period leads to breach of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The power to make provisional appointment is not a charter for arbitrary preference.
It is no administrative licence to ignore the service conditions and the Rules.
As a matter of fact the policy of ad hocism if adopted by the Government for long time results in violation of Articles 14 and 16.
Ad hoc appointments are unreasonable, arbitrary and is nothing but the archaic hire and fire policy since demolished by the Constitution and the law of the land.
Ad hoc appointments are not to be made in violation of rules.
In view of the above position of law in S.W.P.
No. 1592 of 1998 a direction is being given to the State to not to continue with ad hoc arrangement beyond the period of six months.
This period of six months would begin from today.
As a result of the above discussion, it is observed:-  i) That policy of making appointment on ad hoc basis which leads to breach of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India should not be permitted for unduly long period; ii) Ad hoc period of service can be counted if the initial appointment is made under the rules; iii) Where ad hoc arrangement is made when vacancies have been referred to the Public Service Commission or to the Departmental Promotion Committee, then the ad hoc appointees cannot be given the benefit of the service rendered by them on ad hoc basis; iv) In the present case the respondents to the writ petitions No. 680/1989 and 824/1989 came to be appointed for ad hoc period initially for a period of six months.
This period was again extended.
Thereafter there was no extension.
In these circumstances this period of service cannot be treated as regular service; v) That the rules of 1977 require a person becoming the member of the service to be placed on probation.
No such step was taken vis-a-vis respondents in the above petition; vi) Benefit of ad hoc service cannot be given to respondents of S.W.P.
No. 680/1989 and S.W.P.
No. 824/1989.
The writ petitions No. 680/1989 and 824/1989 are accordingly allowed.
The stipulation in the order under challenge that the officiating period w.e.f.
28th October, 1983 is to be counted as regular service is set aside.
The remaining order is held to be valid.
The composite order to the extent is bad is as such set aside.
The bad portion is separated.
The two writ petitions are allowed in the manner indicated above.
In view of the decision given above the State Government would take remedial measure and take note of the impact of this order and implement the order vis-a-vis the other service candidates also.
So far as writ petition No. 1592/1998 is concerned, this is disposed of with a direction that State shall not continue with the ad hoc arrangement beyond the period of six months beginning from today.
Petitions allowed.