AM Mir, J - The petitioner is working as a Deputy Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer in Power Projects and Flood Control Department.
He joined his service as a Junior Assistant on 911961.
At the time of his joining his service he produced his Matriculation certificate before the respondents, wherein his date of birth was shown as 27121938.
All along his journey on the highway of service he kept on abiding by his matriculation certificate in respect of his date of birth.
Obviously after completing 58 years of service, he was to superannuate on 26121996.
He filed a representation before the respondents on 1551996, seeking correction in his date of birth from 27121938 to 27.12.1940.
This correction/rectification was sought in terms of SRO 310 dated 19111995.
The representation raised a dispute in respect of correctness of the date of birth reflected in petitioner's matriculation certificate.
Respondent No. 4 passed a formal order No. CAP/127/101 dated 12.7.1996, whereunder petitioner's representation was rejected.
Aggrieved by the order dated 12.7.1996, the petitioner, 72 days before his actual date of superannuation, filed the present writ petition before this Court on 14.10.1996 and challenged that order.
A Single Bench of this Court, (Hon'ble Justice Bhawani Singh, ACJ.
), issued notice in this petition on 5121996 and stayed the superannuation of the petitioner till further orders.
Uptil date no orders were passed in the petition, with the result that the petitioner continues to be in service on the strength of interim direction issued by this court on 5121996.
The petitioner relies upon first proviso to SRO 310 dated 19111995, which, according to the writ petitioner, lays down as obligation on the respondents to consider petitioner's representation and change his date of birth.
2.
Detailed objections have been filed, wherein it has been thoroughly maintained that the petitioner all along his service career relied upon his matriculation certificate and accepted 27121938 to be his date of birth.
He could not, towards the fag end of his service, resile from this stand and ask for an alteration to his benefit.
It is also pleaded that immediately prior to making of the representation in terms of SRO 310 the petitioner had made another representation wherein he wanted rectification of an error which had crept in the service record.
An office memorandum regarding retirement of some of the officers of the J&K Accounts Service was circulated on 1361995.
The writ petitioner figured at S.No.
7, in this memorandum.
His date of retirement was shown to be 3041996.
The petitioner made a representation under No. DFS/Sgr/603 dated 13111995 for rectification of the error.
In this representation he unequivocally pleaded that his date of birth was 27121938.
So, according to the petitioner, he was due for retirement on 26121996.
Respondent No. 4's communication dated 22.12.1995 informed the writ petitioner that his date of birth had mistakenly been taken to be 17.4.1938 and this was done on basis of the entries in various seniority lists issued by the respondents from time to time.
The respondents called upon the writ petitioner to produce his matriculation certificate in original alongwith copy of the first page of his service book duly attested.
The respondents also informed the petitioner that if that would not be done then there was no alternative left for them except to superannuate him on 3041996.
As a result of this communication, the petitioner submitted his matriculation certificate which fortified the claim he made in his representation dated 13111995 that his date of birth was 27121998.
On receiving the matriculation certificate and other record from the writ petitioner, respondent No. 2 (Director Accounts and Treasuries) issued a corrigendum to office memorandum dated 1361995.
In this corrigendum the date of retirement of the writ petitioner was asked to be read as `31.12.1996' instead of `3041996'.
In terms of this order while accepting petitioner's representation his date of birth was treated as 27.12.1939, not 18.4.1938.
The corrigendum issued on 1361995 is reproduced in its original form for convenience :-  "Please read Date of retirement as 31121995 instead of 3041996 appearing at S.No.
7 of the above cited office memo in respect of Shri Nazir Ahmed presently posted as DFA&CAO Power Project and Flood Control Department Srinagar.
His date of birth recorded in the seniority list issued w.e.f.
121985 vide No. CAE/Misc104/1328 dated 121985 vide No. DAT/Seniority/89/7 dated 22.8.1989 and No. CAE/Misc.89/678 dated 13111995 should actually be treated as 27.12.1928 and not as 17.4.1938 erroneously recorded."
According to the respondents the petitioner was now estopped from asking for a further change in his date of birth because it was maintained by him in the earlier representation, and it was proved by him by producing the matriculation certificate and first page of his service book, that his date of birth was 27121938.
This was done only in June, 1995.
Therefore, as per the respondents, on 1551996 he could not resile from the earlier stand.
It was in these circumstances that the representation made by the writ petitioner in the light of SRO 310 was rejected.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
4.
A growing trend of coming to the courts at the fag end of service and seeking alteration in dates of birth has been witnessed.
It seems that people are reluctant in accepting their retirement.
At different occasions this Court, as also the Supreme Court, sounded note of caution for making attempts to arrest this trend.
In a case titled Union of India and others v. Kantilal Hematram Pandya, reported in A.I.R. 1995 SC 1349 : 1995(2) SCT 520 (SC), the Supreme Court rejected the relief and held that after three decades, even if a certificate, vindicating a date of birth, which would go to the advantage of the petitioner, was produced.
Same was not free from suspicion.
Again in another case tilted Burn Standard Co Ltd and others v. Vinabandu Majamdar and another, reported in A.I.R. 1995 SC 1499 : 1995(3) SCT 126 (SC), their lordships held that ordinarily the High Courts should not, in exercise of their jurisdiction, entertain writ petitions filed by an employee of the Government towards the fag end of his service, seeking correction of his date of birth which was entered in his service record.
The object of such a motion, in their lordships' opinion, was to continue in service and forestall superannuation.
In another case titled Union of India and others v. Mrs. Sarojbala, reported in A.I.R. 1996 SC 1000 : 1996(3) SCT 669 (SC), the petitioner seeking correction of her date of birth belonged to All India Service and remained in service for 18 years.
The Apex Court held that it was unthinkable that a person coming from an educational background, having served for 18 years, could have discovered that her date of birth was wrong.
Therefore, the decision of the Service Tribunal, whereunder correction was granted, was set aside and petitioner's plea rejected.
5.
In the present case, however, the petitioner has based his whole claim on SRO 310 dated 29111995.
He asserts that sub-para (c) of para (3) of the proviso castes an obligation upon the Government to consider the application of a Government servant for change of his date of birth, if made within a period of six months from the date of issue of this notification.
According to the petitioner, once he applied for correction of his date of birth, within time, it was incumbent upon the respondents to effect the change, as desired.
Since the impugned communication has declined to correct his date of birth, same is illegal.
6.
Thus it becomes imperative for this court to understand the true purport of SRO 310 and the first proviso added to sub-para (c).
This SRO sets out the procedure and norms for determination of date of birth of a Government servant.
By virtue of this SRO, Note 2 appended to Art. 35-A was deleted and after Note 1 below Art. 35-A, the contemplations contained in the SRO were added as 35-AA.
The whole purpose of this addendum is to regulate the process of determination of date of birth of public servants.
In the first instance in para (a), the age of superannuation of a Government employee under the SRO is required to be determined on the strength of the date of birth which he furnished at the time of his appointment and which is accepted by the competent authority.
For determination of the age of those of the Government, servants who have passed matriculation examination, matriculation certificate is the document which the parties under the SRO are supposed to act upon.
We are not here concerned with the procedure laid down for non-matriculates and those who have not attended any school.
In para (b) of this SRO the procedure and sequence for recording date of birth has been contemplated.
Sub-para (2) of para (b) calls upon the drawing and disbursing authority to obtain signatures of the Government employee on the first page of his service book.
This signature is required to be taken by way of authentication and acceptance of the date of birth, which was recorded on the strength of the date of birth certificate produced.
Para (c) of the SRO lays down the relevant provisions of alteration of the date of birth.
For purposes of making things clear, I would like this para to be reproduced in full.
It reads as under :-  "(c) - ALTERATION OF DATE OF BIRTH : The date of birth so declared by the Government servant and accepted and once recorded by the appropriate authority as specified in clause (b) above in the service book or any other record of service of the Government servant, as the case may be, shall not be subjected to any alteration, except in the case of a clerical error without the order of the government.
No alteration of date of birth of a Government servant shall be made by the Government (Administrative Department) unless a request in this regard is made by the concerned Government servant within a period of five years of his/her entry into Government service and it is clearly established that a genuine/bona fide mistake has occurred.
Provided that in case of Government servant in service on the date of issue of this Notification, a request for alteration of his/her date of birth may be considered by the Government, for reasons to be recorded in writing, if an application to this effect is made within a period of six months from the date of issue of this Notification.
Provided further that the date of birth so altered would not make him/her ineligible to appear in any school or University/Board or Public Service Commission Examination in which he had appeared or for entry into Government service on the date on which he first appeared at such examination or on the date on which he entered Government service."
In the beginning sentence of the clause, general principle of law sought to be laid down is stated.
That principle of law is that once a date of birth has been recorded by the appropriate authority in the service book or any other record of service and the same has been accepted by the Government servant, it shall not be subjected to any alteration later on.
To this general rule clerical errors form an exception.
In other words wherever clerical error has been committed in recording the date of birth, of a Government servant, that can, of course be subject to an alteration.
But for rectification of that error it is the Government alone, who has the power to do it.
This para also says that this power of the Government will be exercised by the Administrative Department.
Application for rectification of such an error is required to be made within five years period from the date the Government servant entered into service.
The Government must in that case come to a clear conclusion that the clerical error was genuine and bona fide.
7.
For those of the Government servants who were already in service on the date SRO dated 29111995 was notified, the proviso makes a room for making a request for alteration of the date of birth within a period of six months from the date of issue of the Notification.
This proviso relates to the exercise of the same power laid down in the opening para of clause (c).
In other words there should be a clerical error and the error should be genuine and bona fide.
8.
A clerical error has been defined in Webesters 3rd New International Dictionary as "an error made in copying of writing".
Clerks are officials which man a variety of offices where writing is carried in the course of business.
Thus where a transcriptional error is committed by any of these officials in scribing or writing things, events, facts, law or documents, it will be a clerical error.
In a case titled Smt. Sooraj Devi v. Pyaraylal, (1981) 2 SCR 485, the Apex Court described a clerical error as an error occasioned by accidental slip or omission.
It represents a mistake which was never intended to be committed.
Clerical error in this judgment was held to be an error on the face of the record and further held to be not dependent on its discovery or argument or disputation.
9.
A clerical error cannot bring within its fold an error which an authority commits, while exercising its judicial, quasi-judicial and administrative powers.
A judicial error or quasi-judicial error can be corrected by an appeal or review.
An administrative error can be corrected by issuing another administrative order, after application of mind and under rules.
But a clerical error is amendable nune pro tune.
10.
Mr. Qayoom appearing for the petitioner, wants the proviso to be read independently.
It is here where he, in my opinion, is mistaken.
A proviso to a section only aids the section.
It cannot be read in a disjuncted form.
The relationship of a proviso with the provision of the section to which it is affixed was determined by their lordships of the Supreme Court in a case titled Kidar Jute Manufacturing Company Ltd v. Commercial Tax Officer, reported in A.I.R. 1956 SC 12.
Their lordships in this judgment held that the function of a proviso is to carve out an exception to the rule laid down in the section, to clarify something enacted by the section which, but for the proviso, would be within the purview of the enactment.
11.
In a case titled Sourthern Mohrata Railway Company Limited v. Bezvaga Municipality, reported in A.I.R. 1944 PC 71 Lord Macmillan observed as under :-  "The proper function of a proviso is to be except and to deal with a case which would otherwise fall within the general language of the main enactment and its effect is confined to that case."
In Dwarka Parasad v. Dwarkadas Saraf, reported in A.I.R. 1975 SC 1758, it was held that the language of a proviso, even if general in nature, is normally to be construed in relation with the subject matter covered with the section to which the proviso is appended.
In a case titled M/s Mackinon Mackenzie and Company Ltd v. Audrey D'Costa, (1987) 2 SCC 469, their lordships of the Supreme Court held that the proviso normally should not be allowed to travel beyond the provision to which is a proviso.
12.
In short a proviso to a particular section only covers the field to which the main section relates.
A proviso must be read in the light of the section itself and not independently.
Its scope cannot be extended beyond the scope of the provisions.
13.
In the light of the above judgments it becomes clear that normally no body can be allowed to ask for a change in his date of birth when he has all along been representing and acting upon that date of birth during his service career.
It is at his behest that the service record is constructed, first page of the service book is maintained and the court should not, except in rarest of rare cases, accept any petition for correction of date of birth.
14.
With the above provision of law, it becomes clear that the relevant proviso to SRO 310 dated 29111995 is to be read in the light of para (c) only to which it stands added as such.
Therefore, this proviso will relate to alteration of date of birth in case of a clerical error only, not otherwise.
This proviso does carve out an exception.
The exception is that of its relativity to such of the employees who were in service prior to the promulgation of the SRO.
An exception of period of limitation (six months); from the notification date, instead of five years from the date of joining the service, is also carved out.
I want to make it clear that an added condition laid down for entertaining application of the SRO to such employees was that reasons have to be recorded in writing.
15.
In the present case the petitioner made a representation after the promulgation of the SRO.
Same was rejected after passing the impugned order and cogent reasons for refusal of the prayer have been recorded.
The petitioner submitted his matriculation certificate when he joined service.
His service book was compiled.
He accepted the date of birth all along his service and confirmed the same in his representation made in June 1995 also.
Then the petitioner wanted to change this date of birth.
The case of the petitioner is that the matriculation certificate was incorrect.
This would, in no case, fall within the purview of a clerical error.
On the other hand this would involve an alteration after reweighing the whole case, taking evidence and conducting of an inquiry on the merits of the case.
Therefore, para (c) of the SRO No. 310 dated 29111995, would not apply.
The application of the proviso to para (c) (supra) is misplaced.
Therefore, I find no infirmity in the order impugned.
16.
That being so, I dismiss this writ petition and interim direction issued by this Court on 5121996 shall stand vacated.
Petition dismissed.