THB Chalapathi, J - This second appeal is directed against the decree and judgment of the learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, dated October 19, 1996, in Civil Appeal No. 187 of 1996.
2.
The respondent-plaintiff filed a suit for declaration that the order passed by the Commandant, 13th Bn.
P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantt.
dated 1181987, dismissing him from service is illegal, arbitrary, cryptic and contrary to the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules and to direct the defendants to take him back into service without any break with all consequential benefits.
3.
The plaintiff joined the police department in the 13th Bn.
of Punjab Armed Police in the year 1978.
He was dismissed from service by the impugned order dated 1181987 on the charge of wilful absence from duty.
The appeal to the Deputy Inspector General, P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantt and further Revision to the Director General of Police were unsuccessful.
Therefore, he filed the suit challenging the order of dismissal on the ground that mandatory provisions of the procedure as laid down in the Punjab Police Rules are not complied with as there is failure to supply copies of the documents during the enquiry and that the charge against the plaintiff was not established and that the report of the Enquiry Officer is violative of Rule 1624(1)(vii) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
It is also alleged that the absence from duty does not amount to gravest misconduct for which the services could be terminated and no opportunity of personal hearing was given to the plaintiff and the Enquiry Officer and also the punishing authority failed to establish his absence from duty and that the plaintiff remained under treatment during the period of the alleged absence and, therefore, the order of dismissal is wrong.
4.
The defendants in the written statement contended that the suit is not maintainable and the plaintiff has not exhausted departmental remedies and that the allegations against the plaintiff have been found to be proved and the enquiry was conducted according to the provisions of the Rules and there is no violation either of the Rules of the principles of natural justice and, therefore, the suit is liable to be dismissed.
5.
On the basis of the pleadings, the Sub Judge III Class, Jalandhar, framed appropriate issues and on consideration of the evidence on record decreed the suit and directed the defendants-appellants to take back the plaintiff into service without any break with all consequential benefits.
The appeal filed by the defendants against the judgment of the trial Court to the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, was also unsuccessful and hence the present appeal.
6.
Admittedly, the plaintiff-respondent joined the Police department in 18th Bn.
in 1978 and he was dismissed from service in 1987 on the ground of his wilful absence from duty.
A charge-sheet was served on the plaintiff and an enquiry was conducted and in the enquiry it was found that the plaintiff was guilty of the charge of wilful absence from duty.
On the basis of the enquiry report, a show-cause notice was given to the plaintiff.
On a consideration of his explanation, the plaintiff was dismissed from service by the impugned order dated 1181987 (Exhibit P.1).
It was not in dispute that the plaintiff absented himself from duty for 47 days.
There is also no denial that an enquiry was conducted against the plaintiff and the Enquiry Officer had submitted his report on 3061986 and a show cause notice was given on 1371987.
The plaintiff also submitted his written explanation.
It is no doubt true that under Rule 16.2(1) of the Rules, dismissal can be awarded on the basis of gravest acts of misconduct.
7.
On the basis of the enquiry report and also on considering the explanation given by the plaintiff, the punishing authority came to the conclusion that the misconduct is such which attracts the punishment of dismissal from service.
As held by the Supreme Court in BC Chaturvedi v Union of India and others, JT 1995(8) SC 65, judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made and the power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the Court.
The plaintiff belongs to a disciplinary force.
The absence from duty without obtaining leave is certainly a gravest misconduct.
There is no denial of the fact that the procedure under Rule 1624 has been followed.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that the absence from duty for 47 days without obtaining leave cannot be termed as gravest act of misconduct on the part of the police constable and, therefore, I am unable to agree with the Courts below that the wilful absence from duty cannot be termed as gravest act of misconduct.
8.
It is next contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that the charge sheet was issued by the Enquiry Officer but not by the disciplinary authority.
In this context, it is useful to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Inspector General of Police and another v. Thavasiappan, 1996(2) SLR 470 : 1996(3) S.C.T.
680, wherein it has been held that the initiation of the disciplinary enquiry can be by an officer subordinate to the punishing authority.
Their Lordships referred to an earlier decision of the apex Court in PV Srinivasa Sastry v. Comptroller and Auditor General, 1994(1) SCC 419 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
187, wherein it has been held that in the absence of a rule any superior authority who can be held to be controlling authority can initiate a departmental proceedings per se does not visit the officer concerned with any evil consequences.
Therefore, simply because the charge-sheet was issued by the Enquiry Officer, it cannot be said that the enquiry held against the plaintiff is not in accordance with the Rules.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondent further argued that the documents were not supplied but the plaintiff has not made any grievance before the authorities that he was not supplied with the documents.
No request has been made by him.
He has also not specified the documents on which he wants to place reliance and the relevancy thereof.
Therefore, this ground also must fail.
10.
It is also argued by the learned counsel for the respondent that no opportunity of hearing was given to the plaintiff and, therefore, the order of dismissal is bad.
Rule 1624(ix) only envisages that before a punishment is imposed on a person an opportunity should be given to show cause that the proposed punishment is disproportionate to the offence committed by him.
Admittedly, a show cause notice has been given.
Therefore, there is no violation of principles of natural justice.
The principles of natural justice will not extend to giving a personal hearing.
Apart from that the learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, has categorically recorded a finding to the following effect :-  "In the instant case not only written reply but also he was afforded personal hearing as reflected at page 57 of the enquiry file."
11.
Thus, the plaintiff was not only given the opportunity to show cause but also had been given personal hearing.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent also argued that the punishing authority has not taken into account the length of service while ordering the dismissal of the plaintiff.
It has been held by the Apex Court in BC Chaturvedi's case (supra) that the fact that the employee had put in 30 years of service and a brilliant academic record and a promotion after the disciplinary proceedings were initiated, are not relevant nor germane to modify the punishment.
In State of Punjab and others v. Bakhshish Singh, 1997(6) Supreme Court Cases 381 : 1997(3) S.C.T.
401, it has been held that certain "it is certain legal position that it is for the disciplinary authority to pass appropriate punishment, the civil court cannot substitute its own view to that of the disciplinary as well as appellate authority on the nature of the punishment to be imposed upon the delinquent officer.
The High Court and the lower appellate Court ought not to have interfered with the decree of the trial Court dismissing the suit".
That was also a case of a police constable who absented from duty.
Therefore, the length of service is no ground for imposing a lesser penalty.
13.
I do not, therefore, find any infirmity either with the enquiry conducted against the plaintiff or with the order of punishment.
Both the Courts erred in law.
The judgments of the Courts below are contrary to the decisions of the Apex Court, I am, therefore of the opinion that the appeal is to be allowed.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgments and decrees of the Courts below and dismiss the suit.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.