HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - Petitioner No. 1 claims to be a Forum for the redressal of the problems of students seeking admission to Medical Colleges in the State, whereas petitioner No. 2 Robal Behal, was herself a General Category candidate for admission to the MBBS/BDS/BAMS courses in the Government as also in the private Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab.
The State Government vide Notification No. 11/60/98-5HB3/8789 dated 27th March, 1998, notified that 350 seats were available for admission in the Government Medical Colleges at Amritsar, Patiala and Faridkot.
The Notification also provided for admission against various reserved categories and Note (1) below the column Distribution of seats in each college stipulated that 15% of the available seats were to be reserved for Non-Resident Indian (NRIs) candidates in the private Medical, Dental and Ayurvedic Colleges in the State of Punjab.
It was further provided that all the seats except the NRI seats were to be filled in on the basis of merit determined by an Entrance Test.
Petitioner No. 2 took the test on 661998 and on the declaration of the result on 1261998 (put on the Notice Board on 14.7.1998) she was shown at merit position No. 354.
The State of Punjab, in the meanwhile, issued a corrigendum dated 971998 (Annexure R-10 with the reply) to the Notification dated 2731998 reserving 12 seats for NRI or NRI sponsored candidate in three Government Medical Colleges in the State as well.
The State also issued a notice Annexure P-2 in the Daily Tribune dated 1271998 informing the general public that a Caveat that had been filed in the High Court on account of the fact that a challenge was apprehended to the Notification Annexure R-10.
The Director, Research & Medical Education, Punjab, also issued an advertisement Annexure P-3 dated 1571998 intimating that the 12 seats aforementioned would be filled on payment of 75000 US Dollars for NRI as also NRI sponsored Indian students and the latter category of students would be permitted to pay the equivalent of 75000 US Dollars in Indian Money.
It is the petitioner's case that had the 12 seats not been so reserved, she stood a chance of getting admission in one of the three Government Medical colleges.
The present writ petition has, accordingly, been filed by the petitioners and a challenge has been made to the Notification Annexure R-10.
2.
On notice of motion, the respondent-State has put in its reply and it has been pointed out therein that petitioner No. 1 was an unknown Organisation having no locus standi to maintain the petition, whereas petitioner No. 2, who had appeared in the entrance test was way down in order of merit and stood no chance of getting admission even if the 12 seats had been retained in the General Category.
The facts leading to the issuance of the Notification Annexure R-10 have also been detailed in the written statement.
It has been pointed out that the Director, Research & Medical Education, Punjab had, way back, in the year 1997 mooted a proposal before the State Government for the creation of a NRI quota in accordance with the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan JP v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC), highlighting that the medical facilities in the Government Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab were woefully inadequate and needed major upgradation and that the funds taken as fee from NRI students could be utilised for this purpose.
Reference has also been made to the fact that the government had taken a decision vide notification dated 451998 Annexure R-7 with the reply to increase the number of seats for the MBBS Course in the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot from 50 to 100 and additional funds were required for this immediate purpose as well.
Reference has also been made to Annexures R-1 to R-9 in support of the averments reproduced above.
3.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has strongly controverted the plea of the respondents that it would not be possible for petitioner No. 2 to get admission even if the 12 seats were de-reserved and put in the general category as she was low down in merit.
He has also pointed out that a copy of the written statement had been given to him only last evening and as such, he could not file a counter due to lack of time to controvert this fact.
I am, however, of the opinion that in the light of the large and important issues involved, the petitioners cannot be non-suited solely on the ground of their locus standi.
The writ petition is, accordingly, being considered on merits.
4.
Mr. Aggarwal, has raised two basic arguments before me.
He has first and foremost emphasised that the criteria for admission once advertised in a prospectus or a notification could not be changed to the detriment of a student or a class of students.
Reference in this connection has been made to Ravneet Kaur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1985(1) ILR 343(DB) judgment of this Court, Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SLR 673, Raj Singh v. Maharshi Dayanand University, 1994(4) RSJ 289 : 1994(2) SCT 766 (P&H)(FB), Anil Jain, MS General Surgery and others v. The Controller of Examinations, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak and others, 1997(2) PLR 837 and Varinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) Judicial Reports (Labour & Services) 46 all Full Bench judgments of this Court and Kulmanpreet Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) Judicial Reports (Labour & Services) 347 (the latest in point of time) a Division Bench judgment of this Court which dealt directly with the point in issue.
In addition to the above, Mr. Aggarwal has relied on State of Orissa and another v. Dr. Asim Kumar Mohanty and others, 1989(5) SLR 1 wherein some observations supporting the same view have been made.
Mr. Aggarwal has then argued that the fee of 75000 US Dollars or its equivalent in Indian money was in the nature of a capitation fee and this demand could not be permitted in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra).
5.
As against this, Mr. HL Sibal, the learned Senior Advocate representing the respondent-State has laid great emphasis on the fact that the Department had way back in the year 1997 and long before the issuance of the notification dated 2731998 initiated a move for the creation of a 15% NRI quota with the purpose of raising additional funds for providing better medical and teaching facilities in the State run-Medical Colleges and the action being in the larger public interest as enjoined by Articles 41 and 46 of the Directive Principles and as also Article 51-A dealing with Fundamental Duties, no interference was called for.
He has accordingly urged that the judgments cited by Mr. Aggarwal could not be attracted to the matter in hand as they were distinguishable.
He has finally pointed out that the Government Notification dated 2731998 was at best an executive instruction issued under the executive power of the State Government conferred by Article 162 of the Constitution and the same could be amended or changed at any time, and in this view of the matter, no fault could be found with the fresh executive instruction Annexure R-10 dated 971998 as it too was fully authorised by law.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
7.
Mr. Aggarwal's first argument finds full support from the observations made in the cases cited by him.
In Ravneet Kaur's case (supra), while dealing with an identical situation, it was observed by the Division Bench as under :-  "Accordingly, we hold that the eligibility for admission has to be seen according to the prospectus issued before the entrance Examination and while doing so, we are constrained to hold that admission to the reserved quota of sports candidates shall be governed by the instructions prevailing before July 3, 1981 (Annexure P-4) that is on the basis of instructions of 1977 (Annexure P-3)".
This principle was reiterated by the Full Bench in Amardeep Sahota's case (supra) in the following terms:-  "The prospectus cannot subsequently be changed by the State Government to the detriment of students to benefit certain other students.
In Ravneet Kaur v. The State of Punjab and Haryana, ILR 1985(1) Punjab and Haryana, 343, a Division Bench of this Court had an occasion to consider the value of a prospectus issued for admission to an entrance examination.
It was held that the eligibility for admission to a course has to be seen according to the prospectus issued before the entrance Examination and that the admission has to be made on the basis of instructions given in the prospectus as the instructions have the force of law.
We agree with the view taken by the Division Bench."
In Raj Singh's case (supra), the matter was once again considered by the Full Bench and it was held as under :-  "The college, which is entitled to grant admission, has precisely done what it was required to do and it could not wait in granting admission and has no option but to grant admission as per the options exercised in the admission form and as per the prospectus.
Support for this view can be had from Ravdeep Kaur's case (supra) and a Full Bench decision of this Court in Amardeep Sahota v. The State of Punjab, 1993(2) PLR 212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB).
The Full Bench approved the view taken in Ravneet Kaur's case (supra), wherein it was held that the eligibility for admission to a course has to be seen according to the prospectus issued before the Entrance Examination and the admission has to be made on the basis of the instructions given in the prospectus these having the force of law".
The matter came up once again before a Full Bench in Anil Jain's case (supra) and while reiterating the ratio of Sahota's case, the following observations were made :-  "We are in respectful agreement with the said statement of law.
This being the position, we hold that the prospectus decides the rights of the candidates for admission to the Course.
When it is seen that the provisions contained in the prospectus have been strictly complied with by the respondents, petitioners are not justified in putting forth claim for admission to the additional seats which were created or to the seats which had fallen vacant subsequently".
8.
In Varinder Singh's case (supra), yet another Full Bench of this Court while following the principle in Ravneet Kaur's case went still further and observed :-  "All the parties concerned are bound by the terms and conditions of the brochure and they must adhere to them and make admissions on such basis.
The authorities also have no right to alter the terms and conditions of the brochure unless and until such power was specifically reserved while making such declarations and that too, it does not infringe the vested right and is not arbitrary in its implementation".
9.
The essence of the judgments afore-referred were summed up in a Single Bench decision of this Court in CWP No. 8567 of 1998 Gurlal Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others :  "Three broad principles are, therefore, discernible from the cited judgments - firstly, that a prospectus has the force of law.
Secondly, a candidate has a right to seek admission on its basis and on its basis alone and finally that the conditions stipulated therein cannot be changed to the detriment of any other candidate".
A Letters Patent Appeal filed against this judgment has been dismissed by a Division Bench.
10.
Mr. Sibal's reliance on M/s Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy v. The State of Jammu & Kashmir and another, AIR 1980 Supreme Court, 1992 and TMA Pai Foundation and others v. State of Karnataka and others, AIR 1995 Supreme Court 2431 : 1995(4) SCT 447 (SC), and on Kumari Chitra Ghosh and another v. Union of India and others, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 35, is misplaced as all these judgments lay down is that it is open to the Government to frame or re-reframe its policies after evaluating its needs.
Mr. Sibal's contention that the notification dated 2731998 being an executive instruction issued under the power conferred by Article 162, could be amended at any time, by another notification issued under the same provision, loses all significance in the background of what has been quoted above.
Moreover, it is well settled that an executive instruction operates prospectively.
To my mind, therefore, the corrigendum dated 971998 could not be applied to the admission procedure that had been set in motion by the notification issued on 2731998 as this procedure is one integrated whole from start to finish with one part flowing into the next till its final culmination in the actual admission.
It is true (and Mr. Sibal's emphasis on this aspect is fully justified) that adequate funds were perhaps not available with the State Government for the purpose of providing proper medical teaching facilities in the Medical Colleges and the fee taken from the NRI students would be utilised for providing the necessary infrastructure Mr. Sibal has, in this connection, produced on record an undated report of a five-member Committee of medical educationists constituted on 2111998 by the Governor of Punjab "to find out shortcomings in Medical Education".
The report noted that there were serious deficiencies in all the Government Medical Colleges vis-a-vis available facilities in the private Medical Colleges.
It also noted that budgetary allocations to the State Medical Colleges was as follows :-  Place College budget (lacs) Salary (%) Hospital budget (lacs)  Salary (%) Amritsar 94618 9777% 62954 8920% Patiala 91620 8000% 74391 8520% Faridkot 45815 9400% 19877 815% and also recommended that the allocations to these Institutions should be increased 3 fold and an immediate grant of Rs. 15 crore per college be released for the reasons that had been set out and further suggested that:-  "1.
Students fee should be enhanced and should be about Rs. 10,000/- per year per student for MBBS and Rs. 15,000/- per year for Post-Graduate students.
2.
15% of the seats should be given to NRIs/NRI sponsored as is permitted by the Supreme Court vide its judgment Unni Krishnan v. Andhra Pradesh in private Colleges.
These students should be charged equivalent to about US Dollars 75,000/- for the entire course.
Of course, these students should also be taken on merit amongst themselves.
3.
Except for those patients who are entitled to free treatment i.e. yellow card holders, Punjab Govt. servants, other categories who are entitled for free treatment by the Govt., all other patients coming to the teaching hospitals must pay.
The charges levied in PGI Chandigarh should be charged in State Medical Colleges also.
These should be reviewed frequently.
All those patients who have the capacity to pay must contribute for the services in these hospitals.
The money earned by above sources should remain in the college and spent there.
4.
In Medical College, Amritsar, scattered units of SGTB and allied hospitals should be sold for commercial utilisation and entire money should be utilised to shift all departments in Guru Nanak Dev Hospital Complex for better patients care and students teaching.
Private wards and emergency block should be built on priority.
5.
The committee strongly recommends that all Medical Colleges should be given a lump sum amount of Rs. 15 crore each immediately.
It is not clear as to when this report was submitted or whether it was taken into account while issuing the corrigendum dated 971998 (as the copy produced is undated) but it is evident from the reply filed by the State Government that all seats thrown open to the NRIs would bring in about Rs. 360 crore for all 12 seats for the duration of the 4-year course and in the light of the table set out above, this amount would not lead to any substantial increase in the funds available to the three colleges.
To my mind, therefore, even the justification on account of the need expressed by the State Government, is sadly lacking.
11.
In the light of what has been held above, Mr. Aggarwal's argument with regard to the fee being in the nature of a capitation fee, need not be gone into in the present proceedings.
12.
Mr. ML Saggar, has moved CM 19668 of 1998 under Order 1 Rule 10 of the CPC on behalf of one Amrik Singh, who is said to have been one of the selected NRI candidates.
Mr. Aggarwal, has no objection to this application being allowed.
Amrik Singh aforesaid is, accordingly, impleaded as respondent No. 8 to this petition.
13.
In the light of what has been held above, the present petition succeeds, Annexure R-10 dated 971998 is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondent-State that admission to all the seats will be made in the manner notified on 2731998 and in accordance with the instructions issued thereunder.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.