VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment, Civil Writ Petitions bearing Nos. 3315 and 6183 of 1998 can conveniently be disposed of together.
For the sake of convenience, facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 3315 of 1998.
2.
The relevant facts are petitioner M/s Mangat Hospital, Civil Lines, Jalandhar City, is a privately managed hospital.
Respondent No. 2 workman was employed with the petitioner as a nurse.
She had made her claim under section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (for short "the Act") claiming certain benefits from 141975 till 31.3.1990.
It included difference in wages.
One Basir Sahotra was identically placed and was performing similar duties but was paid higher wages.
She claimed money in lieu of national festival holidays at double the rate since she was working on these days and that she was entitled to four off days in a month but she was given holidays on alternative Sunday.
The petitioner management had contested the claim and asserted that the claim of the workman was misconceived and not justiciable.
It was also asserted that the claim was highly belated.
On merits, it was denied that the respondent-workman was entitled to claim any of the amount.
3.
The Labour Court vide order dated 2681997 partly allowed the claim.
The Labour Court disallowed the claim prior to January, 1987 as highly belated.
Regarding other part of the claim that was partly allowed, it was directed that the management will pay Rs. 16306/- to the respondent-workman within four months.
Aggrieved by the same, present writ petition has been filed by virtue of which the impugned award of the Labour Court has been assailed.
4.
The sole submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that in the facts alleged section 33-C(2) of the Act is not attracted.
Needless to state that the respondent's answer was that section 33-C(2) of the Act would be attracted to the facts of the case.
To appreciate the same, reference can be made to Section 33-C(2) of the Act which reads as under :-  "33-C(2) :- Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is capable of being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of money due or as to the amount at which such benefit should be computed, then the question may, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government (within a period not exceeding three months) : (Provided that where the Presiding Officer of a Labour Court considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such period by such further period as he may think fit)."
It is obvious from the aforesaid that if workman's right to receive benefit is disputed, it is to be determined by the Labour Court.
Before proceeding to compute the benefit in terms of money, the Labour Court has to deal with the question as to whether the workman has a right to receive that benefit.
Since the claim of the workman involves adjudication of dispute, it will not fall under section 33-C(2) of the Act.
There is pre-existing right to be adjudicated upon and, therefore, section 33-C(2) of the Act was not attracted.
This question has been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Gurmal Singh v. Punjabi University and others, CWP No. 16851 of 1997 decided on 27111997 and it was held as under :-  "Proceedings under Section 33-C(2) are analogous to execution proceedings and the Labour Tribunal called upon to compute in terms of money the benefit claimed.
A petition under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act is maintainable where an individual workman or workmen claim amount of money due or amount at which the benefit should be computed.
But such claim should be based on the existing right.
Once the right is shown to be existing, the Labour Tribunal would have jurisdiction to entertain the petition and ascertain the money due or the amount at which the benefit may be computed.
Labour Tribunal cannot by an order under Section 33-C(2) create a new right.
In short, it provides for computation of benefit and not creation of right."
5.
Supreme Court even had considered this controversy in the decision rendered in the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ganesh Razak and another, 1995 Labour and Industrial Cases, 330 : 1995(1) SCT 408 (SC).
In the cited case, Ganesh Razak and others who were respondents before the Supreme Court were casual workers of the Municipal Corporation, Delhi.
They had asserted that they were doing the same kind of work as regular employee.
They were required to be paid by the Municipal Corporation the same pay as the regular employee on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
On the basis of this, a claim was laid under section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Supreme Court held that in the facts of the case section 33-C(2) of the Act will not apply.
In paragraph 12 of the judgment, the findings recorded are as under :-  "The High Court has referred to some of these decisions but missed the true import thereof.
The ratio of these decisions clearly indicates that where the very basis of the claim or the entitlement of the workmen to a certain benefit is disputed, there being no earlier adjudication or recognition thereof by the employer, the dispute relating to entitlement is not incidental to the benefit claimed and is, therefore, clearly outside the scope of a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The Labour Court has no jurisdiction to first decide the workman's entitlement and then proceed to compute the benefit so adjudicated on that basis in exercise of its power under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
It is only when the entitlement has been earlier adjudicated or recognised by the employer and thereafter for the purpose of implementation or enforcement thereof some ambiguity requires interpretation that the interpretation is treated as incidental to the Labour Court's power under Section 33-C(2) like that of the Executing Court's power to interpret the decree for the purpose of its execution."
6.
The position herein is identical.
It requires little further adjudication.
There is no earlier right that has been adjudicated upon.
As referred to above, Section 33-C(2) is like an execution proceedings.
When right had not been adjudicated upon and disputed the Labour Court could not pass award under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
7.
For these reasons, both the civil writ petitions are allowed and the impugned awards are quashed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.