YK Sabharwal, J - The writ petition filed by the appellant was disposed of by learned Single Judge in terms of judgment dated 9th April, 1996.
The impugned judgment is based on the statement of counsel for the respondent- Corporation that the petitioner is employed as Personal Assistant (Senior) after promotion and the respondents are not going to deprive him of his designation or scale of pay applicable to him and also that the petitioner has no grievance against the scale of pay which was offered to him under letter dated 8th December 1989 and the consequential increase in that grade.
An application filed on 22nd May, 1996 seeking clarification of the judgment dated 9th April 1996 was dismissed by learned Single Judge by order dated 14th August 1996.
2.
This Letters Patent Appeal challenging the judgment dated 9th April 1996 was filed on 2nd January 1997.
Since the appeal was time barred an application (CM 271/97) seeking condonation of 222 days delay in preparing appeal was filed.
However, in the application no reasons were stated as to why delay had occurred.
The appeal and the application for condonation of delay are supported by the affidavits of the appellant.
The appeal, memo of parties, index, CM 271/97 and Vakalatnama purport to bear the signatures of Mr. KK Mehrotra as Advocate for the appellant.
The name of Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate, has been typed on these papers and the same purport to have been filed through Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate.
3.
The appeal and CM 271/97 were listed before the Court for the first time on 6th February 1997 but were adjourned by the Division Bench to 19th February 1997 since none was present for the appellant.
On 19th February 1997 appellant appeared in person and sought adjournment on the ground that his counsel was not available.
The matter was adjourned to 2nd May, 1997.
Again on 2nd May 1997 the appellant appeared in person but his counsel was not present and, therefore, the case was adjourned to 8th July 1997.
4.
The Court proceedings show that Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate, appeared in Court for the first time on 8th July 1997 and on his request the case was adjourned to 12th August 1997.
Again on 12th August 1997 appellant appeared in person and the case was adjourned to 12th November 1997 as counsel for appellant was not available.
5.
On 12th November 1997 Mr. Mehrotra appeared for the appellant and submitted that an application seeking amendment of CM 271/97 and the appeal had been filed which was not on record.
Thus, the case was adjourned to 12th January 1998.
Again on 12th January 1998 it was noticed that the amended application was still not on record.
On request of Mr. Mehrotra the case was adjourned to 20th January 1998 noticing that no further adjournment will be granted.
6.
The application for amendment of the memorandum of appeal and amendment of Section 5 application (CM Nos. 147/97 and 174/98) were filed in the Registry on 11th August 1997.
In these applications it has been pleaded that the appellant engaged his counsel Sh. KK Mehrotra only on last date of hearing.
The last date of hearing was 8th July 1997.
That is also the date when Mr. Mehrotra appeared for the first time in Court.
The further plea taken in the application is that on scrutinising and examination of the matter it was found that the appellant was in the hands of his earlier advocate and was not being conveyed even the bare facts and he was dancing to the tune of the said advocate.
Reference to earlier Advocate is to Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate.
It has also been pleaded that about 11 days were consumed by the counsel in obtaining the certified copy of the order dated 14th August 1996.
The further plea is as under :-  "Thereafter the learned Advocate Mr. JPN Gupta preparing the Letters Patent Appeal and condonation application allowed the time to be wasted and filed the same only on 2nd January 1997 whereas the fact was that the appellant was always diligent and was only dependent on the guidelines of his Advocate Mr. JPN Gupta.
The delay of 222 days in filing the LPA or further delay in moving the present application was due to the fact that the appellant was misguided, was always kept in dark about the real state of affairs and the cumulative effect of these circumstances was the only cause for delay in filing the LPA or the present belated amendment application for condonation of delay."
We may note that nowhere in the application it has been stated that Mr. JPN Gupta for some ulterior motive got the name of Mr. KK Mehrotra typed on the memorandum of appeal or other papers filed on 2nd January 1997 and he signed those papers as KK Mehrotra or that Mr. KK Mehrotra did not sign any of these papers including the Vakalatnama.
7.
When the appeal and the application including applications seeking amendment of the appeal and application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act (CMs.
147/97 and 174/98) were taken up for hearing on 20th January 1998, Mr. Mehrotra submitted that the Index, Memo of Parties and other papers including Vakalatnama filed alongwith the appeal, though purporting to bear his signatures, were in fact not signed by him.
Mr. Mehrotra further submitted that he has filed his Vakalatnama only alongwith the amended application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act and had signed the same and also the Index and other documents filed alongwith the amended LPA containing the proposed amendments.
It was represented by Mr. Mehrotra that the appellant had been duped in this manner by his earlier counsel Mr. JPN Gupta.
8.
Under the aforesaid circumstances this court while directing issue of notice to the respondents, also directed issue of notice to Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate.
A copy of the amended application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act and the order passed was directed to be served on Mr. JPN Gupta.
9.
Mr. Gupta, Advocate, in terms of the order dated 20th January 1998 appeared in this Court on 18th March 1998.
He also filed an affidavit dated 16th March 1998.
10.
Mr. JPN Gupta in his affidavit dated 16th March, 1998 while denying the insinuations made against him points out as under :-  "It would be relevant to be pointed out, in the context that the petitioner of the matter under reference belongs to Gurgaon in the State of Haryana and has been close neighbour of Shri KK Kathuria, Advocate, practising as an Advocate there.
Shri Kathuria, being a junior practising under Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India and a regular visitor to his Chamber No. 52 in the Supreme Court Buildings, wherein several junior counsels associated with him along with his son Shri SK Sinha, Advocate have been working.
Shri Kathuria, Advocate having engaged Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate got the draft of the application settled by Shri KK Sinha.
But Shri Sinha, Senior Advocate, having unfortunately fallen ill seriously, the matter was entrusted by Shri Kathuria to his son Shri SK Sinha, Advocate who was put in charge of the case.
As Shri SK Sinha has been appearing mainly before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, Shri SK Sinha, as usual having accepted the brief, asked the deponent one of the junior counsels working with Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate in the chamber to take requisite steps in the matter in the High Court under his supervision and guidance retaining his full seisin over the matter promising that he would get some remuneration paid also to the deponent by the client.
Accordingly, the deponent had been taking steps in the matter, namely, C.W.P.
767 of 1996 on his behalf in this Hon'ble Court and he used to appear before this Hon'ble Court when required.
The matter being absolutely under his control and direction and the papers being retained by him in the chamber.
C.W.P.
767 of 1996 having been finally disposed of by this Hon'ble Court on 941996 an application, vide CM 3994 of 1996 was filed for clarification which was dismissed on 1481996.
It may be respectfully pointed out, your Lordships, in spite of the steps taken by the deponent in the matter till disposal of the CM 3994 of 1996 on 1481996, not a single farthing having been paid to the deponent towards the remuneration, in spite of the promises made from time to time, the deponent thereupon declined to work any further in the matter and returned whatever papers he had with him to Shri SK Sinha, Advocate in presence of the client.
The deponent since then having ceased all his association with the matter, and not being acquainted at all with the developments of the matter since after 1481996, the deponent was amazed to receive the instant notice issued to him to meet the allegations therein."
He further points out that :-  "It would further be relevant to be pointed out in the context, Shri Malhotra has also been associated with the chamber of Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate and has also been associated with Shri SK Sinha, Advocate.
11.
At this stage, we may notice that it would be a very serious matter if Mr. Gupta has duped the appellant and has signed or got someone else to sign as `KK Mehrotra' on the papers of appeal etc including Vakalatnama filed on 2nd January 1997.
The fabrication of signatures by any Advocate or at his instance cannot be treated lightly.
Such a serious matter deserves to be taken to its logical conclusion and not glossed over by simply disposing of the application seeking condonation of delay in filing the appeal.
At the same time if Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate, has been made a scapegoat to somehow or the other get the delay in filing the appeal condoned from this Court, it is no less a serious matter and is rather more serious.
It would amount to abuse of the process of the court and would amount to even playing a fraud on the court knowing that the courts are lenient in condoning the delay when it occurs on account of negligence of the counsel generally taking the view that a litigant shall not be made to suffer for the negligence of his counsel.
12.
What was the advantage to Mr. JPN Gupta in adopting the course attributed to him could not be explained to us either by Mr. Mehrotra or the appellant.
Further, the appellant on being asked stated that he cannot say who had signed as `KK Mehrotra'.
It has been vehemently contended on behalf of Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate, that he has in fact been made a scapegoat by the appellant and Mr. KK Mehrotra, Advocate, to somehow or the other get the delay condoned and this has been done in active connivance of one Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, registered clerk of Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate, in the Supreme Court and who is also working as a clerk of Mr. KK Mehrotra.
13.
We may in passing note that according to respondent-Corporation even the writ petition was filed about 6 years late with a grievance regarding scale of pay given to appellant at the time of his initial appointment in the service of the Corporation in the year 1990.
14.
The further facts which have unfolded on going through the matter and hearing parties may now be briefly noticed.
15.
Mr. JPN Gupta has also filed a supplementary affidavit dated 13th May 1998 inter alia pointing out that he had not filed any application for obtaining certified copy of the judgment dated 9th April 1996 as pleaded by the appellant who had in fact himself made an application for obtaining certified copy of the judgment.
As already noticed in the amended application seeking condonation of delay wherein allegations against Mr. JPN Gupta have been made, it has been complained that Mr. Gupta, Advocate, consumed about 11 days in filing an application to obtain certified copy of the impugned judgment.
A perusal of endorsement on the certified copy of the impugned judgment also shows that what Mr. Gupta says is correct.
It is the appellant who had applied for obtaining certified copy and not Mr. Gupta.
It is also pertinent to notice that faced with aforesaid factual position, the appellant had to admit that certified copy was applied for by him and not Mr. Gupta.
The changed version of the appellant now is that he applied for certified copy of the impugned judgment under supervision and guidance of Mr. JPN Gupta.
The appellant has also not now disputed that he personally received certified copy of the judgment from the Registry of the Court on 24th April 1996.
It is thus evident that the case pleaded by the appellant that Mr. Gupta had obtained certified copy and delayed the filing of the appeal is not correct and it was set up to mislead this court with the intention to somehow obtain an order condoning the delay.
We have no reasons to disbelieve the reiteration of the stand by Mr. Gupta in his affidavit that the LPA or condonation application had not been filed by him nor he had anything to do with the matter.
16.
Yet another factual statement made in the applications filed on 11th August 1997 under the admitted signatures of Mr. KK Mehrotra may also be noticed.
It was, inter alia, pleaded that "that the present counsel for the petitioner was running unwell and could not appear before your Lordship on earlier date of hearings except the last date of hearing.......".
Reference to the present counsel is to Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate.
The reference to last date of hearing is obviously to 8th July 1997 when the case was adjourned on request of Mr. Mehrotra to 12th August 1997.
The Vakalatnama admittedly filed by Mr. Mehrotra along with the applications on 11th August 1997, shows that the said Vakalatnama had been actually executed on 11th May 1997 though filed on 11th August 1997.
Earlier to 8th July 1997 the case was fixed on 2nd May 1997 and before that on 19th February 1997 and 6th February 1997.
It is not pleaded in the above paragraph that Mr. Mehrotra could not appear because he had not been engaged.
The plea is that he could not appear on earlier date of hearings because of being unwell.
If he had not been engaged earlier, his being unwell would be irrelevant.
The aforequoted paragraph indicates the reasons for non-appearance of Mr. Mehrotra on dates earlier to 8th July 1997 was his ailment and not that he had not been engaged.
The matter does not end here.
Let us see what happens further.
17.
During the course of hearing on 15th May 1998 Mr. JPN Gupta was permitted to file another affidavit under the circumstances which are from that order which may be reproduced as under :-  "A copy of the affidavit dated 13th May, 1998 of Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate, has been supplied to Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate.
Mr. Ranjan Dwivedi appearing for Mr. JPN Gupta who is also present in court submits that Mr. Sanjay Lodhi is clerk of Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate and he is also clerk of Mr. KK Mehrotra, Advocate.
The said clerk and both Mr. Sinha and Mr. Mehrotra, it is claimed, operate from same chamber, namely, 52, Lawyers Chambers, Supreme Court Compound, New Delhi.
It is further stated that Mr. Gupta has learnt that this appeal in fact was filed by Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate through aforesaid Sanjay Lodhi.
Let these facts be placed on record by filing an appropriate affidavit on or before 16th May 1998 with an advance copy to Mr. Mehrotra.
Reply to this affidavit as also to the affidavit dated 13th May, 1998 be filed on or before 20th May, 1998.
List on 22nd May, 1998."
18.
Pursuant to the above order Mr. Gupta has filed affidavit dated 16th May 1998.
The contents of this affidavit further unfold most disturbing facts.
In this affidavit Mr. Gupta, inter alia, states as under :-  "Mr. KK Mehrotra, Advocate operates from 52, Lawyers Chambers, Supreme Court Compound, New Delhi-110001.
The said Chamber is jointly allotted to Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court and his son Shri SK Sinha, Advocate-on-Record, Supreme Court.
Mr. KK Mehrotra who had been class-mate of Shri SK Sinha and has been closely associated professionally to Mr. SK Sinha, whereas the Deponent had been associated with Shri KK Sinha, Senior Advocate.
Name Plates of the Advocates at the Chamber No. 52 substantiate the fact and photograph of name plate has already been taken by the Deponent for kind perusal of your Lordships, which will be produced at the time of hearing as same is not readily available.
(ii) Mr. Sanjay Lodhi is a registered clerk of Shri SK Sinha, Advocate on Record and he also works for Mr. KK Mehrotra, Advocate as clerk.
(iii) Since the Deponent was also associated in the Chamber, so he is acquainted with signature and hand-writing of Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, the aforesaid clerk.
After inspection of the record of the present case, comparing the signatures and inquiring into the matter he has bona fide reason to believe that the LPA 26 of 1997 including the condonation of delay application, Memo of Parties, Vakalatnama, etc have been filed by Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, Clerk by signing/forging the signature of Mr. KK Mehrotra.
A few sample copies of documents containing signatures/handwriting of Mr. Sanjay Lodhi are being annexed herewith for kind perusal of the fact before your Lordships, and the same are annexed herewith, vide Annexure-A Series.
(iv) The Deponent has also reason to believe that LPA 26 of 1997 was filed by Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, Clerk at the instruction/instance of Shri KK Mehrotra.
This is also evident from the statements made in the application under Order VI Rule XVII read with section 151 CPC, filed on 1181997, demonstrate the fact that Advocate Mr. KK Mehrotra was well aware of the LPA being filed on his behalf and of the proceedings before the Hon'ble Court.
This is in addition to the fact that Vakalatnama was executed by Shri SK Gambhir, the Appellant in favour of Shri KK Mehrotra at the initial filing i.e. 211997, and subsequently on 1151997.
A list of dates, enclosed herewith for kind perusal of your Lordships, vide Annexure-B, which fully substantiate the fact that the LPA 26 of 1997 was filed on 211997 at the instance of Mr. KK Mehrotra, Advocate by the Clerk Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, and the Appellant Shri VK Gambhir who was also fully aware of all these facts.
(v) The amended application for condonation of delay filed on 1181997 alleging the delay of 222 days at the instance of Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate is a planned conspiracy.
(vi) Shri KK Mehrotra, Advocate, who has signed the pleadings of the amended applications, dated 1181997 containing serious allegations of forgery has never inspected the file till date which casts serious doubts about his collusion in the matter.
4.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has passed strictures against Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate and his clerk Mr. Sanjay Lodhi for their indulgence in wrongful practice in filing the affidavit of a dead person and identifying the signature of a dead person.
A true copy of the memorandum issued to Mr. Sanjay Lodhi, dated 1321998 by the Assistant Registrar, Supreme Court of India, and a copy of the cause list of the Supreme Court, dated 2811998 and a copy of the reported judgment of Bihar State Housing Board and others v. Satya Narayan Prasad (Dead) by LRs., 1998(2) Supreme Court Cases, Page 681, at page 686 para 11 passing strictures against them are enclosed herewith for the kind perusal of the case before your Lordships vide Annexure-C Series.
5.
The Deponent, who is a young lawyer, and struggling hard in the profession is a victim of the conspiracy of Mr. KK Mehrotra, Shri SK Sinha and their clerk Mr. Sanjay Lodhi and the Appellant Shri VK Gambhir; and the Deponent submits and prays your Lordships to pass appropriate order/orders in the interest of justice."
19.
In Bihar State Housing Board case referred in the affidavit of Mr. Gupta this is what Hon'ble the Supreme Court has said :-  "Before parting with the case a disquieting feature was brought to our notice, namely, an affidavit of a dead man was filed in the Registry by the advocate-on-record concerned but later on he has tried to wriggle out of the situation by trying to exclude the document from the paper-book.
We have already directed an enquiry into the matter as to how the Oath Commissioner concerned could attest the signature of the deponent on the date on which he was not alive.
We would have also taken a serious view of the matter against the advocate-on-record who filed the same in the Registry of this Court but we refrain from doing so in view of the unconditional apology tendered by the advocate-on-record in course of hearing.
We, however, would observe that the atmosphere of the Court may not be polluted by filing of any forged document for some benefit in any individual case and no advocate on record who is an officer of the Court should involve himself in filing such a document."
20.
It has not been disputed by either Mr. Malhotra or Mr. Dwivedi, learned Counsel appearing for Mr. JPN Gupta, Advocate, that Mr. Sanjay Lodhi is the registered Clerk of Mr. SK Sinha who is the advocate-on-record referred to in the above passage.
Mr. JPN Gupta has also placed on record a Memorandum dated 13th February 1993 issued by the Supreme Court issuing warning to Mr. Sanjay Lodhi to be more careful and not to indulge in wrong practice of identifying the signatures of a dead person.
21.
The appellant in his affidavit dated 20th May 1998 has, inter alia, stated that Mr. Mehrotra was a trainee under Sh. KK Sinha, Advocate, for his advocate-on-record examination passed in 1971 and that Mr. Mehrotra neither professionally nor is otherwise associated with Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate nor was he ever class mate of Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate.
He further states that Mr. KK Sinha allowed Mr. KK Mehrotra alongwith others to put a name plate on Chamber No. 52 for last 4/5 months for Supreme Court filing and work only (Emphasis supplied by us).
An identity card of Mr. Sanjay Lodhi has been filed by the appellant alongwith his affidavit to show that Lodhi was clerk of Mr. SK Sinha and not of Mr. KK Mehrotra.
He has also stated that Mr. Mehrotra, Advocate, came to scene only on 11th May 1997.
22.
When we took up the matter on 22nd May 1998 on noticing that in the affidavit of Mr. JPN Gupta serious allegations had been made against Mr. KK Mehrotra, we granted an opportunity to Mr. Mehrotra to file an affidavit.
23.
Mr. Mehrotra in his affidavit dated 28th May 1998, inter alia, states that :-  "I say that I have never operated from Chamber No. 52, Supreme Court Compound, New Delhi.
Annexures K-1 to K-18 shall speak of my place of operation.
Only for the last 5/6 months, in five or four filings, Chamber No. 52, when permitted, is used for address purposes.
No operation is from the said chamber.
Even for my Supreme Court work, my earlier residence at Jogiwara, then office address at 1/6-B, Asaf Ali Road and new residence at Jagriti Enclave were the places or addresses for operation.
Annexure K-19 and K-20 shall prove recent use of Chamber No. 52 for filing purpose only."
(Emphasis supplied by us).
He further states :-  "I am not a class mate of Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate nor am I ever associated with him throughout my professional career in any case whatsoever or anywhere wheresoever.
I am an independent person and never believe in any association whatsoever, so far my professional career is concerned."
He also states :-  "I say that Sanjay Lodhi is not my clerk nor does he work for me.
LPA No. 26/97 was not filed by Sanjay Lodhi at my instance/instructions.
I was never aware of the fact that LPA 26/97 was being filed or was filed on my behalf or using my name.
I was not aware of any proceedings of this case prior to 871997."
(Emphasis supplied by us).
24.
Mr. JPN Gupta has filed an affidavit dated 14th July 1998.
We may notice that Mr. Mehrotra did not want any further opportunity to file an affidavit to rebut or explain the factual statements made by Mr. Gupta in affidavit dated 14th July 1998.
Alongwith this affidavit Mr. Gupta has filed certain documents to show that Mr. Mehrotra had been operating from Chamber No. 52, Supreme Court Compound not only for the last 5/6 months as stated in the affidavit of Mr. Mehrotra but he has been operating from that chamber from much earlier period.
These documents have been filed to demonstrate that how false are the statements made in the affidavit of Mr. Mehrotra to the effect that Mr. Sanjay Lodhi is not his clerk nor does he work for him.
Certain documents have also been filed by Mr. Gupta to show that Sanjay Lodhi had not only been working for number of years as a clerk for Mr. Mehrotra but he has been even filing matters of Mr. Mehrotra before Supreme Court by signing on different papers including Vakalatnama purporting to bear the signatures of Mr. Mehrotra but in fact being signed by Lodhi.
It is claimed that all this was done under the directions/instructions of Mr. Mehrotra and with his approval.
Further documents have been filed by Mr. Gupta to demonstrate that the contention of Mr. Mehrotra in his affidavit that he has not been associated with Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate, is also incorrect.
The documents, Mr. Gupta says, clearly show that Mr. Mehrotra had been regularly using Chamber No. 52 and he has long association with Mr. SK Sinha, Advocate, and further that not only Sanjay Lodhi, the registered clerk of Mr. SK Sinha has also been working for Mr. Mehrotra but he has also been forging the signature of Mr. KK Mehrotra with his tacit consent and directions.
25.
Most of the documents filed with the affidavit of Mr. Gupta dated 14th July 1998 are photostat copies of the certified copies obtained from the Supreme Court.
These documents are in respect of cases in the Supreme Court in which admittedly Mr. KK Mehotra is an Advocate.
This fact has not been denied by Mr. Mehrotra.
Some of these documents pertain to Special Leave Petition No. 6165/97 Amar Nath Singh v. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd & another and some pertain to Special Leave Petition No. 11884/97 Smt. Suman Virmani and another v. Nanak Chand Gupta.
Apart from the fact that these documents show that the forms with the name of Mr. SK Sinha printed thereupon have been used in the cases in which admittedly Mr. Mehrotra is the counsel but that by itself may not be a serious matter except that it shows close link between SK Sinha and Mr. Mehrotra but what is serious, however, is that one of the documents (Vakalatnama in the case of Amar Nath Singh) which purports to bear the signatures of Mr. Mehrotra also mentions his address as Chamber No. 52 but in fact signed by Lodhi was filed in the Supreme Court on 23rd October 1996 and on the authority of this Vakalatnama, Mr. Mehrotra has been appearing in the said case before the Supreme Court.
Mr. Mehrotra did not dispute that the said Vakalatnama does not bear his signatures though it purports to be signed by him.
Further it was also not disputed that his signatures on the said Vakalatnama were appended by Sanjay Lodhi and admittedly he was appearing in that matter on the basis of same power of attorney and had not filed any other power of attorney.
Certain other documents are of May 1997 and of the period thereafter with the address of Mr. Mehrotra as Chamber No. 52, Lawyers Chambers.
These documents show how false is the plea in the affidavit of Mr. Mehrotra that he has been using only for address purposes Chamber No. 52 for the last 5/6 months.
As already noticed above, what is much more serious is signing of Vakalatnama and other documents by Lodhi as Mr. KK Mehrotra with his tacit consent.
The Vakalatnama in the case of Suman Virmani though is admittedly signed by Mr. KK Mehrotra but is filed in the Supreme Court with the index of papers purporting to bear signatures of Mr. KK Mehrotra but in fact signed by Lodhi as KK Mehrotra.
Mr. KK Mehrotra admits it before us.
26.
Prima facie the person who has signed the papers filed in this Court on 2nd January, 1997 `KK Mehrotra' is the same person who has signed the aforesaid documents likewise and filed the same in Supreme Court.
27.
It is over simplification to plead and contend on behalf of the appellant that without going into the question as to which of the Advocate has duped the appellant, he has been in fact duped and thus delay in filing appeal by him deserves to be condoned.
On the facts of the case such a contention deserves outright rejection.
We have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the appellant is not innocent as was sought to be contended by Mr. Mehrotra.
We may note that the appellant admitted during course of hearing before us that Mr. Kathuria, Advocate of Gurgaon was his neighbour and he had first taken him to the chamber of Mr. Sinha.
Whether it was Mr. KK Sinha or Mr. SK Sinha we are neither in a position to authoritatively decide in these proceedings nor it is so necessary.
It seems evident that the appellant was a party to the plea of negligence of counsel being set out in order to somehow or the other obtain from this court orders condoning delay in filing the appeal.
Appellant on various dates in this appeal appeared in person.
He does not say that after obtaining adjournment, he ever informed Mr. Gupta, Advocate, but says that he informed only Mr. Kathuria, Advocate.
It has also to be noticed that the appellant is not an illiterate person.
28.
In our considered view the plea of appellant having been duped by Mr. Gupta, Advocate, is wholly misconceived.
On the other hand, attempt was made to dupe this court.
It is a clear case of abuse of the process of law.
In fact on 2nd January 1997 there was no proper appeal before this court as according to the appellant the appeal is not signed by his counsel and it also does not bear the signatures of the appellant.
From this viewpoint the delay in filing appeal would not be 222 days but much more.
The appellant has failed to establish sufficient cause for delay in filing the appeal.
The applications seeking condonation of delay are dismissed.
Consequently the appeal is also dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 20,000/- and payable within two weeks to Delhi Legal Services Authority, Room No. 1, Patiala House, New Delhi-110001.
29.
Having bestowed our thoughtful consideration, we feel that the facts are so glaring that it would amount to failure of duty on our part to close the matter by order of dismissal of appeal.
It is not a feeling of anger but is of anguish for the reason that Advocates are officers of court.
If officers of court start conducting themselves in the manner shown in this case, what example they would set for others.
Who will protect victims ?
Who will take care of dignity of courts ?
The legal profession is known to be a noble profession which has set up highest traditions and has produced stalwarts.
These stalwarts have made useful contribution in other fields as well and have played a vital decisive factor in the freedom struggle.
Such a course of conduct from a member of legal fraternity deserves to be severely dealt with lest it may encourage others.
The warning by the highest court, as noticed hereinabove, has not produced the desired result as apparent from the facts of this case.
There is no difficulty in adopting an attitude of leniency and showing magnanimity rather than to adhere to nail-studded path of painful duty while dealing with a member of your own family.
We, however, feel that on the facts of the case, showing indulgence and magnanimity would not subserve the ends of justice and, therefore, we have to perform the painful duty of taking the matter to its logical end.
30.
We, therefore, direct that a copy of this order with photocopies of all the papers filed in this petition be sent forthwith to Registrar General of Supreme Court of India and to Bar Council of India & Bar Council of Delhi for them to take such action as may be deemed necessary.
31.
At the end we may only note that the observations made in this order will not have any effect on the rights and contentions of anyone in any proceedings which may be initiated as a result of this order.
The matter is disposed of in the above terms.
Appeal dismissed.