HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This Judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4217/93, 1450/92,14011/92, 772/93 and CWP No. 1985 of 1993.
The facts are being taken from CWP No. 1985 of 1993.
2.
The Central Board of Secondary Education issued a prospectus for holding the All India Pre-Medical Entrance Examination, 1992.
It was inter alia provided in the prospectus that the application forms could be submitted on or before 6.2.1992.
Whereas the Entrance Examination was to be held on 10.5.1992.
It was further provided that this examination was being conducted exclusively for the 15% Merit positions for the Medical Colleges as specified in the directives of the Supreme Court issued from time to time and would be governed by the rules and regulations specified for the same by the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and that the list of all the candidates who had been successful in the examination would be displayed in order of merit and a waiting list would also be prepared.
3.
As per averments made in the writ petition, the reservation of 15% seats that had been covered by the prospectus was to be made in the Government Medical Colleges in all the States except the States of Jammu and Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh and this exception had been carved out on the basis of the Supreme Court Judgment in Dinesh Kumar others v. Moti Lal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad and ors. AIR 1986 SC 1877.
As the State of Punjab respondent No. 1 herein was represented before the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case, 15% seats were to be reserved in the State of Punjab as well, with the result that 52 seats for the MBBS and 12 seats for the BDS Courses became available.
A note to this effect was also provided in the prospectus published by the CBSE and also in the prospectus issued under the Punjab Government's notification by the Punjabi University, Patiala wherein the test was to be conducted.
The petitioner being fully eligible took the test and a total of 2610 candidates were declared successful.
The petitioner was placed at merit No. 1765 and on this basis, was allocated to the North Bengal Medical College, Darjeeling.
The petitioner subsequently found that half of the seats falling in the 15% share given to the CBSE had been unilaterally usurped by the State of Punjab vide Annexure P1 dated 81192 in which it was directed that "half of the seats out of total 52 seats for MBBS and 12 seats for BDS course out of quota of CBSE will be filled up by nomination and the remaining by the candidates of CBSE".
It appears that 11 candidates thereafter were nominated to the MBBS and the BDS Courses in the State of Punjab.
This writ petition was accordingly filed impugning the order Annexure P1 on the plea that it was contrary to the Supreme Court's directions in Dinesh Kumar's case (supra) to which the State of Punjab was also a party and that in the absence of any guidelines as to how the nominations for the aforesaid seats had to be made the instructions being arbitrary were liable to be struck down on that score as well.
4.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been filed by respondent No. 3 i.e. Union of India in which it has been stated that the action of the Punjab Government in reserving to itself the right to nominate half of the quota of 15% seats reserved for the CBSE without the sanction of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was in violation of the directions of the Supreme Court.
It has further been stated that this position had been conveyed to the Punjab Government by the Govt. of India vide Annexures R1 and R2 and it had been highlighted that as the instructions Annexure P1 were in violation of the Supreme Court directions on the subject their issuance amounted to a contempt of Court.
It was accordingly advised that the decision conveyed in Annexure P1 should be reversed.
It was further pleaded that this advice had not been heeded to and the State Government had gone ahead and had made some nominations.
5.
It appears that similar instructions had come under challenge in various other High Courts in the country and the matter was ultimately taken to the Supreme Court whereby under orders dated 1951993 an interim arrangement was made with respect to such cases.
The present petition also came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court and during the course of the regular hearing the Division Bench issued orders dated 2751993 making some interim arrangements and thereafter adjourned the hearing of this writ petition sine die on the premise that an identical matter was pending in the Supreme Court.
We are informed by Mr. Giani, the learned counsel representing the Union of India that he is unaware as to outcome of the matter in the Supreme Court.
We have, however taken it on ourselves to dispose of this matter as we are of the opinion that the matter stands concluded by this Court in favour of the petitioner.
6.
Mr. HS Giani, the learned counsel for the Union of India has supported the stand of the petitioner and has argued that the right of the State Government to make any nomination without providing any guidelines to the seats allotted to the professional colleges, had been conclusively decided in Punit Kaur Mattewal v. State of Punjab and others 1994(5) SLR 776 : 1995(1) S.C.T.
521, and Sanjay Singh vs State of Punjab, 1995(4) RSJ 834 : 1996(3) S.C.T.
87.
7.
We have gone through the two judgments cited by the learned counsel and find that the first cited case, pertains to the very matter that has been impugned in the present writ petition in that the State Government had made the nomination to the medical college after withdrawing half the seats to itself in terms of Annexure P1.
This nomination was challenged and the Division Bench relying on yet another case in Anter Preet Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) S.C.T.
377, in CWP No. 3763/93 decided on 2691994 observed:-  " Even if for a moment it is conceded that the Government can make nomination for admission to the post-graduate courses, such nominations must withstand the test of reasonableness and fairness.
The doctrine of `equality' which is all pervasive, will have to be kept in view even while making nomination.
Nomination in favour of the candidates, who are related to the political workers, public men or officers who are bearing responsibility for dealing with law and order problem directly or indirectly, or the candidates who cannot go out of the State for education due to financial problems, has got no nexus whatsoever with the selection based on merit.
This policy of the Government does not bear any rationality with the object of selection.
The last category of nominations takes within its fold all types of candidates.
A total free hand has been given to the Government to nominate anybody according to its choice.
It is impossible to discern any rational principle or policy behind nomination of the candidates at the sweet will of those in power.
Merely because one happens to be a member of a family which is related to a political worker or public men or an Officer, who is connected with the terrorist-affected family or one who cannot go out for studies on account of financial problems, cannot be a ground for giving admission to the post- graduate course so as to stultify the chance of a meritorious candidate.
The unfettered, unbridled and unguided power which the Government has assumed in the garb of nomination is a total antithesis to the doctrine of 'equality'.
We can do no better than quoting the observation of the Supreme Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 555.
While giving a new dimension to the doctrine of 'equality', embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court observed:- "From a positivistic point of view equality is antithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies, one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
The Division Bench further observed that a duty was cast on the Court to examine the power and the right of the State Government to make nominations to professional colleges.
This Judgment was subsequently followed in Sanjay Singh's case.
8.
It is clear to us that no guidelines what-so-ever have been spelt out which could enable the State Government to make nominations as had been noticed in Puneet Kaur Mattewal's case.
This case fully covers the present one.
9.
Mr. HS Giani supporting the petitioner has also urged that it was not open to the State Government to unilaterally depart from the scheme that had been formulated by the Supreme Court whereby 15% seats had been reserved for the CBSE quota and for this additional reason the petitioner had to succeed.
We are, however, of the opinion that in the light of what has been held above, this question need not be gone into.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the instruction annexure P1 is quashed.
However, in the light of the interim arrangement that had been made by Hon'ble the Supreme Court on 1951993 and also by the Division Bench of this Court on 2751993, we do not pass any order with respect to the nomination of respondents 9 to 13.
Petition allowed.