VS Aggarwal, J - By virtue of the present writ petition filed by Ajeet Kumar Tripathi and another, they seek quashing of the orders passed by the Controller of Examination, Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar, (respondent No. 3), the Principal, Institute of Management and Technology (respondent No. 4) whereby they had withheld the roll Nos. of the petitioners.
2.
The relevant facts are that the Institute of Management and Technology, Ballabgarh, is approved by All India Council for Technical Education, Ministry of Human Resources.
It is affiliated to Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar.
It gave advertisement for conducting All India Entrance Test for 2 years Full Time M.B.A. course.
In all, there were 60 seats.
26, seats were for general category.
The eligibility criteria were for admission to M.B.A. entrance examination was as under :-  "Eligibility :-  An applicant is eligible for admission to MBA entrance examination if he has passed the following examinations :  (a) A Bachelor/Post Graduate degree in any discipline from recognised University or an examination recognised as equivalent thereto with minimum 50% marks in aggregate.
Or Final examination conducted by the -  (i) Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or England.
(ii) Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India or England.
(iii) Institute of Company Secretaries of India.
Admission Criteria:  Admission will be strictly based on merit secured by the candidates in written entrance test followed by an interview and Group Discussion.
The date and time for interview and Group Discussion will be announced on the date of entrance examination at examination centre.
However, foreign candidates /NRI/NRI sponsored candidates/company sponsored candidates are exempted from entrance test.
They shall be admitted on the basis of the merit to be determined as per the qualifying examination.
The merit of the candidate will be drawn on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by the candidate in entrance examination, Interview and Group Discussion.
Special Instructions  1.
The candidates are required to bring attested copies of the following certificates along with original at the time of interview and Group Discussion.
(a) A certificate of good conduct and character from the Principal of the college last attended by the candidate.
(b) certificates/Details Marks Sheet/Degree of all the examinations passed by the candidates and proof of claim of reserve category (if any).
That further more the All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi has laid down Norms and Standards regarding the entry in the M.B.A. which are as under :-  40 Entry Qualifications :  The minimum qualification for entry to Post Graduate Programme in Management is any Bachelor degree recognised by Association of Indian Universities.
The selection of candidates to the programme should be done on following basis:  (a) An All India Written Admission Test to assess applicant's attitude and preparedness as given in Annexure 1.
(b) Previous Academic Records/Work Experience, and (c) Performance in Group Discussion and Interview.
Note :- 1.
Scores obtained in the All India Written Test would have a minimum weightage of 50%.
2.
University may have their own admission test for the institutions affiliated.
3.
If admission is not done on the basis of All India Written Test, it is essential to stipulate minimum requirement of 50% aggregate marks in the qualifying Bachelor degree if the screening is done at the local/state/Regional Level."
3.
Petitioner No. 1 had passed his B.Sc.
in the year 1991 from Kanpur University.
Admittedly, he did not have 50% marks but thereafter he took admission in Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application at Kanpur University in the year 1993-94 and passed the same by securing 724% marks.
The position of petitioner No. 2 was almost identical.
He graduated from Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
He did not secure 50% marks but thereafter took admission in B.Ed.
and passed the same from Maharishi Dayanand University by securing 545% marks.
Both the petitioners applied for admission in BMA course and subsequently appeared in the Entrance Test on 1091995.
The names of both the petitioners were in the list of qualified candidates.
They were selected and joined the institute in 1995.
After studying for one year, petitioner No1 even had undergone practical training of eight weeks.
Petitioner No. 1 joined third semester in September, 1996 and filled the examination form of third semester.
At that time the petitioners were informed that their Roll Nos. have been withheld.
They have not been approved for registration because it is contended that they did not secure 50% marks in graduation.
The petitioners claimed that they have been studying in the institute and had not suppressed any fact.
They had applied and took the Entrance Test for M.B.A. course because they had scored more than 50% marks in Post Graduate Diploma and B.Ed.
respectively and thus the action of the respondents is illegal.
4.
Respondent No. 4 in the reply admitted that petitioner No. 1 has Post Graduate Diploma while petitioner No. 2 had passed B.Ed.
after graduation.
Both of them obtained more than 50% marks in the Post Graduate Diploma and in the examination for B.Ed.
Respondent No. 4 in its wisdom accepted the qualification of both the petitioners and felt that they were eligible to take the examination.
In fact, respondent No. 4 thus defended the admission given to the petitioners contrary to the contention of the University that they were not eligible to take the Entrance Test for the M.B.A. course.
5.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 on the contrary asserted that both the petitioners had less than 50% marks when they graduated and, therefore, they were not eligible to take the Entrance Test for M.B.A.
When the factum of their non- eligibility came to the notice of the University, respondent No. 4 was informed about it.
It was pointed that admission slips were provisional.
It was subject to the final checking of the documents.
When it was discovered that petitioners were not eligible, necessary action was taken directing that Roll Nos. to be given to the petitioners should be cancelled.
6.
The learned Counsel for the petitioners highlighted that the petitioners had passed the Post Graduate Diploma and Bachelor of Education in which they have secured more than 50% marks and, therefore, they were eligible to take the Entrance Test for M.B.A.
He further in any event contended that the petitioners had given the correct facts.
They had not played any fraud.
Even Respondent No. 4 was of the same opinion as that of the petitioners and they were allowed to continue with the studies.
7.
As regards the first submission, the argument so advanced by the petitioners is simply to be rejected.
This is for the reason that as per the prospectus, the eligibility criteria was that the candidate must have a Post Graduate degree in any discipline of a recognised University with 50% marks in aggregate.
There was no exception drawn pertaining to any Diploma or Post Graduate qualification.
The language is clear and unambiguous.
The petitioner had secured less than 50% marks and, therefore, patently they were not eligible to take the test.
8.
As regards the second argument that the petitioners had already studied and almost completed the course and that they had not suppressed any fact, the same in the peculiar facts must prevail.
Our attention has been drawn to a large number of precedents from this Court that once there is no fraud by the concerned candidate and he has studied for many years he should be allowed to continue and complete his course.
The precedents can well be quoted, namely, in the case of Harnesh Kumar and others, v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar through its Registrar, 1990(1) RSJ 657; Usha Kumari v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(2) S.L.R.
472 : 1993(1) SCT 7 (P&H); Mridula Chandna v. Panjab University through its Vice-Chancellor, Chandigarh and others, 1992(7) S.L.R.
710 : 1993(2) SCT 37 (P&H); Miss Ranjana Sharma v. The Panjab University, Chandigarh and others, 1993(3) RSJ 606 : 1993(3) SCT 226 (P&H); Arvinder Singh Atwal v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar through its Registrar and another, 1994(1) RSJ 119 : 1994(1) SCT 12 (P&H); Dr. Sangita Jain v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and another, 1995(4) Services Law Reporter, 536; and Kiran Balal v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) RSJ 328 : 1995(2) SCT 805 (P&H).
There is no controversy in this regard because if the candidate had given correct facts and had not played and fraud, in that event at a later stage it would be improper to cancel his admission.
The said principle has been accepted by the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 SC 376.
In the cited case, the candidate has been allowed to take the examination.
It was held that once he has rightly or wrongly taken examination and University authorities have not scrutinised the examination form, it would be improper later on to withdraw the said admission to the examination.
The Supreme Court in para No. 7 of the judgment held as under :-  ".........
It is well settled that where a person on whom fraud is committed is in a position to discover the truth by due diligence, fraud is not proved.
It was neither a case of suggestio falsi or suppressio verti.
The appellant never wrote to the University authorities that he had attended the prescribed number of lectures.
There was ample time and opportunity for the University authorities to have found out the defect.
In these circumstances, therefore, if the University authorities acquiesced in the infirmities which the admission form contained and allowed the appellant to appear in Part I examination in April, 1972, then by force of the Unviersity Statute the University had no power to withdraw the candidature of the appellant...." 9.
The Supreme Court in the case of Ashok Chand Singhvi v. University of Jodhpur and others, 1989(1) Supreme Court Cases 399, was concerned with a case where the candidate has concealed nothing still he was granted admission considering the relevant facts.
Later when the mistake was detected and admission was cancelled, but it was held that the said action by the University was not justified.
The court in para No. 17 of the judgment observed as under :-  ".............
When after considering all facts and circumstances and also the objections by the office to the admission of a candidate, the Vice-Chancellor directs the admission of such a candidate such admission could not be said to have been made through mistake.
Assuming that the appellant was admitted through mistake, the appellant not being at fault, it is difficult to sustain the order withholding the admission of the appellant."
10.
Our attention was also drawn towards the decision of the the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Punjab and others v. Renuka Singla and others, 1994(1) S.L.R.
257.
In paragraph 8 of the judgment, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "........... During last several years efforts have been made to regulate the admissions to the different medical institutions, the order to achieve academic excellence.
But, at the same time, a counter attempt is also apparent and discernible, by which the candidates, who are not able to get admissions against seats fixed by different stautory authorities, file writ applications and interim or final directions are given to admit such petitioners.
We fail to appreciate as to how the High Court or this Court can be generous or liberal in issuing such directions which in substance amount to directing the authorities concerned to violate their own statutory rules and regulations, in respect of admissions of students.
It cannot be disputed that technical education, including medical education, requires infrastructure to cope with the requirement of giving proper education to the students who are admitted."
From what is stated above, a clear distinction can well be drawn.
If admission has been granted by no fraud having been practised by the candidate and the said candidate has studied a long way, in that event it is totally improper later on to cancel his admission, but if a fraud has been practised by the candidate by submitting a false certificate or in any way misleading the Unviersity, then passage of time will not come to his rescue.
The position herein is in favour of the petitioners.
Though they were not eligible, they submitted correct certificates.
Even Principal of the Institute, respondent No. 4, was misled.
He did not know the correct position.
If such is the situation, the blame cannot be placed upon the petitioners alone.
By now they have almost studied the entire course.
When the action was contemplated, petitioner No. 1 has completed one year and even undergone eight weeks' practical training.
In such ambiguous situation, it will not be proper to cancel the admission of the petitioners at this late stage.
No other candidate who might have been admitted can even be taken because the clock has moved for more than two years.
11.
In the peculiar facts, therefore, we quash the impugned order and direct that petitioner should be allowed to complete their course.
Petition allowed.