SB Sinha, J - The question as to whether the qualification acquired by a candidate for the post of Assistant Teacher subsequent to the date of sponsorship of the name by the Employment Exchange can be taken into consideration involves in this appeal.
The fact of the matter lies in a very narrow compass.
Pursuant to prior sanction granted by the District Inspector of Schools (SE) in terms of the Rule framed by the Director of School Education, names of the petitioner/appellant and the concerned respondent were sponsored.
Such sponsorship took place on 2141997.
2.
The appellant appeared at the B.Ed.
Examination and his result was published by the University of Calcutta on 1431997.
The Selection Committee constituted by the Managing Committee of the school held interview on 2241997.
Apart any other questions, a pure question of law which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether any mark can be allotted in favour of the writ petitioner in respect of the said B.Ed.
qualification or not.
3.
Mr. Gupta, learned Counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellant has strongly relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekher, reported in 1993 Supp(2) SCC 611 : 1993(2) SCT 208 wherein the Supreme Court by majority held that the appellants were fully qualified on the dates of interview and taking into account the generally followed principle of Rule 37 in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, too much technical view cannot be taken.
The learned Counsel has also placed strong reliance upon a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Bharati Roy v. Shyamal Mukhopadhyay, reported in 1997(2) Cal LJ 386.
According to the learned Counsel, it is well-settled principle of law that eligible candidate should be appointed and in support of the aforementioned contention, the learned Counsel has relied upon a decision of the Apex Court in the case of Excise Superintendent, Malkapatnam, Krishna District, AP v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and others, reported in 1996(6) SCC 216.
4.
Mr. Roy, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents on the other hand submits that as in view of the Rule framed by the Director of School Education only the names of the concerned candidates can be received from the local Employment Exchange, the date of sponsorship should be taken to be the date of final receipt of the application and as the names had been sent as far back as on 2121997, the subsequent qualification of B.Ed.
Examination acquired by the petitioner/appellant cannot be taken into consideration by the Selection Committee.
In support of the aforementioned contention, the learned Counsel has relied upon a decision in the case of Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, reported in 1993 Supp(3) SCC 168 : 1993(2) SCT 279 (SC) and Harpal Kaur Chahal v. Director, Public Instructions, reported in 1995 Supp(4) SCC 796 as also a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in which one of us is a member of Pintu Acharyya v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1997(2) Cal LJ 428.
5.
The learned Counsel has placed before us a recent decision in the case of Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekhar, reported in 1997(4) SCC 18 which has reviewed Ashok Kumar Sharma case (supra) relying on or on the basis of the decision in Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan case (supra).
6.
In Pintu Acharyya's case (supra) the Director of School Education in exercise of his power conferred upon him under Clauses (i) and (ii) of sub- rule (1) and Clause (i) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 28 of the Rules of Management of Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Un-aided), 1969 read with some other notifications of Education Department issued from time to time was entitled to issue directions as regards recruitment of teaching and non- teaching staff.
It is accepted at the Bar that such directions are statutory in nature.
7.
On or about 1781987 a circular letter was issued by the District Inspector of Schools which reads thus :  "In reference to above, the undersigned has to state whatever may be the fact marks should be allotted on the basis of the qualification recorded by the Employment Exchange".
8.
Such direction has again been issued in the year 1989 and was amended in the year 1990.
On or about 14101992 the Director of School Education issued another circular bearing No. 2256(19)GA dated 14101992 wherein it was stated that for preparing the panel marks should not be awarded on the qualification which was not reported to the Employment Exchange and recorded by them.
A fresh direction had been issued by the Director of School Education in the year 1993 and in the Rule 6(a) thereof in no uncertain terms it is stated :  "No credit shall be given to the qualification other than the qualification mentioned by the D.I.S.
(SE) in the prior permission and mentioned by the Employment Exchange."
9.
It is beyond any dispute that sponsorship was sought for from the local Employment Exchange.
The qualification of the petitioner/appellant was sent and could not have been recorded in the Employment Exchange as admittedly the result of the examination was published subsequent to the sponsoring of the name of the candidate.
The petitioner never questioned the vires of the said provision.
The said direction of the Director of School Education has to be followed by the Managing Committee of the School as also by the Selection Committee constituted by it.
The Court of law also cannot ignore the said statutory provision, inasmuch as, no recruitment can be made in violation of any statutory provision.
10.
The matter came up for consideration before a Division Bench of this Court (FMAT 623 of 1996, Sri Srikumar Pal v. The State of West Bengal and others), wherein this Court took a view that qualification possessed by a candidate at the time of advertisement only is to be taken into consideration.
The same principles would apply in a case where vacancies are notified and names are sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
11.
This aspect of the matter has again been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in Pintu Acharyya v. State of West Bengal (supra), Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekher (supra), was the subject matter of a review application.
In Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekhar (supra), BP Jeevan Reddy, SB Majmudar and S Saghir Ahmad, JJ.
took into consideration the majority view as also the minority view expressed by RM Sahai, J. and held that the majority judgment rendered by Dr. TK Thommen and V Ramaswami, JJ.
is unsustainable in law.
The learned Judges affirmed the proposition of law enunciated in Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan (supra).
It was held :  "The reasoning in the majority opinion that by allowing the 33 respondents to appear for the interview, the recruiting authority was able to get the best talent available and that such course was in furtherance of public interest is, with respect, an impermissible justification.
It is, in our considered opinion, a clear error of law and an error apparent on the face of the record.
In our opinion, RM Sahai, J. (and the Division Bench of the High Court) was right in holding that the 33 respondents could not have been allowed to appear for the interview."
12.
In Pintu Acharyya case (supra), Ashok Kumar Sharma case (supra) has been distinguished.
13.
The judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Smt. Bharati Roy v. Shyamal Mukhopadhyay, reported in 1997(2) Cal LJ 386 proceeded solely on the basis of Ashok Kumar Sharma case (supra).
The earlier decision of this Court as also the Supreme Court of India had not been taken into consideration therein.
This Court is bound by the earlier decision of a Division Bench of this Court as also the earlier decision of the Supreme Court of India.
The judgment in Bharati Roy's case was rendered per-incurium and does not create any binding precedent.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that eligible candidate should be appointed.
The proposition that where applications are called for prescribing a particular date as the last date for filing the applications the eligibility of the candidates shall have to be judged with reference to that date and that date alone, is a well-established one.
This proposition rests on the fact that had such fact been brought to the notice of the concerned candidates at the time of advertisement, those who had appeared in the other examination and expected publication of their result prior to interview.
A candidate who acquires prescribed qualification subsequent to such prescribed date cannot be considered at all.
This aspect of the matter is clearly covered by a decision of the Supreme Court of India reported in AIR 1979 SC 1628.
14.
Mr. Gupta, learned Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon a circular letter dated 441996.
A bare perusal of the aforementioned circular letter would show that no marks would be allotted for the qualification not mentioned by the District Inspector in the prior permission.
The said circular, therefore, instead of helping the petitioner goes against his contention.
The said circular cannot have any application particularly in view of the fact that any circular cannot amend a statutory rule and nor thereby Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India can be violated.
Keeping in view the aforementioned finding, we think that the writ application itself should also stand disposed of with the aforementioned observations.
15.
For the reason aforementioned, we do not find any legal infirmity in the judgment under appeal and thus the same is affirmed.
16.
Both the appeal and the application are dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.