VS Aggarwal, J - The Jind Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd Jind by virtue of the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India challenges the award of the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak.
2.
By virtjue of the impunged award, Labour Court directed reinstatement of workman with continuity of service and with full back wages.
3.
During the course of arguments, it was not being disputed that respondent Atma Ram was a seasonal worker with the management of mill.
Keeping in view the said fact, reliance was placed by the petitioner on two judgments of the Supreme Court to urge that it would not be a case of retrenchment contemplated under section 2(oo) (bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In this regard reference can well be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Morinda Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd v. Ram Kishan and others etc., JT 1995(6) SC 547.
The Supreme Court in para No. 5 of the judgment held as under :-  "The question is whether such a cessation would amount to retrenchment.
Since it is only a seasonal work, the respondents cannot be said to have been retrenched in view of what is stated in clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the view taken by the Labour Court and the High Court is illegal.
However, the appellant is directed to maintain a register of all workmen engaged during the seasons enumerated hereinbefore and when the new season starts the appellant should make a publication in neighbouring places in which the respondents normally live and if they would report for duty, the appellant would engage them in accordance with seniority and exigency of work."
Similarly, in the decision of Anil Bapurao Kanase v. Krishna Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd and another, 1997 Supreme Court Cases (L&S) 1637 : 1997(3) SCT 642, while referring to the decision in Morinda Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd (supra) the Supreme Court held as under :  "......
Since the present work is seasonal business, the principles of the Act have no application.
However, this court has directed that the respondent management should maintain a register and engage the workmen when the season starts in the succeeding years in the order of seniority.
Until all the employees whose names appear in the list are engaged in addition to the employees who are already working, the management should not go in for fresh engagement of new workmen.
It would be incumbent upon the respondent management to adopt such procedure as is enumerated above."
Keeping in view the said pronouncements of the Supreme Court, indeed, the award of the Labour Court be sustained.
5.
For these reasons, the writ petition is accepted and the impugned award is quashed.
It is directed that since the work was seasonal, respondent No. 2 was not entitled to retrenchment contemplated under clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
But it is directed that the management-petitioner would maintain a register and engage the workmen when the season starts each year in the order of seniority.
Until all the employees are engaged in addition to the employees already working, the management shall not go for fresh engagement of new workmen.
Petition allowed.