TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of the writ petitions mentioned in the schedule appended to this judgment.
The challenge in these petitions is made to circulars issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance.
These circulars were issued on 1791995, 3171996 and 2671997.
Vide these Circulars, the Central Government decided that for the financial years 1995- 96, 1996-97 and 1997-98, the deduction of income tax at source would not be made in the case of those employees of the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir, who were employed in the Kashmir Valley in the year 1990, and who had to move outside the Valley due to disturbed conditions in the Valley.
2.
The petitioners in these petitions submit that if the benefit could be given to the employees of the State Government, then same benefit should have also been given to other employees who are either working with the Banks or Insurance Companies.
It is submitted that the rationale behind giving the exemption is the disturbed conditions in the Valley and this rationale would hold good for all the migrant employees, whether working with the State Government or working elsewhere.
3.
In a nutshell that argument raised is that the category which has been carved out by the Government of India in the matter of giving exemption (postponement in depositing tax) i.e. migrant employees of the State Government is hit by equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India Learned Counsel for the petitioner places reliance on the decision given by the Supreme Court of India reported as Ram Krishan Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 528 and several other decisions to support his contention that the act of the Union of India in carving out a special category for Government servant only is bad.
What are the principles of law which govern the subject ?
4.
Professor Willis in his work Constitutional Law states:  "The guarantee of the equal protection of laws means the protection of equal laws.
It forbids class legislation, but does not forbid classification which rests upon reasonable grounds of distinction.
It does not prohibit legislation, which is limited either in the objects to which it is directed or by the territory within which it is to operate.
It merely requires that all persons subjected to such legislation shall be treated alike under like circumstances and conditons both in the privileges conferred and in the liabilities imposed.
It does not take from the States the power to classify either in the adoption of police laws or tax laws or eminent domain laws, but permits to them the exercise of a wide scope of discretion and nullifies what they do only when it is without any reasonable basis.
Mathematical nicety and perfect equality are not required.
Similarity not identity of treatment, is enough.
If any state of facts can reasonably be conceived to sustain a classification the existence of the state of facts must be assumed.
One who assails a classification must carry the burden of showig that it does not rest upon any reasonable basis.
Many different classifications of persons have been upheld as constiitutional.
A law applying only to one person or one class of persons is constitutional if there is sufficient basis or reason for it."
5.
But although the expression may be capable of some difference in meaning, the dominant idea common to both the expressions that of equal justice.
6.
The guarantee under this Article cannot be understood as requiring the authorities to act illegally in one case because they have acted illegally in other cases.
7.
The meaning of "equality before the law" or "equal protection of the laws" has been expounded in several decisions of the Supreme Court of India.
Although in actual application of principles to concrete disputes there is still consideable room for differences of views, certain principles may be regarded as settled in regard to the connotation of the conception of equality before the law.
The conception does not involve the idea of absolute equality among human beings which is a physical imposibility.
Equality before the law means that among equals the law should be equal and should be equally administered and that the like should be treated alike.
8.
In Devadasan v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 179, Mudholkar, J of the Supreme Court in delivering the majority judgment, observed as follows:  "What is meant by equality in this Article is equality amongst equals.
It does not provide that what is aimed at is an absolute equality of treatment to all persons, in utter disregard, in every conceivable circumstances, of the differences such as age, sex, education and so on and so forth, as may be found among people in general.
Indeed while the aim of the Article is to ensure that invidious distinction or arbitrary discrimination shall not be made by the State between a citizen and a citizen who answer the same description and the differences which may obtain between them are of no relevance for the purpose of applying a particular law, reasonable classification is permissible.
It does not mean anything more."
9.
In Kedar Nath v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1953 SC 404, the Supreme Court of India observed as follows:  "Now, it is well settled that the equal protection of the laws guranteed by Art. 14 of the Constitution does not mean that all laws must be general in character and universal in application and that the State is no longer to have the power of distinguishing and classifying persons or things for the purposes of legislation.
To put it simply all that is required in class or special legislation is that the legislative classification must not be arbitrary but should be based on an intelligible principle having a reasonable relation to the object which the legislature seeks to attain.
If the classification on which the legislation is founded fulfils this requirement, then the differentiation which the legislation makes between the class of persons or things to which it applies and other persons or things left outside the purview of the legislation cannot be regarded as a denial of the equal protection of the law, for, if the legislation were all embracing in its scope, no question could arise of classification being based on intelligible differentia having a reasonable relation to the legislative purpose.
Article 14 does not insist that legislative classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete."
10.
In Lachmandas v. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 SC 235, the Supreme Court observed as follows:  "It is now well established that while Art. 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation.
In order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled namely - (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others who are left out of the group; (ii) that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
What is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object of the Act."
11.
In Kathi Raning v. State of Saurashtra, AIR 1952 SC 123, Mukherjea, J of the Supreme Court observed as follows:  "It is well settled that a legislature for the purpose of dealing with the complex problems that arise out of an infinite variety of human relations cannot but proceed upon some sort of selection or classification of persons upon whom the legislation is to operate.
The consequence of such classification would undoubtedly be to differentiate the persons belonging to that class from others, but that by itself would not make the legislation obnoxious to the equal protection clause.
Equality prescribed by the Constitution would not be violated if the statute operates equally on all persons who are included in the group and clarification is not arbitrary or capricious but bears a reasonable relation to the objective which the legislation has in view.
The Legislature is given the utmost latitude in making the classification and it is only when there is a palpable abuse of power and the differences made have no rational relation to the objectives of the regulation, that necessity of judicial interference arises."
12.
In Charanjit Lal v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41, Mukherjea, J observed as follows:  "The Legislature undoubtedly has a wide field of choice in determining and classifying the subject of its laws, and if the law deals alike with all of a certain class, it is normally not obnoxious to the charge of denial of equal protection but the classification should never be arbitrary.
It must always rest upon some real and substantial distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to the things in respect to which the classification is made and classification made without any substantial basis should be regarded as invalid."
13.
In the same case Mr. Justice Das observed:  "The inhibition of the Article that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of laws was designed to protect all persons against legislative discrimination among equals and to prevent any person or class of persons from being singled out as a special subject for discriminating and hostile legislation.
It does not, however, mean that every law must have universal application for all persons are not, by nature, attainment or circumstances, in the same position.
The varying needs of different classes of persons often require separate treatment and it is, therefore, established by judicial decisions that the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the American Constitution does not take away from the State the power to classify persons for legislative purposes.
This classification may be on different basis.
It may be geographical or according to objects or occupations or the like.
If a law deals equally with all of a certain well defined class, it is not obnoxious and it is not open to the charge of a denial of equal protection on the ground that it has no application to other persons for the class for whom the law has been made is different from other persons and therefore, there is no discrimination amongst equals.
It is plain that every classification is in some degree likely to produce some inequality, but mere production of inequality is not by itself enough.
The inequality produced in order to encounter, the challenge of the Constitution must be actually and palpably unreasonably and arbitrary."
14.
Patanjali Sastri, J in the same case observed as follows:  "A legislature empowered to make laws on a wide range of subjects must of necessity have the power of making special laws to attain particular objects and must for that purpose possess large powers of distinguishing and classifying the persons or things to be brought under the operation of such laws, provided the basis of such classification has a just and reasonable relation to the object which the Legislature has in view.
While, for instance, a classification in a law regulating labour in mines or factories may be based on age or sex, it may not be based on the colour of one's skin.
It is also true that the class of persons to whom a law is made applicable may be large or small and the degree of harm which has prompted the enactment of a particular law is a matter within the discretion of the law-makers.
It is not the province of the Court to canvass the legislative judgment in such matters."
15.
In State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali, AIR 1952 SC 75, the Supreme Court observed as follows:  "If a legislation is discriminatory and discriminates one person or class of persons against other similarly situated and denies to the former the privileges that are enjoyed by the latter, it cannot be regarded as hostile in the sense that it affects injuriously the interests of that person or class.
Of course, if one's interests are not at all affected by a particular piece of legislation, he may have no right to complain.
But if it is established that the person complaining has been discriminated against as a result of legislation and denied equal privileges with others occupying the same position, I do not think that it is incumbent upon him, before he can claim relief on the basis of his Fundamental Rights, to assert and prove that in making the law, the Legislature was actuated by a hostile or inimical intention against a particular person or class."
16.
The law on the subject was summarised by Fazl Ali, J in the form of a series of propositions in the case of the State of Bombay v. FN Balsara, AIR 1951 SC 318 :  "The presumption is always in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment since it must be assumed that the Legislature understands and correctly appreciates the needs of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest by experience and its discriminations are based on adequate ground.
The presumption may be rebutted in certain cases by showing that on the face of the situate, there is no classification at all end and no difference peculiar to any individual or class and not applicable to any other individual or class and yet the law hits only a particular individual or class.
The principle of equality does not mean that every law must have universal application for all persons who are not by nature, attainment or circumstances in the same position and the varying needs of different classes of persons often require separate treatment.
The principle does not take away from the State the power of classifying persons for legitimate purposes.
Every classification is in some degree likely to produce some inequality and mere production of inequality is not enough.
If a law deals equally with members of a well defined class, it is not obnoxious and it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it has no application to other persons.
While reasonable classification is permissible such classification must be based upon some real and substantial distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to the object sought to be attained and the classification cannot be made arbitrarily and without any substantial basis."
17.
In Budhan Chowdhary v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 191, the Supreme Court summed up the law as follows:  "It is now well established that while Art. 14 forbids class legislation it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation.
In order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification two conditions must be fulfilled namely:  (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group; (ii) that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
The classification may by founded on different bases namely geographical or according to objects or occupations or the like.
What is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object of the Act under consideration.
It is also well established by the decisions of this Court that Art. 14 condemns discrimination not only by a substantive law but also by a law of procedure."
18.
In Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 530, the Supreme Court, after quoting the above passage from Budhan Choudhary's case proceeded to observe as follows:  "The principle enunciated above has been consistently adopted and applied in subsequent cases.
The decisions of this Court further establish:  (a) that a law may by constitutional even though it relates to a single individual if, on account of some special circumstances or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to others, that single individual may be treated as a class by himself; (b) that there is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles; (c) that it must be presumed that the Legislature understands and correctly appreciates the need of its own people, that its laws are directed to problem made manifest by experience and that its discriminations are based on adequate grounds; (d) that the Legislature is free to recognise degrees of harm and may confine its restrictions to those cases where the need is deemed to be the clear; (e) that in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality the Court may take into consideration matters of common report, the history of the times and may assume every state of facts which can be conceived existing at the time of legislation; and (f) that while good faith and knowledge of the existing conditions on the part of a Legislature are to be presumed, if there is nothing on the face of the law or the surrounding circumstances, brought to the notice of the Court on which the classification may reasonably be regarded as based, the presumption of constitutionality cannot be carried to the extent of always holding that there must be some undisclosed and unknown reasons for subjecting certain individuals or corporations to hostile or discriminating legislation.
The above principles will have to be constantly borne in mind by the Court when it is called upon to adjudge the constitutionality of any particular law attacked as discriminatory and violative of the principle of the equal protection of the laws."
19.
In Kangshari Haldar v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1960 SC 457, the Supreme Court again reviewed the previous decisions of the Court and summed up the result as follows:  "The result of these decisions appears to be this.
In considering the validity of the impugned statute on the ground that it violates Art. 14, it would first be necessarily to ascertain the policy underlying the statute and the object intended to be achieved by it.
In this process the preamble to the Act and its material provisions can and must be considered.
Having thus ascertained the policy and the object of the Act the Court should apply the dual test in examining its validity.
Is the classification rational and based on intelligible differential and has the basis of differentiation any rational nexus with its avowed policy and object ?
If both these tests are satisfied the statute must be held to be valid; and in such a case the consideration as to whether the same result could not have been better achieved by adopting a different classification would be foreign to the scope of the judicial enquiry.
If either of the two tests is not satisfied the statute must be struck down as violative of Art.
14."
20.
In applying the two tests laid down in the decisions above referred to, to different cases the emphasis may shift and the approach may not always be identical.
But it is inevitable that the final decision about the vires of any impugned provision must depend upon the decision which the Court reaches having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case, the general scheme of the impugned Act and the nature and effect of the provisions of the impugned Act.
21.
The power to make a classification can be exercised not only by the Legislature but also by administrative bodies acting under an Act.
(See Chiterlekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 1823).
Thus Article 14 does not prevent the State from exempting certain classes of persons from the application of particular law.
Nor does it compel the State extend the application of a particular law to all classes of subjects or to all territories coming within its jurisdiction.
22.
In this case exemption has been granted in favour of the employees of the State Government.
The category carved out in favour of the Government servant has a rationale behind it.
These employees are permanently located in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
The employees who figure as petitioners in this petition are holding transferable post.
They naturally constituted separate category.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that while issuing the circular referred above the respondents-authorities have violated the Article 14 in any manner.
As a matter of fact somewhat similar question came up for Supreme Court of India in case reported as Hari Krishna Bhargav v. Union of India, AIR 1966 SC 619.
Annuity scheme was made applicable to high income groups and not to all tax-payers.
This categorisation was found to be good.
23.
There is yet another way of looking at the matter.
Government of India has granted exemption in favour of a class of employees.
No citizen has a fundamental right to come to the court and contend that exemption which has been granted to one class could be granted to them also.
The grant or non-grant of exemption is a matter which is purely within the discretion of the said authority.
24.
Accordingly, I am of the opinion, that the policy decision taken by the Government of India to grant exemption in favour of State Government employees only and not granting similar benefit to other employees, cannot be said to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India As per the decisions noted above, there can be valid classification on the basis of occupation.
There is no requirement that a policy framed by the executive must have universal application.
The needs of different classes of persons can be taken into consideration.
The employees to which category the petitioners' belong, are not permanently stationed in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
They can be transferred out of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
This is not the position vis-a-vis employees of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
As such, no valid challenge can be made to the grant of benefit in favour of State Government migrant employees and non-grant of benefit to the category of employees, who figure as petitioners in these petitions.
25.
There is another aspect of the matter also.
The circular which is being challenged in these petitions is valid only up to 1531998.
For this additional reason also, no relief can be granted to the petitioners.
These petitions are found to be without any merit and are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.