Satyabrata Sinha, J - A question with regard to interpretation of various provisions of Border Security Force Act and the Rules and Regulations framed thereto arises for consideration in this writ application.
2.
The fact of the matter is not much in dispute.
The writ petitioner at all material times was and still is acting as an Assistant Sub-Inspector (Clerk) and Cashier.
He was posted in 115 Battalion, BSF.
Allegedly a defalcation of a sum of Rs. 23,660/- took place.
One Mr.
I Anthony who at the relevant time was acting as an Assistant Sub-Inspector (Radio Operator) was allegedly detailed by Sri Jagdev Singh to receive the said amount for the purpose of payment thereof to Family Welfare Centre.
The aforementioned 115 battalion moved from Calcutta to Srinagar and is presently stationed at Tanghdhar.
It is said to be not accessible by road as the same is situated in a snow-clad area.
3.
A Court of Enquiry was constituted to enquire into the charges in respect of the said alleged defalcation against Shri Anthony by an order dated 17.5.1995 and it found the said charges to be proved.
On 2451995 the Commanding Officer, 115 battalion agreed with the finding of a Court of Enquiry and recommended recovery of the said amount from the individual concerned from his pay and allowances.
A disciplinary action against him was also recommended.
The petitioner had been asked to depose in the said enquiry in May, 1995 although he was posted at Calcutta and for that purpose he was attached to the said battalion.
However, it is stated that one Mr. YS Bisht, Second-in-Command of 115 battalion took over the charge of Commandant from Sri SK Nanda after his retirement, whereafter an additional Court of Enquiry was directed to be initiated by a new incumbent of the said post.
According to the petitioner, the said inquiry was directed to be constituted at the instance of Sri YS Bisht in March, 1996.
The petitioner was again called at Panthachowk for deposing in the Additional Court of Enquiry wherein he submitted a statement.
However, according to the petitioner, the petitioner was coerced by Mr. Jagdev Singh, and Mr. VM Singh the Presiding Officer of the Additional Court of Enquiry to change his statements whereby he allegedly admitted his involvement in the matter, at the quarter of Mr. VM Singh as regards his presence during the disbursement of the aforementioned sum to Mr. Anthony by Sri Jagdev Singh.
Immediately thereafter, Mr. Jagdev Singh took voluntary retirement and the petitioner was implicated in the said case and for that purpose he was directed to be attached to 115 battalion, BSF for disciplinary purpose at the Frontier Head Quarter of Srinagar.
It now transpires that Shri Anthony has been discharged and in his place the petitioner was found prima facie guilty of commission of the said offence.
On 2211997, a Security Force Court was constituted.
The petitioner prior thereto filed a representation stating the situation under which he was compelled to change his statements.
The said representation is contained in Annexure `D' to the writ application.
4.
The petitioner, inter alia, questioned the order of attachment which was issued against him only for facing the aforementioned Court of Enquiry by filing this writ application.
5.
Admittedly the petitioner was granted leave to come to Calcutta from 23111996 to 2111997 which was extended by 30 days till 2121997.
6.
The contention of the petitioner in the writ application is that S. 97 of the Border Security Act is unconstitutional as it does not contain any guideline therefor.
Further contention of the petitioner is that keeping in view the fact that most of the defence witnesses are in or around Calcutta and the petitioner being entitled to have legal assistance, his attachment to 115 battalion, BSF Tanghdhar must be held to be bad in law inasmuch as in that event the petitioner would be deprived from having a fair hearing in the matter.
7.
Mr. Bhaskar Sen, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that in order to reach Tanghdhar about three days' time from Srinagar is necessary.
The said road is not motorable for most part of the year and one has to walk to reach that place.
It was submitted that in terms of the rules, the petitioner would be obliged to bear the expenses for the witnesses and further he will be deprived from getting any legal assistance in the event the trial takes place at Tanghdhar to which he is entitled.
The learned counsel submits that in that view of the matter S. 79 of the Border Security Force Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) has to be read in the context of the right of the petitioner in a reasonable manner.
According to Mr. Sen the power to hold trial at any place must be exercised reasonably and must be understood in the light of the statutory rights of the delinquent.
In this connection my attention has been drawn to the fact that the petitioner would not be able to examine material witnesses as his defence witnesses and particularly a handwriting expert of Calcutta who had opined that it was not possible to identify the signature of the person appearing on the relevant documents.
It is stated that the occurrence has also taken place near Calcutta and the petitioner is still in Calcutta and, thus, the trial of the petitioner should be held at Calcutta.
8.
Mr. Mihir Chakraborty, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that in view of the fact that 115 battalion has moved to Srinagar, all the requisite documents are also lying at that place.
It is stated that although the petitioner was posted at Calcutta, the officers who would be examined are still attached to 115 battalion.
The learned counsel admits that attachment of the petitioner with 115 battalion was for the specific purposes of facing the trial.
Mr. Chakraborty moreover admits that the pre-trial stage is over.
The learned counsel has pointed out that in terms of S. 79 of the Act, the trial can be held at any place.
It was further submitted that such a proceeding is a judicial proceeding, in view of S. 106 of the said Act.
The learned counsel contends that the trial cannot be directed to be stalled or stopped at the instance of the petitioner.
It is submitted that the petitioner would be given all opportunities to defend himself.
9.
Section 79 of the Border Security Act provides that any person subject to the said Act who commits any offence may be tried and punished for such offence in any place whatever.
Section 88 of the said Act provides that the Security Force Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the general knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.
Section 106 of this Act postulates that any trial by a Security Force Court under the provisions of the said Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of Sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Security Force Court shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning of Sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 141 of the said Act provides for the rule-making power in terms whereof rules were framed by the Central Government known as Border Security Force Rules, 1969.
Rules 46, 63 and 64 of the said rules which are material for the purpose of this case read thus :-  "Attachment to another unit : The commandant shall not deal with any case :-  (i) where the offence with which the accused is charged is against the Commandant himself; or (ii) where the Commandant is himself a witness in the case against the accused; or (iii) where the Commandant is otherwise personally interested in the case and the accused shall be attached to another battalion or unit for disposal of the case under the order of the Deputy Inspector General : Provided that a Commandant shall not be disqualified from hearing a charge merely because the offence was committed against the property of a Force Mess, band or one of disobedience of such Commandant's orders.
Preparation of defence by the accused:  (1) An accused who has been remanded for trial, shall be afforded proper opportunity for preparing his defence and shall be allowed proper communication with his defending officer or counsel and with his witnesses.
(2) A defending officer shall be appointed to defend the accused who has been remanded for trial unless the accused states in writing that he does not wish such an appointment to be made.
(3) If the prosecution is to be undertaken by a legally qualified officer or by a counsel the accused shall be notified of this fact in sufficient time to enable him, if he so desires, to make arrangement for a legally qualified officer or counsel to defend him.
(4) As soon as practicable after a decision has been taken to place the accused on trial in any case not less than four days before his trial, he shall be given : (a) a copy of the charge-sheet; (b) an unexpurgated copy of the record or abstract of evidence showing the passages (if any), which have been expurgated in the copy sent to the senior member; (c) notice of any additional evidence which the prosecution intends to adduce; and (d) if the accused so requires, a list of the ranks, names and units of the members who are to form the court and of any waiting members.
(5) When an accused is given a copy of the charge-sheet and of the record or abstract of evidence in accordance with this rule, he shall : (a) have the charge explained to him; and (b) be informed that, upon his making a written request to his Commandant not less than twenty-four hours before his trial requiring the attendance at his trial of a witness (other than a witness for the prosecution) whom he desires to call in his defence (such witness to be named by him) reasonable steps will be taken in accordance with these rules to procure the attendance of any such witness at his trial.
(6) The provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) shall not apply in relation to a trial before a Summary Security Force Court and in relation to such a trial the period of four days referred to in sub-rule (4) shall be construed as twenty-four hours.
64.
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) the Commandant shall, on a request made in this behalf by the accused, summon such witnesses as are specified by the accused.
(2) Where the Commandant is satisfied that the evidence to be given by any witness is not likely to be of material assistance at the trial he may refuse to summon such witness.
(3) The Commandant may before summoning any witness, require the accused to defray or undertake to defray the cost of attendance of such witness and if the accused refuses to defray or undertake to defray the cost aforesaid, the Commandant may refuse to procure the attendance of that witness.
(4) Where the Commandant has refused to summon the witness under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) the accused may make an application to the Court for the summoning of such witness and the Court may, if it considers it to be expedient in the interests of justice, order the summoning of such witness and, if necessary, adjourn the proceeding for the attendance of such witness."
10.
Chapter IX of the Act provides for procedure for Security Force Courts.
Rules 72, 122 and 123 read thus :-  Plea to Jurisdiction  (1) The accused before pleading to the charge, may offer a plea regarding the jurisdiction of the Court, and in such a case -  (a) the accused may adduce evidence in support of the plea and the prosecutor may adduce evidence in answer thereto; and (b) the prosecutor may address the Court in answer to the plea and the accused may reply to the prosecutor's address.
(2) If the Court allows the plea it shall adjourn and report to the convening officer,  (3) When the Court reports to the convening officer under this rule, the convening officer shall :-  (a) if he approves the decision of the Court to allow the plea, dissolve the Court; (b) if he disapproves the decision of the Court; either :- (i) refer the matter back to the Court and direct time to proceed with the trial; or (ii) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.
Defending Officer, Friend of Accused and Counsel  (1) At any General or Petty Security Force Court an accused person may be represented by a counsel or by any officer subject to the Act who shall be called "the defending Officer" or assisted by any person whose services he may be able to procure and who shall be called "the friend of the accused".
(2) The defending officer shall have the same rights and duties as appertain to a counsel under these rules and shall be under the like obligations.
(3) The friend of the accused may advise the accused on all points and suggest the questions to be put to the witnesses, but he shall not examine or cross-examine the witnesses or address the Court.
Requirements for Appearance of Counsel  (1) An accused person intending to be represented by a counsel shall give to his commandant or to the convening officer the earliest practicable notice of such intention and, if no sufficient notice has been given, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the application of the prosecutor adjourn to enable him to obtain a counsel on behalf of the prosecutor at the trial.
(2) Where the convening officer so directs, counsel may appear along with the prosecutor, but in that case, unless the notice referred to in sub-rule (i) has been given by the accused, notice of the direction for counsel to appear shall be given to the accused at such time (not in any case less than seven days) before the trial as would in the opinion of the Court have enable the accused to obtain counsel to assist him at the trial.
(3) The counsel, who appears before a Court on behalf of the prosecutor or accused shall have the same rights as the prosecutor or accused for whom he appears to call, and orally examine, cross-examine, and re-examine witnesses to put in any plea, and to inspect the proceedings and shall have the right otherwise to act in the course of the trial in place of the person on whose behalf he appears and he shall comply with these rules as if he were that person and in such a case that person shall have no right himself to do any of the aforesaid matters except as regards the statement allowed by sub-rule (2) of Rule 93 and sub-rule (4) of R 101 or except so far as the Court permits him so to do.
(4) When counsel appears on behalf of the prosecutor, the prosecutor if called as witness, may be examined and re-examined as any other witness".
11.
It is an admitted fact that upon implication of the petitioner Sri Anthony has been discharged from the charges levelled against him.
It is further admitted that although an handwriting expert of Central Forensic Department, Calcutta had opined that it was not possible to state definitely as regard the person who had withdrawn the amount, another opinion has been obtained from the Scientific Assistant DOC, Jammu and Kashmir Forensic Laboratory, Srinagar and the said opinion has gone against the petitioner.
12.
The question which arises for consideration in this application is as to whether the trial should be held at Tanghdhar or at Calcutta.
The case at hand poses a complicated question.
According to the petitioner, apart from the aforementioned handwriting expert from Calcutta he is required to examine the following witnesses :-  (1) Shri Virendra Singh (the then drawing and disbursing Officer of the detailed report) - presently posted at DIG, Head Quarter, BSF, Malda, West Bengal; (2) Shri Jagdev Singh (the then temporary drawing and disbursing Officer) - has proceeded on voluntary retirement.
(3) Shri Narendra Singh (presiding officer of the Court of enquiry who did not implicate the petitioner) - presently posted at 109th Battalion, Coochbehar, West Bengal; (4) Shri SK Nanda - (Erstwhile Commandant of 115th Battalion BSF who accepted the report of the Court of Enquiry) - retired from service."
13.
The petitioner has also stated that he intends to engage from Calcutta.
14.
It is also admitted that as against Shri I Anthony in relation to the self-same matter, a First Information Report was lodged at the Baranagar Police Station.
15.
The question which arises for consideration is as to whether Shri Anthony received the amount in question from the petitioner or he himself defalcated the same amount.
As indicated hereinbefore, there is a variance of opinion as regards the handwriting of the person receiving the amount between Central Government Forensic Department, Calcutta and the Scientific Assistant, Jammu and Kashmir Forensic Laboratory, Srinagar.
16.
The petitioner has also alleged bias as against the Commandant of 115 battalion as also the presiding officer of the Additional Court of Enquiry.
He in view of representation of the petitioner is also likely to be a witness in the case.
In any event, in view of likelihood of bias the petitioner should not be attached with the 115 battalion.
The respondents in their affidavit-in-opposition have also not stated as to what impelled them to start an Additional Court of Enquiry.
Only upon constituting the said enquiry, the handwritings of concerned persons namely Shri I Anthony and Sri Jagdev Singh were referred to Forensic Department, Srinagar and as noticed hereinbefore an opinion was obtained that the signature and the date in the pay cheque book and advance register were in the hand-writing of the petitioner.
In the Additional Court of Enquiry where the petitioner was called as a witness he was found to be blameworthy and thereafter he was attached to 115 battalion BSF by a department order dated 1861996.
In the affidavit-in-opposition it is stated :-  "It is submitted that the aforesaid Additional Court of Inquiry and the petitioner's attachment with 115 battalion BSF at Srinagar were made on the face of the petitioner's involvement in the misappropriation of Government money as per the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory, Srinagar.
It is clarified here that the initial Court of Inquiry proceeding was substituted by the subsequent proceeding of the Additional Court of Inquiry.
With regard to the statement made in paragraph 15 of the said petition, it is on the basis of the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory, Srinagar that the Additional Court of Inquiry, was ordered.
In the said Court of Inquiry, the petitioner himself had made a statement that he had received the sum of money in question being Rs. 23,660/- for safe custody and disbursement to Assistant Sub-Inspector I Anthony.
The petitioner stated to have disbursed this amount to the said Asstt.
Sub-Inspector I Anthony in the absence of Sri Jagdev Singh, the DDO.
It is submitted that such an act on the part of the petitioner was in violation of Rules relating to financial matters.
The opinion of the Additional Inquiry dated 3rd May, 1996 was that the conduct of the petitioner was blameworthy in this case and a disciplinary action should be taken against him.
A true copy of this opinion of the Addl.
Court of Inquiry dated 3rd May, 1996 is annexed herewith and marked "F"."
17.
It is true that the Border Security Force Act is a special Act.
However, the provisions of the said Act must be construed in the light of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
The Border Security Force Rules having also been made validly, the provisions of the Act and the Rules should be read together and construed harmoniously so that provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder may be given effect to.
18.
The principles of natural justice which are required to be complied with had been laid down in the Border Security Force Rules.
The said rules provide that the petitioner may be given an opportunity to be defended by a lawyer.
A lawyer is admittedly not available at Tanghdhar.
It is not disputed that Tanghdhar is situated at a snow-clad place and except the army camps no other place for stay of any outsider is available.
Thus, there is no place for stay of the witnesses or the counsel who may have to be taken there by the petitioner.
19.
The petitioner in view of the provisions of the rules which entitled him to have the assistance of a counsel is also entitled to examine the defence witnesses at his costs.
In Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, reported in AIR 1986 SC 180 the Apex Court held (para 42) :-  "There is no static measure of reasonableness which can be applied to all situations alike.
Indeed, the question "Is this procedure reasonable ?"
implies and postulates the enquiry as to whether the procedure prescribed is reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
In Francis Coralie Mullin, 1981(2) SCR 516, Bhagwati, J said : ".............. it is for the court to decide in exercise of its constitutional power of judicial review whether the deprivation of life or personal liberty in a given case is by way of procedure, which is reasonable, fair and just or it is otherwise".
The Supreme Court further observed (para 45) :-  "The hearing may be given individually or collectively depending upon the facts of each situation".
20.
In DK Yadav v. JM.A.
Industries, reported in 1993(3) SCC 259 : 1993(3) SCT 537, the right to continue to be in service was held to be protected under Art. 21 of the Constitution of India.
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1978 SC 597 a new concept of Art. 14 was adumbrated.
In Swapan Ray v. Indian Airlines Ltd reported in 1996(1) Cal HN 147, it was held :-  "(1) It is now well-known that although principles of natural justice are based on two pillars, namely - (1) nobody shall be condemned without hearing, and (2) nobody shall be a judge of his own cause, in relation to domestic enquiry, fairness in the procedure is admittedly a part of the principles of natural justice.
As in the instant case, there has been a gross violation of the principles of natural justice, the impugned orders must be held to be bad in law.
Reference in this connection may be made to Khem Chand v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1958 SC 300.
(2) But a departmental enquiry entailing consequences like loss of job which now-a-days means loss of livelihood, there must be fair play in action, in respect of an order involving adverse or penal consequences against an employee; there must be investigation to the charges consistent with the requirement of the situation in accordance with the principles of natural justice insofar as these are applicable in a particular situation.
The application of those principles of natural justice must always be in conformity with the scheme of the Act and the subject-matter of the case.
It is not possible to lay down any rigid rules as to which principles of natural justice are to be applied.
There is no such thing as technical natural justice.
The requirements of natural justice depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the enquiry, the rules under which the Tribunal is acting, the subject matter to be dealt with and so on.
Concept of fair play in action which is the basis of natural justice must depend upon the particular lis between the parties.
See KL Tripathi v. State Bank of India, 1984(1) SCC 43 : AIR 1984 SC 273.
Rules and practices are constantly developing to ensure fairness in the making of decisions which affect people in their daily lives and livelihood.
Without such fairness democratic Governments cannot exist.
Beyond all rules and procedures that is the sine qua non".
21.
The aforementioned decision was followed by a division bench of which I was a member in Indian Airlines Ltd v. Amar Nath Halder, reported in 1996(2) Cal LT (HC) 261.
22.
In a departmental enquiry the delinquent is entitled to both the substantive and procedural safeguards.
It is true that in a given case, and particularly when the delinquent is not prejudicial, the Court may not interfere with the findings of guilt.
But it is also a trite law that justice is not only to be done but manifestly seem to be done.
In the instant case, in view of R 46 aforementioned itself the petitioner cannot be attached to 115 Battalion.
Thus, it is difficult to accept that the trial of the petitioner must be held at Tanghdhar and at no other place.
If the trial of the petitioner is held at Tanghdhar, the safeguards provided to the petitioner under the statutory rules cannot be complied with as a result whereof the proceeding would be vitiated in law.
23.
In Sawal Singh v. State of Rajasthan, reported in AIR 1986 SC 905, the Apex Court held that a departmental enquiry entailing consequences like loss of job which now-a-days means loss of livelihood there must have a fair play in action.
In respect of an order involving adverse or penal consequences against an employee there must be investigation to the charges consistent with the requirement of the situation in accordance with the principles of natural justice insofar as these are applicable in a particular situation.
24.
In R Surinder Singh Kanda v. Government of the Federation of Malaya, reported in 1962 App Cas 322, Lord Denin, J observed :-  "If the right to be heard is to be a real right which is worth anything, it must carry with it a right in the accused man to know the case which is made against him.
He must know that evidence has been given and what statements have been made affecting him; and then he must be given a fair opportunity to correct or contradict them.
This appears in all the cases from the celebrated judgment of Lord Loreburn LC in Board of Education v. Rice down to the decision of their Lordships' Board in Ceylon University v. Fernando.
It follows, of course, that the judgment or whoever has to adjudicate must not hear evidence or receive representation from one side behind the back of the other.
The Court will not inquire whether the evidence or representations did work to his prejudice.
Sufficient that they might do so.
The Court will not go into the likelihood of prejudice.
The risk of it is enough.
No one who has lost a case will believe he has been fairly treated if the other side has had access to the judge without his knowing."
25.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the rule of natural justice is not a rigid rule and varies from case to case.
26.
There cannot be any open and shut case nor the rule of grasp of steel can be applied.
See John v Rees, 1970(1) Chancery 345 at 402.
27.
Similarly in R v. Thames Magistrate, reported in 1974(2) All ER 1219 at 1223, the court held that even non-grant of an adjournment in a criminal case sought for by the accused for the purpose of preparation of case comes within the purview of the principles of natural justice.
28.
In the instant case also the proceeding is quasi-judicial in nature and before a penal action can be taken against the procedee a fair procedure is required to be adopted.
29.
In Sri Hanuman Steel Rolling Mill v. CESC Limited, reported in 1996(1) Cal HN 469, it has been held :-  "In Wade's Administrative Law, 6th edition, page 497, the learned Author observed : "The hypothesis on which the courts built up their jurisdiction was that the duty to give every victim a fair hearing was just as much a canon of good administration as of good legal procedure.
Even where an order or determination is unchallengeable as regards its substance, the court can at least control the preliminary procedure so as to require fair consideration of both sides of the case.
Nothing is more likely to conduce the good administration."
30.
Apart from the rules of audi alteram partem, which means that no one shall be condemned unheard, corollary of which is that he should be given reasonable notice of the nature of the case to be met, there are other rules of common law to the same effect.
(See Franklin v. Minister, Town and Country Planning, 1947 AC 87 : 1947(2) All ER 289, John v Rees, 1970 Ch D 345).
31.
In De-Smith's Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 5th Edition, at page 403 the learned authors have referred to various decisions while emphasising the need to comply with the principles of natural justice in a case of forfeiture or deprivation of some right as also in the cases where applications are required to be filed as for example the cases of licence.
32.
The petitioner is in a worse position inasmuch as he is to face a trial and wherein he may be convicted.
The petitioner, thus is required to be given all statutory protection to which he is entitled to.
In SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1990 SC 1984 : 1991(1) SCT 241, the Apex Court while considering the provision of the Army Act and the rules framed thereunder held :-  "The rules of natural justice are not embodied rules.
The extent of their application depends upon the particular statutory framework whereunder jurisdiction has been conferred on the administrative authority."
33.
In Rees v. Crane, reported in 1994(1) All ER 833, the Appeal Court upon taking into consideration various decisions held :-  "Plainly in the present case there would have been an opportunity for the respondent to answer the complaint at a later stage before the tribunal and before the Judicial Committee.
That is a pointer in favour of the general practice but is not conclusive.
Section 137 which sets up the three-tier process is silent as to the procedure to be followed at each stage and as a matter of interpretation is not to be construed as necessarily excluding a right to be informed and heard at the first stage.
On the contrary its silence on procedures in the absence of other factors indicates, or at least leaves open the possibility, that there may well be circumstances in which fairness requires that the party whose case is to be referred should be told and given a chance to comment.
It is not a priori sufficient to say, as the appellants in effect do, that it is accepted that the rules of natural justice apply to the procedure as a whole but they do not have to be followed in any individual stage.
The question remains whether fairness requires that the audi alteram partem rule be applied at the commission stage."
34.
Although S. 19 of the Act confers a wide jurisdiction upon the competent authority to select the place for trial, if thereby, a valuable right of an employee/accused is taken away, the same may be held to be ultra vires Arts.
14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
Although a wide discretion has been conferred on the disciplinary authority, the said power must be exercised reasonably and on following the objective criteria.
Such a discretion cannot be exercised on the basis of subjective satisfaction of the authority.
For a detailed discussion on the subject, reference is made to Chaitanya Charan Das v. State of West Bengal, reported in AIR 1995 Cal 336 (paragraphs 50-62).
35.
It is further well known that if two interpretations are possible, one of which would uphold the constitutionality of the law as the same should be applied and for that purpose, if necessary, the provision in question can be read down.
36.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case it would not be equitable to hold this enquiry at the place where the 115 Battalion is stationed.
37.
Although in ordinary course such an enquiry could be held at Tangadhar 115 battalion BSF is posted there, but we have to keep in mind that for the purpose of proving the charges it is not necessary to examine each and every officer and a truck-load of documentary evidence also may not be necessary.
Few documents would serve the purpose and the number of witnesses on behalf of the respondents may be a few.
38.
It is not well known that interest of justice must be given priority so as to uphold the constitutional values and safeguards inasmuch as it is a basic principle of law that justice is not only to be done but manifestly seen to be done.
The procedural safeguards provided for in the rules must be given its full effect so that the trial as against the petitioner may not be held to be vitiated on that ground alone.
Procedural laws are meant to subserve the ends of justice and not to frustrate it.
It is well known that in case of conflict, harmonious construction between the Act and Rule is required to be made.
One way in which the repugnancy would be avoided in the conflicting provisions is dealing with distinct matters or situations, but in case of conflict between the principles of natural justice and forum, the principles of natural justice must be given preference.
We have to keep in mind that keeping in view the doctrine of forum convenience the superior Courts of this country have been conferred power both under Code of Civil Procedure and Code of Criminal Procedure to change the place of trial from one court to the other.
It is further well known that an intention to produce an unreasonable result is not to be imputed to a statute if there is some other construction available.
See Artemiou v. Procopiou, 1966(1) QB 878 at page 888.
It is further well known that law is meant to do justice and avoid injustice.
In Maxwell's Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, it is stated :-  "Whenever the language of the law legislature admits of two constructions and if considered in one way would lead to obvious injustice, Courts act upon the view that such a result could not have intended unless the intention to bring it about has been manifested in plain words.
If the court is to avoid a statutory result that flouts common sense and justice, it must do so not by disregarding the statute or overriding it, but by interpreting it in accordance with the judicial presume parliamentary concern for common sense and justice".
39.
In BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, reported in 1995(8) JT (SC) 65 : 1996(1) SCT 617, Hansaria, J held that the High Court has similar power which the Supreme Court exercises in its power under Art. 142 of the Constitution of India.
40.
In Nathuni Mian v. Amir Hussain, reported in 1995(2) BLJR 1407, the Court held :-  "Reverting to the next point about the effect of subsequent written statement on behalf of defendants 6 to 10 admitting plaintiff's case without leave of the Court.
One thing is to be kept in mind that provision is an enabling one and is directory in nature.
It does not provide penal clause about the consequences in case leave of the court was not obtained.
We are reminded of an old Latin Maxim "summum jus summa injuria", which connotes that extreme law is extreme injury.
The rigour of law, intempered by equity is not justice but denial of it.
In owners and parties interested in MV Vali Bro.
v. Ferandeo Lopez, 1989(4) JT SC 10, it was ruled by the Apex Court that Rules of procedure are not by themselves an end but are a means to achieve the ends of justice.
These Rules are tools forged to achieve justice and are not hurdles to obstruct the pathway to justice.
Only that construction would be proper which promotes justice and prevents miscarriage by enabling the court to do justice in myriad situations.
In our opinion, nothing has been indicated as to what would happen if leave of the court is not obtained.
In our opinion, procedural law is meant to further the ends of justice and not to frustrate it.
That interpretation which tends to serve the ends of justice must be preferred.
The procedure is the handmaid to justice (see Special Investigation Cell v. Anupam J Kulkarni, 1992(3) JT (SC) 366 ; Das Bandhu Gupta v. NL Anand, 1993(5) JT (SC) 313."
41.
It is further well known that law should be just.
Francis Bennion in his Statutory Interpretation, 1st Edition, S. 128 states the law, thus :-  "Legal policy - The principle that law should be just is an aspect of legal policy.
For the general nature of legal policy see S. 126 of this Code.
As to the opposing construction see S. 84 of this Code.
Parliament is presumed to intend to act justly and reasonably.
(IRC v. Hinchy, 1960 AC 748, per Lord Reid at p. 768.
See also Mangin v. IRC, 1971 AC 739 at p. 746 ; Nothman v. London Borough of Barnet, 1979(1) All ER 142 at p. 148).
Justice here includes social justice (Williams and Glyn's Bank Ltd v. Boland, 1980(2) All ER 408, per Lord Scarman at p. 416) or what is sometimes called distributive justice.
(See RW.M.
Dias Jurisprudence (4th Edn.
1976) pp. 276-285).
Yet injustice has been judicially described as not `a practical test' (Prudential Assurance Co Ltd v. Newman Industries Ltd, (No. 2), 1982(1) All ER 354 at p. 366) and as meaning `different things to different men' (Estmanco (Kilner House) Ltd v. Greater London Council, 1982(1) All ER 437 at p. 444).
Nevertheless the Courts are always concerned to see that there is not a failure of justice, R v. Ward, 1848(2) Car & Kir 759, and that the well of justice remains clear (A-G v. English, 1982(2) All ER 903 at p. 909).
Here Courts rely on `impression and instinctive judgment as to what is fair and just'.
(Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co Ltd, 1970 AC 1004, per Lord Pearson at p. 1054.
See also Warden v. Warden, 1981(3) All ER 193 at p. 196).
42.
Reference in this connection may also be made to Viles v. Wakefield Metropolitan District Council, 1985(1) All ER 905 at p. 911.
43.
It must also be borne in mind that life of the law is not logic but experience.
In the instant case, the petitioner expects hostility of higher ranking officers.
The case is a very complicated one and in all fairness he should be afforded legal assistance at all stages.
As indicated hereinbefore, the case at hand poses peculiar problems and, thus, in my opinion, it is necessary to dispose of the matter with certain directions in order to meet the ends of justice upon taking into consideration the balance of conscience (convenience ?)
of the parties.
44.
The petitioner is a poor employee.
It will, therefore, not be possible for him to examine his defence witnesses at Tanghdhar who are all residents in and around Calcutta.
What defence he would take and what material should be brought on records by the prosecution and the defence is not a matter which this Court is to consider at this stage.
45.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case in my opinion justice will be subserved if the application is disposed of with the following directions :-  (A) The petitioner should not be attached with 115 Battalion.
The competent authority shall consider the question of attaching the petitioner with another battalion and may upon taking into consideration the materials on records consider the desirability to attach him with a battalion which is situated in or around the State of West Bengal.
(B) If for some cogent reason, the same is not possible, he may be attached with any battalion posted in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and in that event; (i) the trial subject to the following directions be held at one of the principal towns of the State where the petitioner would be able to obtain the services of a lawyer, (ii) the trial may be held at Calcutta for the purpose of examining the petitioner's defence witness, (iii) in the event, the court of enquiry does not agree thereto, the entire expense for examination of the defence witness shall be borne by the respondents, (iv) in the event, any difficulty arises for bringing any original documents, the same would be xeroxed in presence of the petitioner and the petitioner would be entitled to compare the same with the original which may be marked as exhibits and such xerox copies may be brought to Calcutta, (v) however, in the event, the petitioner intends to get the said documents examined by another hand- writing expert, such an opportunity may be provided to him, and (vi) the period during which the petitioner was at Calcutta upon expiry of his leave period shall be adjusted against his due leave, if any, and the same shall not be considered as break in service.
46.
This writ petition is disposed of with the aforementioned directions but in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
47.
Let plain copy of the operative portion of the order counter-signed by the Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the learned counsel for the parties on usual undertaking.
Order accordingly.