VK Bali, J - Challenge in this Letters Patent Appeal is to the judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge, dated November 21, 1990 in Civil Writ Petition No. 16791 of 1989.
Petitioners-Dharam Chand and 102 other Clerks employed in the Haryana Agriculture University, through writ petition referred to above, successfully claimed same pay scale and allowances as were being given to the Clerks appointed before June 6, 1980, from the date of their appointments, on the principle of `equal pay for equal work' enshrined in Article 32(d) read with Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Single Judge, on the basis of decision of the Apex Court in P Savita and others v. Union of India and others, 1985(3) SLR 29, and on the facts, as shall be detailed hereinafter, as referred to above, directed the appellant- Haryana Agriculture University to grant the same pay scale and allowances to the petitioners as were being granted to the Clerks appointed before June 6, 1980, from the date of their appointment, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
The obvious prayer of the appellant in this Letters Patent Appeal is to set aside the judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge in CWP No. 16791 of 1989, and consequently dismiss the writ petition.
Before, however, the grounds pressed into service for the desired relief, as have been canvassed by Mr. SC Mohunta, Senior Advocate learned counsel for the appellant-University, are taken into consideration and commented upon, it shall be useful to give a back-drop of the events culminating into filing of Civil Writ Petition No. 16791 of 1989.
Petitioners were appointed as Clerks in the Haryana Agriculture University after June 6, 1980.
It has been their case so pleaded in the petition that the Clerks working in the Haryana Agriculture University formed one cadre and have one seniority list.
The qualifications for the post of Clerk is matric 1st Class or Higher Secondary, IInd Class or BA The duties and responsibilities of the Clerks are the same.
Before April 1, 1979 the pay scale for the post of Clerk was 120-300 but w.e.f.
April 1, 1979 the said pay scale of Rs. 120-300 was revised to Rs. 420-700 and subsequently, when again pay scales were revised, this pay scale of Rs. 420-700 was revised to Rs. 1,200-2,040.
However, the Clerks appointed on or after June 6, 1980 were granted the pay scale of Rs. 400-660 w.e.f.
June 6, 1980 and this pay scale of Rs. 400-660 was revised to 950-1,500 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
The extract of the decision dated November 26, 1980 whereby the University decided to grant different pay scales to the Clerks on the basis of their date of appointment, is available on records as Annexure P-3.
The petitioners filed representation to the Vice Chancellor that all Clerks were having same qualifications, duties and responsibilities and, thus, the action to grant different pay scales was contrary to the principle of `equal pay for equal work'.
In context of the facts, referred to above, the petitioners naturally pleaded that decision of the University in granting different pay scales to equally situated persons was discriminatory and, thus, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
They also canvassed that the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' as enshrined in Article 32(d) of the Constitution of India, had too been violated.
2.
The claim of petitioners was contested on behalf of the appellant- University and in the written statement filed on its behalf, it was pleaded that the Clerks recruited before June 6, 1980 had been appointed in the pay scale of 120-300.
On revision of pay scales w.e.f.
April 1, 1979, the Board of Management in its meeting held on December 26, 1979 took a policy decision for maintaining firm linkage in regard to grant of revised pay scales and for future recruitments on the pattern of the State Government.
Accordingly, the pay scale of Clerks was revised to 400-660 at par with the State Govt. Clerks in the State Government.
The Clerks in the State Govt. were in the pre- revised pay scale of Rs. 110-225.
The grant of pay scale at par with the pay scale of Clerks to Haryana Agriculture University employees created an anomaly and the Clerks recruited in the pay scale of Rs. 120-300 insisted for grant of improved scale.
After detailed deliberations and considering all aspects, the pay scales Anomaly Removal Committee of the University, headed by the then Finance Secretary Shri TK Banarjee, recommended the grant of personal scale of Rs. 420-700 to such Clerks who were recruited in the pay scale of Rs. 120- 300.
This recommendation was approved by the Board of Management of the University.
As the recruitments in the pay scale of Rs. 120-300 were made prior to June 6, 1980, the personal scale of Rs. 420-700 was, thus, given to the Clerks recruited prior to June 6, 1980.
For future recruitments, the pay scale of Rs. 400-660 was kept at par with the State Govt. Further, revision of pay scales w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 was a replacement of pay scales then existing.
The pay scale of Clerks recruited in the scale of Rs. 400-660 had been revised to Rs. 950-1,500 and the personal scale of the Clerks recruited prior to June 6, 1980, viz. Rs. 420-700, had been revised to Rs. 1,200-2,040, as a measure of personal pay, keeping in view the definition of term of existing pay scale as provided in Rule 3(2) of the Haryana Civil Services Pay Rule, 1987, which reads thus:-  "Existing scale" in relation to a Government employee means the present scale applicable to the post held by the Government employee, or, as the case may be, personal scale applicable to him, as on the 1st day of January, 1986 whether in a substantive or officiating capacity."
The petitioners, who were appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 400-660 were, thus, not entitled to the revised scale of Rs. 1,200-2,040 granted as a measure of personal scale to certain clerks who were recruited in the better scale prior to June 6, 1980.
3.
In the context of the averments made in the written statement, as have been fully detailed above, Mr. Mohunta, learned counsel representing the appellant-University, vehemently contends that the Clerks, who came to be appointed after June 6, 1980 and those who were already in service prior to that, constitute different classes and that being so, there was no discrimination involved in granting different pay scale to them.
With a view to appreciate the contention raised by learned counsel, it requires to be highlighted that the Clerks, who were employed prior to June 6, 1980 with the appellant-University were getting their pay in the pay scale of Rs. 120-300 whereas the Clerks, who were working in the State Government were getting the pay scale of Rs. 110-225/-.
The Clerks working in the University were, thus, getting a higher pay scale than their counterparts employed with the State Government.
With a view to bring parity between the Clerks employed by the appellant-University and the State Government with regard to their pay scales, a decision was taken by the University vide its resolution dated December 26, 1979.
In the resolution aforesaid it was decided that linkage of pay scales with the State Government for all non-teaching posts shall be maintained.
This decision obviously was not subject matter of challenge at any stage, least in the writ petition culminating into grant of pay scale to the petitioners as desired by them.
The obvious result of this linkage was that the pay scale of the Clerks of the appellant-University was to go down.
Those who were already working on the posts of Clerk in the University prior to the decision taken by the University, as referred to above, could not possibly be disturbed as, under law, their pay had to be protected.
In the context of the facts, as have been referred to above, in our view, it was not a case of giving a particular pay scale to the Clerks already working in the University prior to the cut off date.
It was, on the other hand, a case of protecting their existing pay scale, which, as referred to above, could not possibly be disturbed.
All those Clerks, who came to be employed after the cut off date, were given the same pay scale that was equivalent to their counter-parts employed with the State Government.
It goes without saying that when the petitioners came to be appointed on the post of Clerk, the pay scale then existing, i.e., at par with the pay scale given to a Clerk in the State Government, was made admissible and actually paid to them.
Such Clerks, i.e., the Clerks who came to be employed after the cut off date, have been paid the same pay scale.
In the very nature of things in this case two different classes of Clerks came into existence, i.e., the one who came to be employed before the cut off date and the other after the said date.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the considered view that doctrine of `equal pay for equal work', even though the Clerks may be doing the same job and having the same responsibilities, could not possibly be invoked.
The view that we have taken can well be supported from a recent decision of the Apex Court in Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd and another v. Sarat Chandra Rath and others, 1996(4) SCT 290.
The facts of the case aforesaid would reveal that the Fertilizer Corporation of India introduced a stagnation scheme for its employees.
Under it, the employees in the highest workmen's pay scale, who had been stagnating for seven years, were promoted to the lowest officers' scale.
A pay revision settlement followed.
The revised pay scales fixed were to be effective from January 1, 1983 to December 31, 1986, the highest scale of workmen being Rs. 915-1,520.
It was also provided that the employees promoted under stagnation scheme were only to be placed (not promoted) from their existing scale of Rs. 915-1,520 to the lowest officers' scale of Rs. 960-1,610 and on such placement they were to be given the designation of Junior Foreman (W).
As a result of the settlement, there were, as on December 31, 1986, employees who had already undergone placement from the highest workers scale of Rs. 915-1,520 to the lowest officers' scale of Rs. 960-1,610 on account of the fact that they had fulfilled the eligibility conditions under the seven years stagnation scheme on some dates before December 31, 1986.
However, workmen, like the respondents, who had not fulfilled the aforesaid eligibility conditions under the stagnation scheme as on December 31, 1986 continued to remain in the workmen's category, as on that day, in the pay scale of Rs. 915-1,520.
The respondents fulfilled the eligibility conditions under the seven years stagnation scheme on December 1, 1987.
By office memorandum dated November 7, 1987, these respondents were placed in the officers pay scale of Rs. 960-1,610/- w.e.f.
September 1, 1987.
As the pay revision settlement was to expire on December 31, 1986, a new wage settlement had to be made to be effective from January 1, 1987.
The wage settlement of workmen took place much earlier than the settlement as regards officers.
Both settlements were made effective from January 1, 1987.
The rules for revision of pay scales of officers stipulated different methods for fixation of pay of such of the employees who have been promoted from the highest category of workmen to the juniormost category of officers on or after January 1, 1987 and for officers promoted before January 1, 1987.
On the facts, as have been fully detailed above, Supreme Court held that "the two categories of Junior Foremen (W) were dealt with by two different sets of rules because as on January 1, 1987 they were not similarly situate.
Whereas, the respondents were Assistant Foremen, those who were placed in the officers' grade prior to January 1, 1987, were regarded as officers.
There could, thus, be no comparison between these two categories of persons.
These two categories were unequal and respondents could not, in law, make any grievance if different principles were adopted in the fixation of their respective pay scales."
It was further held that "the respondents as on January 1, 1987 had not acquired the officers' grade and were working as Assistant Foremen.
On the other hand those of the workers who were in the highest grade and had been placed in the lowest scale of the officers' grade had by January 1, 1987, already acquired the officers' grade.
These two categories of employees, keeping in view their designation as well as the pay scales which they actually were drawing as on January 1, 1987, were clearly in different classes."
As mentioned above, petitioners came into service only after June 6, 1980.
On their being absorbed in the service, a particular pay scale which was equivalent to the pay scale admissible to a Clerk in the State Government, was given to them.
Those, who were working prior to June 6, 1980 were already getting a higher pay scale.
The pay scale of such employees who were already in service could not possibly be reduced but that principle of pay protection could not possibly apply to the petitioners, who were not even in service on the date when pay scales were revised and linked with the pay scale admissible to a Clerk employed with the State Government.
Even though, therefore, the Clerks of both these categories may be doing the same job and having the same responsibilities, they formed two different classes and, therefore, the question of there being any discrimination does not arise.
4.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner-respondents, as before the learned Single Judge as also before us, has placed reliance upon a decision of the Supreme Court in P Savita's case (supra).
The facts of the case aforesaid would reveal that there were 33 establishments under the Ministry of Defence Production and Director General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta.
In those establishments, there were two categories of Drawing Office Staff: (i) Senior Draughtman, and (ii) Draughtman.
Senior Draughtmen were either directly recruited or promoted from the post of Draughtmen.
At all relevant times, all the Senior Draughtmen were drawing the same pay scale.
The first and the second Pay Commissions set up by the Government of India, recommended same pay scales of pay for all the Senior Draughtmen.
The Third Pay Commission set up by the Government of India, however, made recommendations that Draughtmen were to be in the pay scale of Rs. 330-560/- while the Senior Draughtsmen were divided into two groups with two scales of pay, Rs. 330-560 and 425-700.
It is this division of Senior Draughtsmen that was challenged in P Savita's case (supra).
On the facts, as have been detailed above, Supreme Court, while setting aside the order passed by the High Court, held that "the explanation that this division is based on seniority cannot be accepted as sufficient to meet the requirements of law.
By seniority, a Senior Draughtsman will get higher pay with the increments that he earns proportionate to the number of years he is in service; here that is not the case.
It is the classification of the Senior Draughtsmen into two groups that is responsible for the higher pay.
For this classification, the Government must be able to satisfy the Court of certain other tests which are non- existent in this case, since it is not in dispute that Senior Draughtsmen, belonging to the two divisions, do equal and same work.
Supreme Court further held that "in view of the total absence of any plea on the side of the respondents, that the Senior Draughtsmen who are placed in the advantageous group do not perform work and duties more onerous or different from the work performed by the appellants group, it will have to be held that this grouping violates Article 14 of the Constitution."
5.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the contention raised by Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the respondents herein but are of the view that the facts of this case have no parity with the facts that were available before the Supreme Court in P Savita's case (supra).
The two different categories are clearly decipherable in this case.
It is not also a case where, by an intentional act of omission or commission, two different pay scales for same category of persons have been made admissible.
As mentioned above, one category is such which could not possibly be touched in the matter of pay scale as the existing pay scale that they were getting since long had necessarily to be protected.
The other class of category, like the petitioners, is the one which came to be employed when the pay scale earlier admissible had already been revised to link it with the pay scale of the Clerks employed with the State Government.
6.
In view of the discussion made above, this appeal succeeds.
Consequently, decision rendered by the learned Single Judge in CWP No. 16791 of 1989 is set aside and the writ petition is dismissed.
In view of fluctuating fate of the parties, they are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.