GC Garg, J - Petitioner has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, quashing the impugned order dated 1781983, Annexure P-8 whereby the private respondent No. 3, Sadhu Ram has been promoted to the post of Fee Collector with effect from 15111972.
2.
Facts necessary to understand the controversy raised herein are that the petitioner was appointed as Auction Recorder in the Market Committee, Safidon on 781970 and was confirmed on the said post on 18.8.1971 whereas respondent No. 3 was appointed as a Clerk in that committee on 27.10.1971 and confirmed as such on 1911973.
Services of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 are governed by the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 (for short `the Rules').
Posts of Auction Recorder/Clerks and Care takers constitute one cadre and there is a joint seniority list of such employees.
In the seniority list prepared in January 1976, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 121 whereas respondent No. 3 was shown at serial No. 179.
In the year 1972, a post of Fee Collector fell vacant in the respondent-committee but the respondent-committee without considering the claim of the persons on the basis of seniority, promoted respondent No. 3 to the said post.
Aggrieved by this action of the committee, two persons namely, Kali Ram and Lakhmi Chand who were working as Auction Recorders but were senior to the petitioner and respondent No. 3, preferred appeal and as a consequence thereof, respondent No. 3 was reverted to his substantive post of a Clerk with effect from 15111972, and instead the aforesaid Kali Ram was ordered to be deemed to have been promoted w.e.f.
15111972.
The other Auction Recorder who had earlier represented against the promotion of respondent No. 3 and was senior to the petitioner, was dismissed from service in the year 1975 but was re- appointed afresh in the year 1976.
As a consequence of this development, the petitioner became the senior-most Auction Recorder in the committee.
In the year 1983, the Chief Administrator of the respondent-Board while disposing of the representation of respondent No. 3 for restoration of his status as Fee Collector, requested the committee to create an ex-post facto post of Fee Collector so that respondent No. 3 could be promoted to such post.
Meanwhile, the petitioner having come to know of the above move, submitted a representation dated 841983, Annexure P-2 clearly stating therein that he was the senior-most Auction Recorder and in case a post of the Fee Collector was created, he was entitled to be promoted as Fee Collector.
Respondent- Board accordingly on the basis of a resolution dated 15.4.1983 passed by the committee, sanctioned one ex-post facto post of Fee Collector in the Market Committee, Safidon w.e.f.
15111972.
Meanwhile, the respondent-Board by its letter dated 1151983 forwarded the petitioner's representation for promotion and sought the comments of the Administrator of the committee in the matter.
The Administrator of the respondent-committee by its letter dated 1171983, Annexure P-7 sent his parawise comments to the Chief Administrator of the Board to the effect that the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 3 as per the seniority list prepared on 111976 and thus he deserved to be promoted first on the basis of seniority.
Despite all this, the respondent-committee promoted respondent No. 3 as Fee Collector by its order dated 1781983, Annexure P-8.
It is in this situation, the petitioner has challenged the order, Annexure P-8.
3.
In response to notice, the respondents filed their respective written statements.
All the three written statements filed by the respondents are almost on similar lines.
All that is sought to bring out on behalf of the respondents is that the petition suffers on account of delay and laches and thus no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
It has been stated in that regard that respondent No. 3 was promoted as Fee Collector as back as on 15111972 on which post he worked upto 1261974 and the petitioner did not file any representation or appeal against his promotion and therefore, he cannot be permitted now to challenge the same after a lapse of eleven years and that the petitioner having not challenged the promotion of respondent No. 3, when he was initially promoted in the year 1972, should be deemed to have foregone his right to do so.
It has been further stated that respondent No. 3 after his reversion in the year 1974, had made a representation for again considering him for promotion as Fee Collector and the matter was got examined from the Legal Advisor of the respondent-Board and it was on his advice that respondent No. 3 was found entitled to promotion and accordingly an ex-post facto post was created and he was promoted retrospectively with effect from 15111972 by order Annexure P-8 and thus it was not a promotion against a fresh vacancy.
It has also been stated that promotion of respondent No. 3 was effected much earlier to the enforcement of the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 and thus these Rules have no application to the present dispute.
According to the respondents, the Rules ibid came into being in October, 1974 on the basis of which the first gradation list was prepared on 111976 and prior thereto, the Auction Recorders and the Clerks were altogether in different cadres.
It was thus sought to bring out that promotion of respondent No. 3 was fully justified in law and equity and consequently the writ petition deserved to be dismissed.
In turn, the petitioner also placed on record two documents, viz. Annexures P-9 and P-10 by moving Civil Misc. 217 of 1984 whereas respondent No. 3 placed three documents, viz. Annexure R-3/1 to R-3/3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and after considering the whole matter, I am of the opinion that this petition must succeed.
The impugned order, Annexure P-8 has been primarily challenged on the grounds that the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 3 and the latter was wrongly promoted by the Committee on 15111972 as he was later on reverted and in his place the senior-most Auction Recorder was promoted.
Thus in the wake of the above situation, the impugned order Annexure P-8 is quite contrary to the decision taken by the Board itself.
Another ground of challenge to the impugned order is that it has been passed without considering the claim of the petitioner for promotion who is senior to the private respondent.
According to the petitioner, the impugned order, Annexure P-8 smacks of arbitrariness and high -handedness at the hands of the authorities of the respondent- committee, for at one point of time the Administrator of the committee has himself written to the Chief Administrator of the respondent-Board that the petitioner was senior to the private respondent and therefore, he may be promoted first on the basis of seniority, and on the other hand he promoted respondent No. 3 ignoring his (petitioner's) rightful claim in that behalf.
4.
After having a cursory look at the submissions of the petitioners, I find that these deserve to be dealt with collectively.
As per the case put forward by the petitioner, though he was initially appointed as Auction Recorder in the Market Committee, Safidon and respondent No. 3 as Clerk in the said Committee, yet in spite of their having two different designations, their seniority was joint.
In other words, all the Auction Recorders, Clerks and Care Takers formed one cadre and they had a joint seniority list.
Services of such employees are governed by the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 (for short `the Rules') and as per the said Rules, the seniority inter se of such employees is determined by having regard to the length of their service on the post.
This aspect of the matter has been controverted by the respondents by alleging that since the promotion of respondent No. 3 was effected in November, 1972 ie in the first instance and thus much earlier to the enforcement of the 1974 Rules, these Rules have no applicability to the present dispute.
This contention of the respondents is totally baseless and deserves to be rejected.
Undisputedly, a post of Fee Collector fell vacant in the year 1972 on which respondent No. 3 came to be promoted with effect from 15111972 though according to the petitioner's case, the said promotion was ordered without considering the claim for promotion of the persons senior to respondent No. 3.
It is also the admitted case of the respondents that two persons, namely Kali Ram and Lakhmi Chand claiming themselves to be senior to respondent No. 3 filed an appeal against the promotion of respondent No. 3.
The appeal was accepted by respondent No. 1 by his order dated 361974, Annexure P-1 and as a consequence thereof, Kali Ram was ordered to be deemed to have been promoted w.e.f.
15111972 and respondent No. 3 was ordered to be reverted to his substantial post of Clerk w.e.f.
15111972.
Lakhmi Chand who along with Kali Ram had represented against the promotion of respondent No. 3 was in the meantime terminated from service and again came to be re-appointed in the year 1977-78.
It is not disputed by the respondents that the services of the petitioner and the private respondent and also such employees were governed by the 1974 Rules and to say the other way, the said Rules were in force in the year 1974.
It is further clear from the record that after the promotion of Kali Ram as a Fee Collector and after termination of services of Lakhmi Chand in the year 1975, the petitioner happened to be the senior-most amongst the employees eligible for being considered for promotion on the basis of seniority and this was so indicated as well in the joint gradation list of the Auction Recorders/Clerks/Care Takers drawn on 111976.
It is also not disputed that after the enforcement of the 1974 Rules, the promotion to the post of Fee Collector was required to be made strictly on the basis of seniority.
This is somehow reflected in the certificate dated 711984, Annexure P-9 as well.
5.
Now it deserves to be noticed that after the promotion of Kali Ram as a Fee Collector by pushing down respondent No. 3 to his substantive post of Clerk, the latter seems to have made a representation apparently against his reversion that was ordered in consequence of acceptance of the appeal of Kali Ram by order dated 361974.
As per the further stand of the respondents, the representation of respondent No. 3 remained pending consideration for some time and the matter was subsequently got examined from the Legal Advisor of the respondent-Board.
It seems that the Legal Advisor recommended that respondent No. 3 deserved to be restored the status as a Fee Collector and this opinion apparently came after acceptance of representation of respondent No. 3.
On the basis of the above recommendation/opinion of the Legal Advisor, the respondent-committee was asked by the Chief Administrator of the respondent Board to create an ex-post facto post and accordingly send a resolution in that behalf.
The respondent-committee thereafter in pursuance of request of the Chief Administrator, passed a resolution Annexure P-4 in April 1983 on the basis of which sanction for ex-post facto post of Fee Collector was accorded by the respondent-Board which was conveyed to respondent-committee by letter dated 1051983, Annexure P-5.
Respondent- Board, however, by letter dated 1151983 Annexure P-6 sent a copy of the representation of the petitioner to the Administrator of the Market Committee, Safidon for his comments whereby the petitioner had made a request for promotion as a Fee Collector.
The Administrator, Market Committee, Safidon in compliance of the letter Annexure P-6, made his comments by writing a letter dated 1171983, Annexure P-7 and the relevant portion of those comments deserves to be noticed herein:  "According to seniority list as stand on 1176 of the Auction Recorders, Clerks and Care-takers, the date of appointment of Shri Zile Singh is 781970 and date of confirmation is 18971 while date of appointment of Sadhu Ram is 27.10.1971 and date of confirmation is 1911973.
On this day i.e. 1176 the pay scale of Shri Zile Singh was Rs. 130/- pm whereas the scale of Shri Sadhu Ram was Rs. 126/- pm From this it is clear that Shri Zile Singh is very senior employee from Shri Sadhu Ram.
xxx xxx xxx.
As mentioned above Shri Zile Singh is very senior to Shri Sadhu Ram, so Zile Singh be promoted first on the basis of seniority.
In this connection the record of Zile Singh and Sadhu Ram can be compared.
But Zile Singh is No. 121 of the seniority list whereas Shri Sadhu Ram stands at No. 179 under the seniority list.
If Zile Singh is not considered fit for promotion on the basis of record, then before considering the case of Shri Sadhu Ram for promotion, the record of the employees who are at Sr. No. 122 to 178 is essential to be looked into."
6.
At this stage it deserves to be noticed with advantage that the Secretary, Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh while deciding the appeals of Kali Ram and Lakhmi Chand against the promotion of respondent No. 3, also granted relief to the former having regard to the seniority of the persons concerned and in this behalf, a few observations made by the Secretary in the order dated 361974, Annexure P-1 need to be highlighted here :  "From an examination of the record of the Market Committee, it came to notice that at the time of promotion of Sh. Sadhu Ram, the following officials were working as Auction Recorders :-  S. No. Name Date of Appointment 1 Kali Ram 15111968 2.
Zile Singh 781970 3.
Lakhmi Chand 2561970 4.
Sadhu Ram 27101971 5.
Mool Chand 21.12.1971 Shri Kali Ram having been appointed as Auction Recorder from 15111968 was thus the senior-most Auction Recorder and his claim for promotion as Fee Collector should have been kept in view by the Market Committee, Safidon, while making promotion to the post of Fee Collector on 15111972.
It was, however, not done and the Market Committee ignored the claim of Sh. Kali Ram wrongly."
As noticed already, in order to rectify the said mistake, the respondent- committee promoted Kali Ram as a Fee Collector w.e.f.
15111972 by reverting respondent No. 3 to the post of Clerk.
It is also crystal clear from the observations of the departmental appellate authority noticed above that even at the time when respondent No. 3 was initially promoted as Fee Collector, seniority of the officials was the fore-most consideration and in other words, it is the seniority that was the primary criterion for consideration of the persons eligible for promotion as Fee Collectors.
But notwithstanding the above fact, the respondent-authorities preferred to promote respondent No. 3 by ignoring the claim of the persons senior to him.
However, as noticed already, the mistake done by the authorities by promoting respondent No. 3 ignoring the claim of the persons senior to him stood rectified by the departmental appellate authority and an appropriate order came to be passed.
Not only this, respondent No. 3 feeling dissatisfied with the order dated 361974 of the appellate authority preferred a revision against that order.
The revision was dismissed by the Deputy Secretary to Government, Haryana Agriculture Department, exercising the powers of the Government of Haryana by order dated 251977, Annexure P-10 and all that was observed by the Deputy Secretary deserves to be noticed herein:  "Sh. Sadhu Ram, Fee Collector, Safidon filed a revision petition against the order dated 3674 of the Secretary, Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board.
The prayer of the petitioner is that the order should be set aside and he should be promoted.
I have gone through the record and the impugned order dated 3674 very carefully and find that the order was correctly passed.
I, therefore, do not want to interfere at this belated stage and reject the revision petition."
7.
A cumulative study of the circumstances as reflected above raises a significant question that once the authorities had promoted respondent No. 3 against the norm prevailing on the subject at that time and that wrong was undone firstly by the departmental appellate authority i.e. the Secretary of the respondent-Board and secondly, when the decision of the appellate authority was approved in revision filed at the instance of the private respondent herein, then on what basis and under which circumstances the Legal Advisor of the respondent-Board came to the conclusion that the claim of respondent No. 3 was justified and thus he be promoted to the post of Fee Collector with retrospective i.e. from 15111972.
Though the entire defence of the respondents to support the impugned order Annexure P-8 is primarily on the strength of the advice/opinion given by the Legal Advisor and even respondent No. 2 in his written statement has stated that a copy of the advice tendered by the Legal Advisor of the Board on the representation of respondent No. 3 was being annexed therewith, as Annexure R-1 but after making a fishing scrutiny of the whole record, I have not been able to find any such advice on record.
Written statement filed by respondent No. 2 consists of four sheets and a glance at the entry in the index made by the office also goes to show that written statement of respondent No. 2 consisted of only four sheets i.e. from pages 30 to 33.
All this leads me to an inevitable conclusion that the advice tendered by the Legal Advisor that provided a booster to the authorities to pass the impugned order was in fact not attached with the reply and it seems to have been deliberately withheld from the Court under an apprehension that the production thereof might damage the case of the respondents.
Thus the fact remains that having got a cue from the advice of the Legal Advisor of the Board which in my view, does not appear to have seen the light of the day, an ex-post facto post was got created and as a result thereof, respondent No. 3 was again promoted, by the impugned order Annexure P-8 passed on 1781983 with retrospective effect i.e. from 15111972 and this time too, without considering the claim of the petitioner who was admittedly senior to respondent No. 3.
This action of the respondent- authorities does not appeal to any reason.
Nor can it even be approved by this Court.
The whole process of ordering promotion of respondent No. 3 by the respondent-authorities goes a long way to show that the authorities adopted a kaleidoscopic approach from time to time and dealt with the matter and made promotion of respondent No. 3 in violation of the Rules in vogue.
The respondents have not been able to bring any material on record that may justify the promotion of respondent No. 3 without considering the claim of the petitioner in that behalf.
Even if an ex-post facto post had come to be created and a person was required to be promoted as Fee Collector, it was incumbent upon the respondent-authorities to consider the petitioner also for promotion thereto.
In the absence of any concrete reason to do so, the petitioner could not have been ignored for promotion and instead respondent No. 3 promoted.
In these circumstances, there is no escape from the conclusion that the impugned order Annexure P-8 cannot be sustained, as admittedly, on none of the two occasions when promotion of respondent No. 3 was ordered, the claim of the petitioner, who was otherwise eligible and senior to him, was ever considered for promotion as Fee Collector.
8.
In all fairness, a few contentions raised on behalf of the respondents deserve to be noticed.
It was contended by learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioner did not file any representation against the promotion of respondent No. 3 when the latter was initially promoted on 15111972 and he thus having not so done has foregone his right to challenge the impugned order.
The contention is misconceived and rather amusing.
Evidently, respondent No. 3 was promoted in the year 1972 and there were two more officials in between who were immediately senior to the petitioner and even respondent No. 3.
Once a person is promoted to a particular post by ignoring the claim of the officials senior to him, it is only the senior-most official amongst the ignored persons who has the grouse first and it is only he who has to represent against the promotion.
In the present case, Kali Ram and Lakhmi Chand, the officials immediately senior to the petitioner had already represented against the promotion of respondent No. 3 and one of them got the relief even, in appeal.
In the situation, it was hardly expected of the petitioner who was junior to the above two officials, to make any representation against the promotion of respondent No. 3.
If this was not done by the petitioner at that time, it did not take his right away to challenge the impugned order now and consequently the contention is rejected.
9.
It was also vehemently argued by learned counsel for the respondents that the petition suffers on account of delay and laches.
To buttress this argument, it was submitted that respondent No. 3 was promoted to the post of Fee Collector as back as on 15111972 and worked on the said post upto 1261974 and since the petitioner did not file any representation or appeal at that time, so he cannot be permitted to challenge the said promotion now after a lapse of eleven years.
On a consideration of the matter, I find that this contention has no legs to stand.
As observed in the preceding para, respondent No. 3 was promoted as Fee Collector by ignoring the claim of three officials senior to him and the first person aggrieved by the said promotion was the senior-most official out of the persons ignored for consideration and admittedly, two officials who were senior to the petitioner and also respondent No. 3 did file appeal and one of them being the senior-most gained the ground and was promoted in place of respondent No. 3.
Moreover, there was only one post available for promotion and thus only one official could have an ardent grouse in that behalf.
Besides the above, once the appeal filed by the senior-most official out of the officials ignored for promotion was accepted by order dated 361974 passed by the appellate authority, he was deemed to have been promoted as a Fee Collector w.e.f.
15111972 and respondent No. 3 stood reverted to his substantial post of Clerk; there was left no occasion for the petitioner to raise any clamour thereafter, against the promotion of respondent No. 3 effected on 15111972.
Even otherwise, now in the present petition, it is not the order dated 15111972 which is under challenge and rather the petitioner has challenged the order dated 1781983, Annexure P-8 whereby respondent No. 3 was promoted again and the present writ petition was filed within a week of the passing of the impugned order dated 1781983, though in pursuance thereof, respondent No. 3 was promoted with effect from 15111972.
Once the impugned order came into being only on 1781983 and writ petition challenging the said order was filed on 2481983, I fail to understand how this is liable to be thrown on the ground of delay and laches as sought to be contended on behalf of the respondents.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondents also urged that writ petition was pre-mature as the petitioner had made a representation dated 841983 which was still pending consideration of the authorities and the petitioner without waiting for the decision on his representation, rushed to the Court.
This submission though on the one hand looks lucrative but on the other it seriously tells upon the conduct of the authorities who in their zeal to accommodate respondent No. 3 did not at all consider appropriate to dispose of the representation of the petitioner first and then to proceed with the matter in accordance with law.
Even before the Motion Bench, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 had raised a preliminary objection on 10111983 to this effect and in a way admitted at that time that the representation of the petitioner was still pending consideration and the Motion Bench had even directed the respondent-Board to decide the petitioner's representation on or before 2.1.1984, but it seems that direction was not complied with by the respondents, for they did not bring/produce any order on record that might have been passed thereon.
Otherwise also, the sole thrust of the petitioner in his representation dated 841983 was that he was the senior-most and in the eventuality of any post of Fee Collector being available, he deserved to be considered therefor in preference to the claim of respondent No. 3.
Thereafter the impugned order promoting respondent No. 3 came to be passed on 1781983 and therefore, on the passing of this order of promotion, the prayer of the petitioner made in the representation could obviously be deemed to have been rejected and thus the petitioner was well within his right to approach this Court.
11.
In the circumstances as discussed above, there cannot be any other conclusion but the one that the impugned order dated 17.3.1983, Annexure P-8 cannot sustain and deserves to be quashed.
A question thus arises that in consequence thereof, as to what relief the petitioner is entitled to.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment, the first order of promotion to the only available post of Fee Collector was passed on 15111972 whereby respondent No. 3 was promoted.
Later on, pursuant to the order passed on the representation of Kali Ram, respondent No. 3 was reverted and instead Kali Ram was deemed to have been promoted w.e.f.
15111972 and, therefore, the matter stood at rest.
However, by virtue of whatever advice of the Legal Advisor of the Board or otherwise, an ex-post facto post of a Fee Collector came to be created and the sanction therefor was accorded by the respondent-Board by Annexure P-5.
The respondent-committee, therefore, promoted respondent No. 3 against that post by order passed on 1781983, admittedly, without considering the claim of the petitioner for promotion thereto and the said order dated 1781983 has been held to be not sustainable in law.
Therefore, it is this date from which the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Fee Collector.
Since it is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner was not senior to respondent No. 3 or under the relevant Rules in force at that time, seniority was not the criterion or that the petitioner had a bad service record and thus was not entitled to be considered for promotion, it is held that the petitioner should be deemed to have been promoted as a Fee Collector with effect from 15111972.
12.
Now as far as the question of granting consequential benefits to the petitioner on his promotion as Fee Collector w.e.f.
15111972 is concerned, it may be mentioned here that such a question fell for consideration before the apex Court and the said Court in Paluru Ramakrishnaiah and others v. Union of India and another, Judgments Today 1989(1) SC 595 held as a principle that there has to be "no pay for no work", i.e. a person will not be entitled to pay and allowances during the period for which he did not perform the duties of higher post, although he was deemed to be promoted to the higher post with effect from the date his junior was promoted.
It was thus observed that such a person will be entitled only to step up the scale of pay retrospectively from the deemed date but is not entitled to the payment of arrears of salary.
The same ratio was reiterated in later judgment in Virender Kumar v. Avinash Chandra Chadha, Judgments Today 1990(3) SC 503.
Still again in a recent judgment in State of Haryana and others etc. v. OP Gupta etc., Judgments Today 1996(2) SCT 294, the Supreme Court took the same view and consequently denied the payment of arrears of salary to the aggrieved officials in respect of the period i.e. from the deemed date of promotion to the date of their posting in the promotional posts.
Thus, on the strength of the above judgments of the apex Court, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 submitted that in case this Court comes to the conclusion that the impugned order is bad in law and petitioner deserves to be promoted, he cannot be given the arrears of salary from the deemed date of promotion till he is actually posted on the promotional post.
With due respect to the learned counsel, this contention has no legal foundation.
I have gone through the above-referred judgments of the Supreme Court and find that none is applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The observations as noticed above in all the above noticed cases came to be made on a quite different set of circumstances which is not the situation here.
In OP Gupta's case (supra) there was inter se dispute amongst the officials regarding promotion to the higher posts and seniority list on the basis of which promotions were being ordered was held to have not been drawn strictly in accordance with the Rules in force.
It was in the situation held :  "Having regard to the above contentions, the question arises: whether the respondents are entitled to the arrears of salary ?
It is seen that their entitlement to work arises only when they are promoted in accordance with the Rules.
Preparation of the seniority list under Rule 9 is a condition precedent for consideration and then to pass an order of promotion and posting to follow.
Until that exercise is done, the respondents cannot be posted in the promotional posts.
Therefore, their contention that they were willing to work, they were not given the work after posting them in promotional posts has no legal foundation."
... ... ...
In these appeals unless the seniority list is prepared and finalised and promotions are made in accordance with the Rules on the basis of the above seniority list, the question of entitlement to work in the promotional posts does not arise."
... ... ...  13.
The circumstances in the present case however, are different, for the petitioner herein was denied the opportunity to work on the promotional post for no fault of his and he was always willing to work on the promotional post, if promoted.
The petitioner was illegally denied the promotion and thus an opportunity to work by making promotion of a person junior to him and thus after the quashment of that illegal order and deeming him to have been promoted w.e.f.
15111972, his entitlement to work on the promotional post cannot be scuttled even though he may not have actually performed the duties as such.
The petitioner was denied the opportunity to work only because of the impugned order which has now been found to be invalid.
In almost a similar situation, the Supreme Court granted the relief in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, Judgments Today 1991(3) SCT 317.
In the above referred case, the incumbent was willing to work but was denied the opportunity to work for no fault of his.
The aggrieved in the matter before the Supreme Court was kept under suspension during departmental enquiry and the authorities adopted the sealed cover procedure because of the pendency of a criminal case against him.
The criminal case having ended in his favour, the departmental proceedings were held to be invalid and consequently, the Supreme Court held that he was entitled to the arrears of salary.
Similar is the situation in the matter in hand as well.
If the authorities had not promoted respondent No. 3 and instead had promoted the petitioner, a person senior to him available for promotion as Fee Collector, there is no denying the fact that petitioner would have certainly got salary in the pay scale attached to the promotional post and all other ancillary benefits.
14.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is allowed with costs which are quantified at Rs. 3000/-.
Resultantly, the order dated 1781983, Annexure P-8 is quashed and as a consequence thereof, it is ordered that since the petitioner is entitled to be promoted in preference to respondent No. 3, he shall be deemed to have been promoted as a Fee Collector against the post on which respondent No. 3 was promoted by the impugned order dated 1781983, Annexure P-8, retrospectively w.e.f.
15111972.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits like arrears of pay and allowances that might have been admissible to him as if he had been promoted on 15111972 itself.
As a natural consequence, respondent No. 3 shall be deemed to have been reverted to his substantive post w.e.f.
15111972 except that he might be entitled to promotion as such on a post being available after 15111972.
The payment of pay and other allowances made to respondent No. 3 on account of his promotion as Fee Collector by impugned order dated 1781983 shall however not be recovered from him on his reversion to his substantive post as ordered herein.
The amount of costs of Rs. 3000/- shall be payable personally by the Chief Administrator of the respondent-Board, in-office at the relevant time who without first deciding the petitioner's representation dated 1841983 directed for ordering promotion of respondent No. 3, and the costs shall not be paid from the State funds.
The official respondents shall now give effect to this order within two months from the date of receipt by them a copy of the order.
Petition allowed.