CVN Sastry, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner assails the action of respondents in not considering him for appointment as Assistant Lineman/Helper and seeks a declaration that he is entitled for appointment as Assistant Lineman/Helper in the respondent Society in the existing vacancy with all consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner passed Intermediate and he holds a Diploma in Electrical Engineering.
He also successfully completed Apprenticeship Training in the respondent Society for a period of two years.
On completion of the apprenticeship, he sought for absorption in the Society as Assistant Lineman/Helper.
The Board of Directors of the Respondent Society resolved on 2711992 to address the Registrar of Co-operative Societies for approval of the appointment of the petitioner and also one K. Rajendra Reddy.
The Commissioner for Co-operation and Registrar of Co-operative Societies accorded his approval by proceedings, dated 1471992.
The District Co-operative Officer, Karimnagar, by his proceedings dated 28.7.1992 requested the Managing Director of the Society to appoint the two Apprentices i.e., the petitioner herein and K Rajendar Reddy and report compliance.
As no such orders of appointment were issued to him despite representation made by him and also a communication dated 10.2.1994 addressed by the Commissioner for Co-operation and Registrar for Co-operative Societies, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, requesting the Society to inform the action taken in the matter at an early date, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
The stand taken in the counter affidavit is that the writ petition against a Co-operative Society is not maintainable, that though the petitioner completed the Apprenticeship training it is not obligatory on the part of the Society to appoint him, that the petitioner was involved in a theft case for the alleged offence of committing theft of a Motor Car, for which he was prosecuted by the State in CC No. 18 of 1993, on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Sircilla, and as such, he is not fit to be considered for appointment and that there are no vacancies in which he can be appointed.
4.
In support of the above contentions, the learned Counsel for the respondents Sri PV Narayanarao has placed reliance on the following decisions :  Sri Konaseema Co-operative Central Bank Limited, Amalapuram v. VN Seetharama Raju, 1990(2) ALT 171; VVSS Vara Prasada Rao Patnaik v. The Co-operative Central Bank Limited, Vizianagaram, 1996(2) ALT 107; State of Kerala v. KA Balan, 1979(1) SLR 94; Kor Singh v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR 1965 Ker.
90; Delhi Administration v. Sushil Kumar, 1997(1) SLR (SC) 123 : 1997(1) SCT 474 and Judgment in Writ Petition No. 4035 of 89, dated 2011996.
5.
An additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the petitioner along with a copy of bye-laws of the Society to show that the Society comes within the meaning of "State" under Article 12 of the Constitution of India and it is therefore amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In the decision reported in Sri Konaseena Co-operative Central Bank Limited, Amalapuram v. VN Seetharama Raju (supra), a Full Bench of our Court after an exhaustive review of the case law on the subject held that :  "If a particular Co-operative Society can be characterised as a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution (applying the tests evolved by the Supreme Court in that behalf), it would also be an `Authority' within the meaning, and for the purpose, of Article 226 of the Constitution.
In such a situation, an order passed by the Society against the employee in violation of the bye-laws can be corrected by way of a writ petition.
A society which is a State has to act in confirmity with Article 14 and other Articles in Paragraph 3 of the Constitution."
6.
It is further held that :  "Even if a Society cannot be characterised as a `State' within the meaning of Article 12, even so a writ would lie against it to enforce a statutory public duty which an employee is entitled to enforce against the society.
In such a case it is unnecessary to go into the question whether the society is being treated as a `person', or an `authority', within the meaning of Article 226 of the Constitution.
What is material is the nature of the statutory duty placed upon it, and the Court will enforce such statutory public duty."
It is also held in the said judgment that :  "The bye-laws made by a Co-operative Society registered under the Andhra Pradesh Societies Act do not have the force of law.
They are in the nature of contract, terms of contract, between the Society and its employees, or between the Society and its members, as the case may be.
Hence, where a Society cannot be characterised as a `State', the service conditions of its employees, governed by bye-laws, cannot be enforced through a writ petition.
However, in the matter of termination of service of the employees of a Co- operative Society, it will be enforced, in an appropriate case, by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution".
7.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Full Bench, it may not be necessary to consider in detail the other judgments cited by the learned Counsel for both parties on this aspect of the matter.
It is seen from the additional reply affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner and also from the bye-laws of the Soceity, the main object of the Society is to distribute and supply electrical energy to the persons living in the area of its operation which comprises the entire Taluq of Sircilla, consisting of 173 villages.
The Society performs the said function of distribution and supply of electricity as an agent of the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board and the Society is governed by the provisions of Indian Electricity Act and the Electricity Supply Act.
A perusal of the bye-laws of the Society also reveals that there is deep and pervasive control of the State Electricity Board on the Society in its day-to-day functioning in supplying electricity to the consumers.
It is thus clear that the Society is performing an essential public function as an agency or instrumentality of the State and it is under the administrative and supervisory control of the Government and the State Electricity Board.
I am, therefore, of the view that the respondent Society is amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It therefore follows that the contention of the learned Counsel for the respondents that the writ petition is not maintainable has no force.
But the question still remains whether the petitioner is entitled to the relief sought for in the writ petition.
8.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner has successfully completed his apprenticeship.
Sub-section (1) of Section 22 of the Apprentices Act, 1961 provides that it shall not be obligatory on the part of the employer to offer any employment to any apprentice who has completed the period of his apprenticeship training in his establishment, nor shall it be obligatory on the part of the apprentice to accept an employment under the employer.
9.
Sub-section (2) of the above section reads that :  "Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where there is a condition in a contract of apprenticeship that the apprentice shall, after the successful completion of the apprenticeship training, serve the employer, the employer shall, on such completion, be bound to offer suitable employment to the apprentice, and the apprentice shall be bound to serve the employer in that capacity for such period and on such remuneration as may be specified in the contract".
10.
In the instant case, the petitioner executed a contract of Apprenticeship, dated 6.1.1990, in favour of the Society.
Clause (I) of the said contract provides that it shall not be obligatory on the part of the employer to offer any employment to any apprentice who has completed the period of his apprenticeship training in his establishment, nor it shall be obligatory on the part of the apprentice to accept an employment under the employer.
11.
There is no further clause in the said contract as envisaged in sub- section (2) of Section 22.
Therefore; it cannot be said that the petitioner is entitled to claim appointment in the Society as of right.
12.
It is true that the Society has addressed the Registrar of Co- operative Societies seeking approval for the appointment of the petitioner and the Registrar has also granted approval.
The Society has also issued orders of appointment to the other apprentice viz., K Rajendar Reddy.
The approval granted by the Registrar cannot be construed as a direction under Section 116-C of the AP Co-operative Societies Act which is binding on the society.
It cannot be doubted that an agency or instrumentality of a State is expected to act fairly and reasonably and it cannot apply double standards while offering employment in its establishment.
At the same time, the Society can certainly look into the antecedents and character of a person while considering his case for employment.
In this case, the petitioner was admittedly involved in a criminal case for an alleged offence of theft of a motor car.
He was, however, acquitted by the Criminal court.
13.
The learned Counsel for the respondents has contended that the Criminal Court acquitted the petitioner as the witnesses turned hostile and that the Society is not bound by the judgment of the Criminal Court and that it is open to the society to take into consideration the antecedents and character of the petitioner for denying employment to him.
14.
In support of his contention, the learned Counsel placed strong reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Delhi Administration v. Sushil Kumar (Supreme Court) (supra).
In that case, the respondent was provisionally selected for appointment as a constable in the police force subject to verification of character and antecedents.
In the subsequent verification of his antecedents, it came to light that he was tried for offences under Sections 304 and 324 read with Section 34 IPC, but he was acquitted.
However, the appointing authority was of the view that he was not suitable for appointment and accordingly he was denied appointment.
The respondent questioned the same before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed his application on the ground that since he had been discharged/acquitted of the offences, he cannot be denied the right of appointment to the post under the State and accordingly directed the authorities to reconsider his case for appointment.
The Supreme Court, however, set aside the order of the Tribunal, holding that verification of the character and antecedents is one of the important criteria to test whether the candidate is suitable to a post and the appointing authority is entitled to take into consideration the character and antecedents of the person before appointing him.
Even though he was discharged and acquitted of the criminal offence, the same has nothing to do with the consideration of his suitability for such appointment.
15.
The other two judgments cited by the learned Counsel for the respondents, namely, State of Kerala v. KA Balan (supra) and Kor Singh v. State of Jammu and Kashmir (supra) are also to the same effect.
In the instant case, a perusal of the judgment in CC No. 18 of 1993 shows that the Criminal Court came to the conclusion that the evidence brought on record by the prosecution does not show that it is the accused who committed theft of the car in question from the petrol bunk and that there is also no evidence to show that the car was recovered from the possession of the accused.
Under the circumstances, the Criminal Court, was of the view that it has no option but to acquit the accused.
In view of the pronouncement of the Supreme Court cited by the learned Counsel for the respondents, the fact that the petitioner was acquitted of the offences by the Criminal Court does not preclude the employer from taking into consideration his antecedents and character and the fact that he was involved in a criminal case of that nature, to come to the conclusion that he is not fit to be appointed.
It cannot be said that it is not a relevant consideration.
The mere fact that an order of appointment was given to Rajendar Reddy does not confer a right on the petitioner also for appointment when the employer, on consideration of his character and antecedents, found him unsuitable for appointment.
16.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.