VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of R.S.A.
No. 2073 of 1995 filed by the defendants and also the cross-objections No. 7-C of 1996 filed by the plaintiff.
2.
In brief, the facts are that plaintiff, Surinder Singh was appointed as water carrier on 361976 in Zila Parishad, Hoshiarpur.
Vide order dated 1331995 his services were regularised w.e.f.
361978.
The appointment of the plaintiff was on compassionate ground as his father had died during service while working as Water Carrier under Zila Parishad, Hoshiarpur.
It is the case of the plaintiff that on 17.8.1978 when he had gone to join his duties at Veterinary Hospital, Rurki Khas Block, Garhshankar, he was told that his services had already been terminated.
It is also his case that he made an application on 3181997 in addition to earlier request, to the Secretary, Zila Parishad to grant leave of the kind due and permit him to join, but he was told by the Secretary that since his services had been terminated, leave cannot be sanctioned nor he can be allowed to join.
Plaintiff has termed the order of termination as illegal, passed with prejudiced mind and thus, in the suit has prayed that the order of termination be quashed and suit in his favour for declaration that order dated 19121986 terminating his services be declared inoperative against him.
He has also prayed that the defendants be directed to allow him to join duty after sanctioning the leave of the kind due, and further pay the arrears of pay and other allowances admissible under the rules alongwith interest.
On notice of the suit, defendants submitted that plaintiff absented himself from his place of posting on 9121985 without having obtained any leave and remained absent continuously for months together.
Defendants submitted that the plaintiff sent a fake medical certificate to the office where he was posted.
He was asked vide various registered letters to join duties, but the registered letters were received back in original with the report that the plaintiff has gone abroad.
Then publication was made in newspaper namely Daily Ajit, but despite that the plaintiff failed to join duties.
Consequently an enquiry was ordered and on receipt of the report of the Enquiry Officer, services of the plaintiff were terminated.
Defendants thus prayed that the suit be dismissed.
Plaintiff filed replication, reiterating the averments made in the plaint and denying the one made in the written statement.
The trial Court framed the following issues :-  (1) Whether the impugned order dated 30121986 terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, null and void and violation of the service Rules on the grounds alleged in para 9 of the plaint ?
OPP (2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration and consequential relief of permanent and mandatory injunction ?
OPP.
(3) Relief.
Trial Court returned the finding against the plaintiff on both issues and consequently, dismissed the suit.
On appeal by the plaintiff, first appellate court has set aside the order of dismissal by saying that there is a technical defect in the same.
However, defendants have been given liberty to pass fresh order after hearing the plaintiff.
This second appeal is by the defendants against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court.
In the cross-objections No. 7-C of 1996, the finding of the first appellate Court in regard to enquiry having been held in accordance with law and rules of natural justice, is being challenged.
According to the plaintiff, as submitted in the cross-objections, no proper enquiry was held against him as no notice was served on him.
It has also been stated by the plaintiff that the order terminating his services is also silent about the cause and the grounds that weighed with the Punishing Authority.
Plaintiff, thus, has termed the order of dismissal as vague and cryptic.
3.
Learned counsel for the defendants, has urged that the findings of the first appellate Court are self-contradictory.
He submitted that in para 13 of the judgment, first appellate Court has observed that when an employee abandons the job, then no further enquiry is necessary as the fact stands proved and termination of such an employee cannot be saved, but in para 14, the order of termination has been set aside by observing that the order being retrospective is bad in law and cannot be sustained.
Counsel has submitted that the first appellate Court has wrongly interpreted and misapplied the facts of the present case.
Against this, counsel for the plaintiff has argued that the order of dismissal cannot be passed with retrospective effect and so, no interference is called for as far as this part of the judgment of first appellate Court is concerned.
In regard to the finding of the Courts below that proper enquiry was held against the plaintiff, counsel has contended that mere issuance of notice to the plaintiff indicating the nature of the allegations levelled against him, cannot be treated as sufficient compliance of the requirement of natural justice.
In this regard, he has cited judgments in Vidya Rani v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) RSJ 336 and Narinder Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) RSJ 337 : 1995(4) SCT 222 (P&H).
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, I am of the view that the appeal filed by the defendants deserves to be allowed and the cross-objections filed by the plaintiff being without any merit deserve to be dismissed.
It is not in dispute that plaintiff while in employment of Zila Parishad had been posted at Veterinary Hospital, Rurki Khas Block, Garhshankar.
He absented himself from duty 9121985.
The Incharge of the Veterinary Hospital vide letter dated 341984 informed the Zila Parishad that the plaintiff has left the country and is absent from duty since 9121985 without having obtained any leave.
The Secretary, Zila Parishad, sent registered letter to the plaintiff calling upon him to join duties within a week from the receipt of the notice, but the notice was received back unserved.
Another registered notice was sent to the plaintiff on 361986 but the same too came back undelivered.
On finding that the plaintiff despite the sending of registered notices has not joined duties, the Zila Parishad made the following publication on 2771986 in newspaper, Daily Ajit :  ``Sh. Surinder Singh, Water Carrier, son of Sh. Maghar Singh resident of village and post office Seekri, District Hoshiarpur, is wilfully absent from duty since 9121985.
He was directed to join duty vide this office letters Nos. 1990 dated 30.4.1986 and 2546 dated 361986.
The said two letters were sent to the official through Registered A.D.
In spite of the said letters, neither he reported on duty nor he sent any intimation regarding his unauthorised absence.
The Registered A.Ds.
sent to his residential address have been received back with the following remarks of the postal authorities :- ``The official has left without any information.
Hence, the same is returned undelivered.''
``Again on 7.6.1986, the registered letter received back with the report ``the official has gone abroad.''
Sh. Surinder Singh, Water Carrier is informed through this notice to join his duty within 15 days from the publication of this notice and explain the reasons for his wilful unauthorised absence from duty, failing which it will be assumed that he is no more interested to serve in the Zila Parishad and further necessary action will be taken against him, according to the rules without giving him any other intimation/reference.Administrator, Zila Parishad,Hoshiarpur.''
Even after the publication, plaintiff failed to join duties.
He was charge-sheeted on 191986 and the charge-sheet was sent vide registered A.D. post which came back unserved.
The Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry, who had been appointed as Enquiry Officer, held the enquiry and submitted his report to the Secretary, Zila Parishad.
The Secretary, Zila Parishad, put up the note before the Administrator, Zila Parishad, who after going through the record including the report of the Enquiry Officer, terminated the services of the plaintiff w.e.f.
9121985.
Notice regarding termination of his services was also published in the newspaper, Daily Ajit, on 12121987.
The civil suit was filed on 12111987.
I fail to understand as to what else was required to be done by the defendants.
In Vidya Rani's and Narinder Kumar's cases (supra), termination order was set aside as the procedure of enquiry was not followed.
In the present case, as noticed above, not only the plaintiff was asked time and again by the employer to join duties, but on his failure to do so, a charge-sheet was sent for giving opportunity to the plaintiff to file reply.
Enquiry Officer was appointed who also sent a notice to the plaintiff to appear before him and on plaintiff's failure in this regard, the Enquiry Officer had no alternative but to submit his report.
In my view, the defendants have not committed any illegality in conducting the enquiry against the plaintiff.
In fact the enquiry has been held against the plaintiff in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Consequently, there is no merit in the contention of counsel for the plaintiff that the enquiry was not held in accordance with law or principles of natural justice.
5.
The learned first appellate Court while setting aside the order terminating services of plaintiff on the technical ground, recorded finding as under :  ``I have gone through the contention of the counsel for the appellant.
As regards the Punjabi translation of the word `dismissal' is concerned, there can be some mistake to use the word `Barkhasht or Hataia Jana' in place of Khatam but the mistake in the use of word `Khatam' cannot be held to have any legal implication but in this case, order with retrospective effect should not have been passed.
Therefore, there is technical defect in the order.
Therefore, in view of the observation in 1987 Lab IC 505 I allow the appeal partly and order dated 30121986 is set aside and direct the Department to hold fresh inquiry against the plaintiff/appellant and to pass fresh order after hearing him.''
The finding recorded by the learned first appellate Court is not sustainable.
The order terminating the services is in two parts : (1) terminating the services; and (2) giving retrospective effect to the order from the date plaintiff absented himself.
Assuming that the second part giving retrospective effect to the order is invalid on the ground that an order of termination cannot be passed with retrospective effect, there is no reason why the other part of the order, namely, terminating the services from the date such an order was made, should not be held to be valid.
In this regard, reference be made to judgment of the Supreme Court in R Jeeratnam v. State of Madras, 1967 SLR 657.
In the case before the Supreme Court, civil servant was suspended pending enquiry into the charges against him and subsequently dismissed with effect from the date of his suspension.
Such an order in substance was termed as an order of dismissal from the date of the order with the super-added direction that the order should operate retrospectively from the date of suspension of the civil servant concerned.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the two parts of the order are clearly severable.
Assuming that the second part, giving retrospective effect to the order was invalid, there was no reason why the first part of the order, namely, dismissal as from the date when such order was made, could not be given the fullest effect.
Their Lordships further held that the court, no doubt, cannot pass a new order of dismissal, but surely it can give effect to the valid and severable part of the order.
In this case too, the order can be given effect to from the date it was passed.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed, judgment and decree of the first appellate Court is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored, with no order as to costs.
Consequently, the cross-objection preferred by the plaintiff shall stand dismissed.
Appeal allowed.