HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner-appellant was appointed as a Technical Assistant by direct recruitment in the Department of Economic and Statistical Organisation in March 1964.
She was promoted to the post of a Research Assistant/District Statistical Officer on 5th April, 1968 against an extisting vacancy in the pay scale of Rs. 250-600 and her promotion was also notified in the Punjab Government Gazette dated 1751968 (Exhibit P1).
This appointment was made w.e.f.
the afternoon of 6th April, 1968.
The promotion of the appellant was also subject to undergoing probation for one year and that too was completed vide order Exhibit P2 dated 29th August, 1969.
All the private respondents were directly recruited as Research Officers vide order dated 9th June, 1963.
A seniority list was framed by the department in terms of the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (States Service Class III) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the 'original rules') wherein the appellant was shown as junior to the respondents.
This tentative seniority list was challenged in this Court by a number of persons aggrieved thereby and the writ petitions were eventually disposed of with a direction that the department would finalise the seniority list in terms of the Rules.
The competent authority thereafter heard the affected parties and reonotified a final seniority list dated 16th September, 1983 which maintained the seniority as given in the tentative seniority list.
Aggrieved thereby the plaintiff-appellant has filed this suit claiming that this seniority list was erroneous on the ground that her seniority as Research Officer w.e.f.
6th April, 1968 had not been accepted and she was entitled to count her service with effect from that date.
The defendant-respondents filed their replies in which the claim of the plaintiff was denied and it was stated that the period of service of the plaintiff-appellant w.e.f.
6th April, 1968 to 16th June, 1968 had been on an ad hoc basis and it was only on 19th June, 1968 that she had been inducted against a regular vacancy, with the result that the period from 6th April, 1968 to 16th June, 1968 could not be granted towards her seniority.
It was accordingly pleaded that the seniority list keeping her junior to the private respondents was in order.
2.
On the pleadings of the parties, the trial Court raised the following issues :-  1.
Whether the impugned seniority list made final by the order dated 1691983 is illegal, unconstitutional, void and not binding on the plaintiff as claimed in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is senior to defendant Nos. 2 to 6, if so, to what effect ?
OPP.
3.
What is the effect of the writ petition filed by defendant No. 2 in the Hon'ble High Court on the present suit ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP.
5.
Relief.
3.
The trial Court took up issue Nos. 1, 2 and 4 together and recorded its finding in favour of the plaintiff and held that the final seniority list dated 16th September, 1983 had been wrongly framed and the suit was accordingly decreed.
The State of Punjab thereafter filed an appeal before the first Appellate Court, which came to the conclusion that the finding of the trial Court on issue Nos. 1, 2, and 4 was wrong as the promotion of the plaintiff w.e.f.
6th April, 1968 to 16th June, 1968 had been only on a provisional basis and not against a regular sanctioned post and, as such, her seniority had to be determined w.e.f.
19th June, 1968 only.
The appeal was accordingly allowed.
Hence this second appeal.
4.
It has been argued by Miss Nidhi Gupta appearing in support of the appeal that the three issues that had been decided by the first appellate Court against the appellant were on an erroneous appreciation of the law and facts and thus could not be sustained.
In this connection, she has pointed out that in Exhibit P1 which was the extract of the Punjab Government Gazette dated 17th May, 1968 notifying the appointment of the appellant as a Research Officer, it had been clearly mentioned that she was being appointed as such against an existing vacancy.
She has then referred to Exhibit P8 which is a report from the department to the government that the appellant had assumed charge on the post of Research Officer on the forenoon of 6th April, 1968 against an existing vacant post of Research Officer sanctioned by the Punjab Government Planning Department Memo No. 1355-pg-Pb.
68/855 dated 21st March, 1968.
She has also relied on Exhibit P3 to show that the provisional promotion of the appellant (referred to herein) to the post of Research Officer was pending the approval of the Public Service Commission and it could not be taken to mean that it was provisional because it was against an ad hoc or temporary arrangement.
She has also pointed out that it was the admitted case that this approval had subsequently been received.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have considered the arguments of the appellant's counsel and find merit in them.
As per the exhibits mentioned above the appointment of the appellant had been made against a duly sanctioned post of a Research Officer and the inferences drawn by the lower appellate Court to the contrary are therefore based on no evidence.
6.
It has been additionally argued by Miss Gupta that the lower appellate Court was wrong when it found that the original Rules as amended in 1984 were applicable.
She has pointed out that the amendment was made on 27th March, 1984 in Rule 10 to the detriment of the appellant inasmuch as a note was incorporated which provided that the seniority of a person appointed on a purely ad hoc basis was to be determined from the date when such person was regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointment and that this note could not be applied to the case of the appellant as her promotion had been made in 1968 and even the final seniority list published on 16th September, 1983.
7.
I have considered this argument of the learned counsel and find that there is merit in it.
Rule 10 of the Original Rules and amendment is reproduced below :-  ORIGINAL RULES "The seniority interse of the members of the service shall be determined separately for each of the sections shown in Appendix `A' to these rules by the date of their continuous appointment to a post in that very section, provided that in the case members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of a subsequent selection.
Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :-  a) a member appointed by direct recruitment shall be senior to a member appointed otherwise; b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a person appointed by transfer; c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or transfer seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointment from which they were promoted or transferred; and  d) In the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same then by their length of service in those appointments and if the length of such service is the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Note :- In the case of members whose period of probation extended under rule 9, the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
AMENDED RULES  "The seniority inter se of members of the service in each cadre shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in that cadre of the service.
Provided that in the case of members requited by direct appointment who join within the period specified in the order of appointment or within such period as may from time to time be extended by the appointing authority subject to a maximum of four months from the date of order of appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission or other recruiting authority of the Govt. as the case may be shall not be disturbed :  Provided further that in case a candidate is permitted to join the service after the expiry of the said period of four months in consultation with the commission or other recuiting authority, as the case may be, his seniority shall be determined from the date he joins the services.
Provided further that in case any candidate of the next selection has joined the service before the candidate referred to in the preceding proviso joins, the candidate so referred shall be placed below all the candidates of the next selection who join within the time specified in the first provision ; Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date their seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) A member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a members appointed otherwise; (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer; (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a members who was drawing a higher rate of pay in the previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by their length of service in those appointments and if the length of such service is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member".
Note :- Seniority of members appointed on purely provisional basis shall be determined as and when they are regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointment. ''
8.
It will, therefore, be seen that under the original and the amended Rules, the basis of determining of members of the service was virtually the same but by the amendment of 1984, a note (reproduced immediately above) has been added on.
Obviously this note could not be applied to promotion made in 1968.
It will thus be clear that entire length of the appellant's service that is from 6th April, 1968 on the post of Research Officer was to be taken into account for the purpose of determining her seniority.
9.
Reliance has been placed by the lower appellate Court on the judgment in Daljit Singh v. State of Punjab and Haryana, 1987(4) S.L.R.
603 which also pertained to a challenge to the seniority list impugned in the present suit.
That challenge was on the basis of the quota vis-a-vis the promotees and direct recruits and has no bearing in this case.
10.
This appeal is accordingly allowed.
The order of the lower Appellate Court is set aside whereas the judgment and decree of the trial Court is restored.
No order as to costs.