VS Aggarwal, J - In this bunch of writ petitions namely CWP Nos. 18600 of 1991, 4728 of 1989, 13785 of 1990, 1857 of 1995, 7007 of 1990, 10154 of 1990 and 10940 of 1991 the common question relates to the scope of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964 (hereinafter described as `the Rules'), Government Instructions vis-a-vis the ambit of promotion in the Service of Engineers called the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I, P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) with respect to the General category candidates and Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes is in controversy.
All the petitioners are presently working in the cadre posts of the Rules mentioned above.
2.
To appreciate the facts in controversy, reference to the two petitions, one filed by the General category officers and the other by an officer of the Scheduled Caste would make the position clear.
In Civil Writ petition No. 18600 of 1991, the petitioners were initially appointed by way of direct recruitment to the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II (Irrigation Branch).
They were allowed promotion to Class I service against the rank of Executive Engineer.
The petitioners are all members of general category.
At the time when they filed the petition, they had still further been promoted to the rank of Superintending Engineer.
They claim that they were senior to respondent No. 2 (Kartar Chand).
Respondent No. 2 was promoted to Class I service against the rank of Executive Engineer on 2951974, that is to say after all the petitioners.
Petitioners claim that respondent No. 2 has been allowed current duty charge against the post of Chief Engineer.
The said order is challenged to be illegal alleging that respondent No. 2 cannot claim reservation for purpose of appointment to the post of Chief Engineer.
There is no reservation contemplated under the Rules for members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
In any case it is contended that the instructions issued by the State of Punjab dated 451974 had envisaged only promotion within the service in case of the petitioners.
The petitioners were senior to respondent No. 2, and therefore, had a claim to be considered and appointed to the post of Chief Engineer.
A plea has also been raised that the Class I service constitutes a single cadre.
There could not be promotion for members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes within the same service.
3.
Civil Writ Petition No. 4728 of 1989 has been filed by Shri SK Bains.
He seeks a direction for quashing the order whereby respondent Nos. 2 to 4 had been promoted as Chief Engineers.
The petitioner herein is a member of the Scheduled Caste and he challenges the promotion of the General category officers.
The case of the petitioner herein is that he was recruited directly to P.W.D., Irrigation and Power in December, 1965.
It was Class II Service.
On 2951974 he was promoted to the rank of Executive Engineer which was a Class I service under the Rules.
Thereafter he was promoted as Superintending Engineer.
He was promoted as Superintending Engineer before respondents 2 to 5 and thus became senior to them.
He should have been promoted to the post of Chief Engineer.
4.
The petition as such has been contested by the State of Punjab.
It is denied that petitioner was senior to respondents 2 to 5.
As per the reply filed by the State of Punjab, the seniority of a member of the service is to be determined in accordance with Rule 12 of the Rules.
As per the said rule inter-se seniority of the members of the service is to be determined by a ``Year of Allotment''.
The officers with earlier years of allotment would be senior to those of a later year.
The officer who starts officiating earlier, will be senior to officer who officiates later.
There is one single seniority list for all members of the service.
The Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers are all members of Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I Service (for short `PSE Class I Service').
The seniority list is prepared on basis of the year of allotment as Executive Engineer.
The question of separate seniority being maintained for Superintending Engineers or Chief Engineers did not arise.
The year of allotment of the petitioner was stated to be 1974 while that of respondents 2, 3 and 4 to be 1963 and that of respondent No. 5 it is 1964.
It is denied that petitioner had a right to be considered to the post of Chief Engineer because he was not senior to respondents 2 to 5.
Plea has also been raised that out of 14 posts of Chief Engineers, 2 members of the Scheduled castes are already in position and any further promotion to a member of the Schedules Caste would be over and above the quota of 14 per cent prescribed for the said category.
5.
Separate reply was filed by respondent No. 4.
His contention was also that there are 14 posts of Chief Engineers.
Out of them two persons who are members of the Scheduled Castes were promoted against the reserved posts.
There could not be further promotion against the said reserved posts in excess of the quota.
It was denied that petitioner was senior to respondents 2 to 5 or had a right to be considered for the post of Chief Engineer.
6.
As is apparent from the resume of the facts given above, the main groups of actors in the petitions are the General category officers and those of the Scheduled Castes.
They are relying on the Rules so as to bring home a fact to their advantage.
Consequently, it becomes necessary to refer to the relevant rules that were framed in the year 1964.
Rule 5 of the said Rules reads :-  ``5.
Recruitment to service.
- (1) Recruitment to the service shall be made by Government by any one or more of the following methods :- (a) by direct appointment; (b) by transfer of an officer already in Class I service of the Government of India or of a State Government; (c) by promotion from Class II Service.
(2) Recruitment to the Service shall be so regulated that the number of posts filled by promotion from Class II service shall not exceed seventy-five per cent of the number of posts in the service, excluding the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers for the first ten years from the date of commencement of these rules and thereafter shall not exceed fifty per cent of the number of posts in the service excluding the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers:  Provided that in case an adequate number of Assistant Executive Engineers, who are eligible and considered fit for promotion, are not available, the actual percentage of officers promoted from Class II Service, may be larger than seventy-five per cent or of fifty per cent, as the case may be.
(3) In the service as constituted immediately after the commencement of these rules, it shall be assumed that the number recruited by promotion from Class II Service is seventy-five per cent of the senior posts in the service, and future recruitment shall be based on this assumption.
(4) All first direct appointments to the Service shall be to the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers.
(5) An officer promoted from Class II Service shall be recruited to the post of Executive Engineer.
(6) Appointment by transfer of an officer will normally be made to the rank of Executive Engineer.
(7) No person -  (a) who is not a substantive member of the P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch, Class I Service on the date of enforcement of these rules; or (b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the Service as provided in rule 23 read with Appendix F; shall hold the post of Executive Engineer, or above, even in an officiating capacity, unless he is declared, within a period of three months from the date of enforcement of these rules, as suitable for appointment to the Service under the provisions of these rules.
Perusal of the said Rules shows that recruitment to the service is made from three sources, namely direct appointment or by transfer of an officer already in Class I Service of the Government of India or of a State Government.
The third source which is relevant in the present petitions is by promotion from Class II Service.
Admittedly, all the petitioners and the respondents were earlier in Class II service in the State of Punjab.
They were promoted to the service as Executive Engineers which is Class I Service.
There is no controversy that they all had completed their relevant period under Class I Service and are substantively members of the same.
In this process they are all holding cadre posts as defined in Rule 2(3) of the Rules and had been appointed to the service in terms of Rule 2(1) of the Rules.
Rule 2(12) defines the expression ``member of the service.''
It reads :-  ``2(12) ``member of the service'' means an Officer appointed substantively to a cadre post, and includes : (a) in the case of a direct appointment an officer on probation, or such an officer who, having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post; (b) in the case of an appointment by transfer, an officer who is on probation or who, having successfully completed his probation awaits appointment to a cadre post, provided such officer does not have a lien on a substantive post in any Government Department; (c) in the case of an appointment by promotion, an officer on probation or such an officer who having successfully completed his probation awaits appointment to a cadre post.
Explanation :- It is not necessary that member of the service shall at any given time be actually doing the work of a cadre post.
He may be working in an ex-cadre post for reasons of administrative convenience.
Conversely, an officer officiating against an ex-cadre post may in fact perform the duties of a cadre post.''
Since all the private parties to the present petitions were promoted from Class II service, there is no dispute that they had completed their probation period and were members of the service as already mentioned above.
7.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the General candidates alleged that under the Rules, there is no quota fixed for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and that it is one Cadre and promotion is within the service.
The same has to be effected as per the seniority.
In support of his argument, he referred to the relevant Rules to urge that specifically there is no reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
To appreciate the said controversy, necessarily one has to dwell on the relevant rules.
Rule 8 deals with appointment by promotion to the service.
It reads :-  ``8.
Appointment by promotion.
- (1) A committee consisting of the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend, any other member of the Commission representing it, the Secretary, P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) and the Chief Engineer, Punjab, P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch, shall be constituted.
(2) The Chairman or the member of the Commission, as the case may be, shall preside over the meetings of the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year, and consider the cases of all eligible officers for promotion to the senior scale of the Service, as on the first day of January of that year.
(4) The Committee shall prepare a list of officers suitable for promotion to the senior scale of the Service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
(5) The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Class II Service : Provided that any junior officer, who in the opinion of the Committee is of exceptional merit and suitability may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him.
(6) The list shall be prepared every year.
(7) If in the process of preparing the list it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officers and may record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
(8) The list prepared in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government along with -  (i) the record of all officers included in the list ; (ii) records of all officers proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee; (iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any officer; (iv) the observations, if any, of the State Government on the recommendations of the Committee.
(9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee along with other documents received from the State Government and, unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
(10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from Government, the Commission shall make the changes it proposes and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government.
(11) Appointments to the service shall be made by Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
(12) Appointment by promotion may be made to an ex-cadre post or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list prepared under this rule.''
It is apparent from aforesaid that names of the officers included in the list have to be arranged in the order of seniority except only where a junior officer which in the opinion of the committee is of exceptional merit.
He may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of the officers senior to him.
The list has to be prepared every year.
Rule 9 in this regard deals with the promotion within the service and unfolds itself in the following words :-  9.
Promotion within Service .
- (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) members of the Service shall be eligible for promotion to any of the posts in the Service, namely, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers :  Provided that a member of the Service, in whose case the qualifications mentioned in clause (a) of rule 6 have been waived, shall not be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer or above, till he has acquired the necessary qualification.
Explanation .
- Once an officer has been appointed a member of the Service, his promotion within it from one rank to another shall be regarded as promotion within the same cadre.
(2) Promotions shall be made by selection on the basis of merit and suitability in all respects and no member of the Service shall have any claim to such promotion as a matter of right or mere seniority.
(3) A member of the Service shall not be eligible for promotion to the rank of -  (a) Executive Engineer unless he has rendered five years service as an Assistant Executive Engineer; Provided that an officer who has rendered six years or more service as an Assistant Executive Engineer shall, unless he is considered unsuitable for promotion, be given preference for such promotion over an eligible Class II Officer; (b) Superintending Engineer, unless he has rendered seven years service as an Executive Engineer; (c) Chief Engineer, unless he has rendered three years service as Superintending Engineer; Provided that, if it appears to be necessary to promote an officer in public interest, the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, either generally for a specified period or in any individual case reduce the periods specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) to such extent as it may deem proper.
Special attention was drawn towards the explanation of Rule 9(1) of the Rules.
It was urged that once an officer had been appointed as a member of the Service, his promotion within it from one rank to another has to be recorded as promotion within the same cadre and that this shows in the absence of anything to the contrary that there is no reservation provided within the said rules.
It governs both the petitioners and the respondents.
8.
But we are afraid, the said contention is totally devoid of any merit.
The rules have to be read as a whole.
In order to determine if rules exclude promotions of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes within the Service, the manner in which the Rules have been drafted and the plain language has to be considered.
Thereafter a decision can be arrived at as to if there is explicit or implicit exclusion of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes in promotion within the service.
In the present case as noted above, the rules in fact do not exclude, reservation of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes to posts within the service.
There is no reference of such an exclusion.
That will not imply that instructions could not be issued in this regard.
If there was a specific rule which excluded reservation of promotion within the service by reservation of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, one could urge to that effect.
But when there is no explicit or implicit exclusion of promotion within the service by reservation, nothing restricts the Government from issuing relevant instructions as would be noticed hereinafter.
On the strength of Rule 9(1) (explanation) it cannot, therefore, be held that no promotion has been prescribed within the service by reservation.
9.
In that even it had been argued that under Rule 7 of the said Rules, in case of direct appointments reservation has been mentioned of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
There is no such reservation for promotion within the service thereafter.
In the view of the learned counsel for general category petitioners, this excludes reservation for promotion in service to the posts of Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers.
Sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 7 read :-  ``7(1).
A candidate for direct appointment shall not be less than 20 years and more than 25 years of age on or before the first day of August next preceding the last date of submission of applications to the Commission; Provided that -  (a) in the case of candidates who are displaced persons and in whose case the age limit for admission to Engineering College had been relaxed, and in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes, the upper age limit shall be such as may be fixed by Government from time to time.
(b) in the case of candidates possessing the requisite qualifications who are already in the service of the State Government, the upper age limit shall be 30 years; (2) The selection of candidates, including those belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, shall be made by the Commission, after holding a competitive examination, the syllabus for which shall be such as may be prescribed by Government from time to time.
The Commission shall recommend the required number of candidates after arranging their names in the order of merit and indicating which out of them belong to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes: Provided that a candidate shall not be considered qualified for appointment, unless he obtains not less than forty per cent marks in each subject and also not less than fifty per cent marks in the aggregate, and no candidate who does not obtain the qualifying marks shall be called for interview by the Commission : Provided further that where a vacancy has been reserved for a person belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, the candidate belonging to a Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe or a Backward Class, who secures the highest marks in the aggregate and has qualified for an appointment shall be selected irrespective of his position with respect to the other candidates.''
Certainly in case of direct appointments, there is a specific mention of selection of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
In case of further promotions within the service, the rules indeed are silent.
But the State can certainly issue instructions and supplement the rules when they are silent.
We seek support in coming to this conclusion from the majority view in the well-known decision of Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992(6) SLR 321 : 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC).
Relying on the earlier decision of the Supreme Court in the case Comptroller and Auditor General of India v. Mohan Lal Mehrotra, 1990(2) SCC 1 : 1991(3) SCT 581 (SC), it was held that where rules are silent, the Government can issue instructions to matters which are not covered by the Rules.
In paragraph 104, the Court held :-  ``104.
Be that as it may, there is yet another reason why we cannot agree that the impugned Memorandums are not effective and enforceable the moment they are issued.
It is well settled by the decisions of this court that the appropriate government is empowered to prescribe the conditions of service of its employees by an executive order in the absence of the rules made under the proviso to Article 309.
It is further held by this court that even where Rules under the proviso to Article 309 are made, the government can issue orders/instructions with respect to matters upon which the Rules are silent.
(See Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1968(1) SCR 111).
This view has been reiterated in a recent decision of this court in Comptroller and Auditor General v. Mohanlal Mehrotra, 1990(2) SCC 1 : 1991(3) SCT 581 (SC) wherein it is held : ``The High Court is not right in stating that there cannot be an administrative order directing reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as it would alter the statutory rules in force.
The rules do not provide for any reservation.
In fact it is silent on the subject of reservation.
The Government could direct the reservation by executive orders.
The administrative orders cannot be issued in contravention of the statutory rules but it could be issued to supplement the statutory rules (See the observations in Santram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1968 I SCR 111 : AIR 1967 SC 1910).
In fact similar circulars were issued by the Railway Board introducing reservations for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the Railway Services both for selection and non-selection categories of posts.
They were issued to implement the policy of the Central Government and they have been upheld by this court in Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railways) v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCC 246 : AIR 1981 SC 298.''
The findings recorded above provide the answer to the argument of the learned counsel for general candidates and it follows from above the Government can issue instructions when rules were silent about reservation in the posts within the service.
10.
Instructions had been issued by the Government of Punjab on 451974.
The same read :-  ``In continuation of Punjab Government circular letter No. 1411-SEI-74/7421 dated 26th April, 1974, I am directed to refer to the subject noted above and to say that at present reservations for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes is applicable in promotions to and within class III and IV only.
Since these Castes/Classes are poorly represented in various higher services in the State Government, it has been under the active consideration of the State Government that some reservation in promotion within higher services as well should be made for them.
It has now been decided that except in the case of all India Services, 16 per cent of the posts to be filled by promotion to or within class I and II services under the State Government should be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward classes (14% for members of Scheduled Castes and 2% for members of Backward Classes) subject to the following conditions.
(a) the persons to be considered must possess the minimum necessary qualifications, and  (b) they should have satisfactory record of service.
2.
In a lot of 100 vacancies occurring from time to time, those falling at serial Nos. mentioned below should be treated as reserved for the members of Scheduled castes.
1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87, 94 and so on.
Vacancies falling at serial Number 26 and 76 should be treated as reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
The reservation prescribed shall be given effect to in accordance with a roster to be maintained in each department.
The roster will be implemented in the form of running account from year to year.
4.
Reservation in promotion for scheduled castes and backward classes in Class III and IV services should continue to be followed as laid down in Punjab Government circular letters issued from time to time.
5.
The above instructions will take effect from the 6th March, 1974 and vacancies arising in class I and II services under the State Governments existing on arising after the 6th March, 1973 should be filled up in accordance with these instructions.
6.
The receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged.''
These instructions recite that earlier, there was reservation for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes in promotion to and within Class III and IV only.
But thereafter it was decided that except in case of All India Services, 16% of posts were to be filled up by promotion to or within Class I and III Services under the State.
11.
Learned counsel for the General candidates urged that while in case of promotions to Class III and IV, the expression used is ``promotion to and within'' but in case of posts to be filled up by promotion to Classes I and II, the expression used is ``promotion to or within Classes I and II services''.
In his opinion, the expression ``or'' is significant and in case of Class II officers who have already been promoted to Class I Service on basis of reservation, there would be no further reservation.
12.
In our considered opinion, the said argument which was so much thought of by the learned counsel is devoid of any merit.
While interpreting the said instructions, the true meaning and scope can only be understood, keeping in view the intention behind it.
With the issuing of these instructions, reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes was provided to the posts to be filled up by promotion to or within Classes I and II Services under the State.
It does not restrict promotion at one time only.
If this meaning as urged by the counsel for the General candidates is accepted, the whole of the instructions would become redundant.
If the intention was otherwise, it would have been so stated specifically.
The expression `or' in the context necessarily has to be read as `and'.
This is so because the word `and' is normally conjunctive and the word `or' is disjunctive.
But some time they are read as vice versa to give effect to the manifest intention.
Scrulton J in Green v. Premir Glynr., 1928(1) KB page 561 observed :-  ``You do not sometimes read `and' in statute, but you do not do it unless you are obliged because `or' does not generally mean `'and'; and `and' does not generally mean `or'.''
In Maxwell's Interpretation of Statutes 9th Edition Page 299 in dealing with conjunctives `or' and `and', it is said :-  ``To carry out the intention of the legislature, `and', it is occasionally necessary to read conjunctives `or' and `and', one for the other.''
13.
In the absence of the exclusion of promotion by reservation within the service, it must follow that by virtue of the instructions issued in the year 1974, the members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes could claim promotion within the service as provided in the instructions.
The plain reading would reveal that promotion by reservation to members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes to or within the service mean, as the case would be.
Therefore, this particular plea necessarily must fail.
14.
On behalf of the members of the Scheduled Castes, the learned counsel contended that his client had been promoted as Superintending Engineer before some of the general candidates and, therefore, he is senior and has a better right to be considered for the post of Chief Engineer.
There is no controversy in this regard that within the service, the members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes at times were promoted earlier than the General candidates who otherwise were senior to the officers who were members of the Scheduled Castes.
15.
This naughty question becomes easier because of rule 12 of the Rules and also by judicial pronouncements of the Supreme Court.
Rule 12 deals with the question of seniority.
Sub-rules (1), (2), (3), (5), (6) and (9) of Rule 12 are relevant and read :-  ``12(1).
Except as provided in sub-rules (8) and (10) of this rule relating to officers appointed by transfer, and except to the extent provided in these rules, no members of the Service shall, for purposes of determining seniority in the Service, enjoy the benefit of any period of service rendered by him in any other employment prior to his appointment to the service.
(2) The seniority of a member of the Service shall be determined by the ``year of allotment'', officers with an earlier year of allotment being senior to those of a later year : Provided that if under the provisions of the proviso to sub-rule (3) below a member of the Service has had added to his year of allotment the figure half, he shall be considered junior to all members who do not have such an addition to their year of allotment.
Example - All officers allotted the year 1952 shall be senior to those allotted the year 1953, and so on.
An officer allotted the year 1952 shall be junior to all officers allotted the year 1952 but shall be senior to officers allotted the year 1953.
(3) Assistant Executive Engineers.
- The year of allotment of a member appointed to the Service as an Assistant Executive Engineer shall be the calendar year in which the order of appointment has been issued by Government :  Provided that where the period of probation of an officer has been extended, the order of appointment shall be deemed to have issued on a date determined by adding to the original date, the extended period of probation.
If the resulting date is within the same calendar year, the officer shall be deemed to have been appointed in that year with the fraction half added to it.
If the resulting date falls in a subsequent Calendar year, the year of allotment shall be such subsequent year.
(5) Executive Engineers and above .
- The year of allotment of a member of the Service promoted to the post of Executive Engineer from that of Assistant Executive Engineer in the Service shall continue to be the year allotted to him as Assistant Executive Engineer under the provisions of sub- rule (3) above.
Explanation.
- Such an officer may be superseded for promotion to higher rank but will continue to retain his seniority in the Service as initially fixed both in regard to the year of allotment and his position in it in regard to other officers similarly recruited.''
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (7) and (8) below the year of allotment of an officer who is initially appointed to the service as Executive Engineer, shall be the same as that of the juniormost officer in the Service whether officiating or confirmed as Executive Engineer before the former's appointment.
Explanation.
- If an officer appointed to the Service as officiating Executive Engineer, later on reverts from that post and is again promoted to it, for purposes of this rules, the year of allotment shall be determined taking into consideration the date of his latest appointment on the post of the Executive Engineer.
(9) The seniority of members of the Service having the same year of allotment shall be determined by the date of continuous officiating service on the post of Executive Engineer, the officer who starts officiating earlier being senior to an officer who starts officiating later :  Provided that -  (a) the date of continuous officiating service of such a member of the Service, whose period of probation has been extended, shall be the date determined for the purposes of seniority in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (7) or the second proviso to sub-rule (8) as the case may be; (b) in regard to the seniority of an officer, who, for any administrative reason or for any other cause, which Government may consider sufficient, is unable to join his appointment as Executive Engineer or on a post of higher rank in the sequence in which he should have joined, Government may pass an order that his seniority shall not be affected and he shall be deemed to have joined in the sequence in which he should have joined and for this purpose Government shall, on an ad-hoc basis, determine the date on which he shall be deemed to have joined his appointment; (c) This sub-rule shall not have the effect of reducing the seniority or changing the year of allotment of a member of the Service who is passed over for promotion.
He shall continue to have the year of allotment already fixed under these rules and shall - (i) if he is promoted at a subsequent date, be placed at the bottom of the year of allotment; or  (ii) if within that year there is another officer or officers who were with him in the lower rank from which he was initially not promoted continue his place amongst them as it was in the lower rank.''
Perusal of the above-quoted rules shows without any pale of controversy that seniority of members of the service has to be determined by the year of allotment.
The officers who are allotted earlier year of allotment, would be senior to those who are allotted later year of allotment.
Sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 deals with the year of allotment of members appointed to the service as Assistant Executive Engineers and sub-rule (5) deals with the year of allotment of a member of the service promoted to the post of Executive Engineer from that of the Assistant Executive Engineer.
It clearly specifies that a year of allotment of a member of the Service promoted to the post of Executive Engineer shall continue to be the year allotted to him as Assistant Executive Engineer.
The explanation clarifies that such an officer may be superseded for promotion to higher rank.
But he will continue to retain his seniority in the service as initially fixed.
This is further clarified by sub-rule (9) of Rule 12 because under clause (c) of the proviso of sub-rule (9) of Rule 12, it has been clarified that a person will not be reduced in seniority if he has passed over any promotion.
The reading of the Rules reveal that it is one service and the seniority will not be disturbed merely because if incidently a junior person is promoted earlier.
In the present case in hand because of the policy of reservation, certain members of the Scheduled Castes who were promoted against the posts reserved in their quota, the officers who were in the General category at times were promoted later.
But as noted above, since they were earlier senior to the officers of the Scheduled Caste category and had been allotted the year of allotment earlier to the officers of the Scheduled Castes, therefore, they would be senior and continue to be so though they were promoted later.
Rule 12, therefore, gives an answer to the said question raised by the learned counsel representing the officers of the Scheduled Castes category.
Otherwise also this question had been raised and argued before the Supreme Court in a number of decisions.
The Constitution Bench in the case of RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, JT 1995(2) SC 351 : 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) directly considered this question.
There were two questions that arose for consideration before the Supreme Court.
It had been urged: (i) object of reservation was to provide adequate representation to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes in the service.
If more than the prescribed percentage, the Scheduled Castes candidates are appointed, then purposes of reservation in the cadre have not been achieved.
The Government instructions in respect of the reservation would become inoperative; and (ii) the question considered was that once the posts earmarked for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes on the roster are filled, the reservation is complete and the roster cannot operate any further.
It has to be stopped.
The Supreme Court with respect to the first question held :  ``When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserve posts.
On the other hand, the reserve category candidates can compete for non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.''
As regards the second question the answer given was :-  ``We see considerable force in the second contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The reservations provided under the impugned Government instructions are to be operated in accordance with the roster to be maintained in each Department.
The roster is implemented in the form of running account from year to year.
The purpose of ``running account'' is to make sure that the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribe and Backward Classes get their percentage of reserved posts.
The concept of ``running account'' in the impugned instructions has to be so interpreted that it does not result in excessive reservation.
``16% of the posts...'' are served for members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
In a lot of 100 posts those falling at serial number 1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87 and 91 have been reserved and earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled Castes.
Roster points 26 and 76 are reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
It is thus obvious that when recruitment to a cadre starts, then 14 posts earmarked in the roster are to be filled from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes.
To illustrate, first post in a cadre must go to the Scheduled Castes and thereafter the said class is entitled to 7th, 15th, 22nd and onwards upto 91st post.
When the total number of posts in a cadre are filled by the operation of the roster then the result envisaged by the impugned instructions is achieved.
In other words, in a cadre of 100 posts when the posts earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled Castes and the Backward Classes are filled, the percentage of reservation provided for the reserved categories is achieved.
We see no justification to operate the roster thereafter.
The ``running account'' is to operate only till the quota provided under the impugned instructions is reached and not thereafter.
Once the prescribed percentage of posts is filled, the numerical test of adequacy is satisfied and thereafter the roster does not survive.
The percentage of reservation is the desired representation of the Backward Classes in the State services and is consistent with the demographic estimate based on the proportion worked out in relation to their population.
The numerical quota of posts is not shifting boundary but represents a figure with due application of mind.
Therefore, the only way to assure equality of opportunity to the Backward Classes and the general category is to permit the roster to operate till the time the respective appointees/promotees occupy the posts meant for them in the roster.
The operation of the roster and the ``running account'' must come to an end thereafter.''
This question again came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in the case, Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan, JT 1995(7) SC 231 : 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC).
It had specifically been considered as to what would be the effect of a person who is promoted earlier by virtue of being a member of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes.
In paragraph 24, the Supreme Court answered this question and held that when an officer of general category is promoted later, he would retain his original seniority.
It was further held that accelerated promotion does not give accelerated seniority.
The Supreme Court continued to elucidate and held :-  ``This means that while the rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, it does not give the accelerated - or what may be called, the consequential - seniority.
There is, however, one situation where this rule may not have any practical relevance.
In a given case, it may happen that by the time the senior general candidate gets promoted to the higher grade, the junior reserved category candidate (who was promoted to the said higher grade earlier) may get promoted to yet higher grade.
In other words, by the time the senior general-category candidate enters, say, Grade `B' his junior Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate is promoted to Grade `A'.
It is obvious that in such a case, the rule evolved in the aforesaid circulars does not avail the senior general candidate for there can be no question of any seniority as between, say, a person in `B' grade and a person in `A' grade.''
No different was the view of the Supreme Court in the later decision in case Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab, JT 1996(2) SC 727 : 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC).
The Supreme Court again considered the effect of out of turn promotion that an officer of Scheduled Caste category is awarded as a result of the reservation.
In paragraph 9 it was held :-  ``It need hardly be pointed out that such candidates who are members of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes and have got promotion on basis of reservation and application of roster before their seniors in the lower grade belonging to general category, in this process have not superseded them, because there was no inter se comparison of merit between them.
As such when such seniors who belong to general category, are promoted later it cannot be said that they have been superseded by such members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Class who have been promoted earlier.
While considering them for further promotion against general category posts, if the only fact that they have been promoted earlier being members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Class is taken into consideration, then it shall violate the equality clause and be against the view expressed not only in the case of RK Sabharwal (supra) by the Constitution Bench, but also by 9 Judges Bench in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra) where it has been held that in any cadre, reservation should not exceed beyond 50%.
The 50% posts already being reserved against which promotions have been made, then any promotion against general category posts taking into consideration that they are members of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes, shall amount to exceeding the limit fixed in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra).''
Later relying upon the decision in the case of Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan (supra) it was again reiterated that the seniority will not be affected and an officer of general category when promoted later would retain his original seniority.
It was concluded :-  ``We respectfully concur with the view in Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan, (supra) that seniority between the reserved category candidates and general candidates and in the promoted category shall continue to be governed by their panel position i.e. with reference to their inter se seniority in the lower grade.
The rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, but it does not give the accelerated `consequential seniority'.
If a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate is promoted earlier because of the rule of reservation/roster and his senior belonging to the general category candidate is promoted later to that higher grade, the general category candidate shall regain his seniority over such earlier promoted Scheduled Caste/Tribe candidate.
As already pointed out above that when a scheduled caste/tribe candidate is promoted earlier by applying the rule of reservation/roster against a post reserved for such Scheduled Caste/Tribe candidate, in this process he does not supersede his seniors belonging to the general category.
In this process there was no occasion to examine the merit of such scheduled caste/ tribe candidate vis-a-vis his seniors belonging to the general category.''
The answer by virtue of these pronouncements of the Supreme Court is clear and no further elucidation would be required.
It has to be held following the dictum of the Supreme Court that officers of general category who are earlier senior to the officers belonging to Scheduled Castes category, on being promoted later would retain their original seniority.
16.
On behalf of the officers of the Scheduled Castes, reference was made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh, Through its Secretary v. Union of India through its Secretary, Ministry of Railways, JT 1996(8) SC 274.
Perusal of the facts of the cited case reveals that it is distinguishable.
The Supreme Court herein considered that when a reserved candidate was promoted according to the roster and got promotion to a higher post, then having stolen a march over the senior general category candidates in the lower cadre, the said general category candidate cannot claim seniority over the reserved category candidate.
These observations had been made keeping in view the fact that it was considered that there was a possibility that in the meantime the reserved candidates may still be promoted further.
That eventuality does not arise in the facts of the present case.
Therefore, the cited decision is clearly distinguishable on its facts.
17.
All the same on behalf of the officers of the Scheduled Castes/reserved category, it was urged that in case of RK Sabharwal (supra) it had been held that judgment would operate prospectively.
In other words, since the vacancies had arisen for the post of Chief Engineer before the pronouncement of the judgment in the case of RK Sabharwal (supra), the reserved candidates should be promoted.
In answer to this argument, the contention raised by the counsel for the officers of the general category candidates was that in any case at that time the Full Bench decision of this court in the case of Jaswant Singh v. The Secretary to Government, Punjab Education Department, 1989(4) SLR 257 was in force and the promotions had to be made in accordance with the ratio of that decision.
18.
In our considered view it becomes wholly unnecessary to go into the question about the decision in the case of Jaswant Singh (supra).
The reasons are not far to fetch.
It is true that in the case of RK Sabharwal (supra) it was held that judgment would operate prospectively.
But these observations were confined to the parties in the case of RK Sabharwal (supra).
In the case of Ajit Singh Janjua (supra) there was nothing that indicated that the said decision is intended to be prospective in nature.
This fact had been considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Chander Pal v. State of Haryana, Writ Petitions (Civil) Nos. 4715-4718 of 1983, decided on 4121996.
The Supreme Court held that in case of RK Sabharwal (supra), the judgment may remain as operative prospectively but it will not be so in all such cases.
We find no reason, therefore, to direct that our judgment would also operative prospectively.
This is for the added reason that all promotions that were made were subject to the decision of the present petitions before us.
Once it is so, we find, it would be improper to direct that the judgment would operate prospectively.
19.
Keeping in view the above said findings arrived at by us and the decisions of the Supreme Court, we, therefore, conclude :-  (a) The Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, PWD (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964 do not exclude reservation to promotion within the service; (b) The instructions dated 451974 issued by the Government of Punjab are applicable to the members of the Service in question; (c) Once the number of posts reserved for being filled up by reserved category candidates in the cadre are filled up by operation of roster, the object of the rule of reservation shall be deemed to have been achieved.
The roster will not operate further except as indicated in the case of RK Sabharwal (supra).
(d) Percentage of reservation has to be worked out in relation to the number of posts in the cadre and not with respect to vacancies; and (e) By promotion on the basis of the reservation to a post, the officer will not become senior as indicated above.
20.
It is true that our judgment may upset some expectations in case of general or reserved category officers.
The petitions had been filed couple of years ago.
Some promotions must have taken place.
As indicated above, it was subject to decision of these petitions.
If any officer as a result of this decision has to be reverted, he will not be asked to refund the arrears of the salary.
As a corollary to aforesaid, if any officer has to be promoted from the back date, since he has not rendered any service on the promotion post, his pay would be fixed notionally but no arrears shall be paid till the date of the present judgment.
Subject to these directions, the State Government will consider the individual cases regarding which this Court is not expressing any opinion.
In all fairness to the parties' counsel, it must be stated that some instances of individual cases were given to this Court.
But we do not propose to go into the individual cases.
As mentioned above and rementioned at the risk of the repetition, it is for the authorities to re- examine the individual cases in the light of the principles stated hereinbefore.
It is directed that respondents will re-examine the cases of the concerned officers regarding seniority and promotions in accordance with the findings arrived at above.
They shall comply with the directions within a period of four months from today.
21.
Subject to aforesaid, the writ petitions are disposed of accordingly.