Sat Pal, J. - By this judgment, I am disposing of four writ petitions bearing CWP No. 18865 of 1995, CWP No. 19042 of 1995, CWP No. 6770 of 1996 and CWP No. 6702 of 1996 as the facts involved in these cases are similar and the point of law raised in these writ petitions is also similar.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that all the petitioners in these writ petitions, who were working in the Irrigation and Power Department Punjab, were convicted and sentenced under Section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and under Sections 409, 420, 466, 468, 471, 477-A and 120-B, Indian Penal Code by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar, exercising the powers of Special Judge.
The orders of conviction and sentence were upheld by this Court vide judgment dated 15th May, 1985.
After the conviction and sentence awarded to the petitioners was upheld by this Court, the State Government dismissed all the petitioners under Rule 13(i) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (thereinafter referred to as the 1970 Rules), vide order dated 19th May, 1989.
All the petitioners challenged the orders of conviction and sentence before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court allowed all the appeals filed by the writ petitioners and set aside the convictions and sentences passed against them and acquitted all the petitioners of all the charges vide judgment dated 13th July, 1995.
It was observed by the Supreme Court that "the chain of circumstantial evidence is far from being complete and the conviction, in our view, has been based more on surmises and conjectures than on the basis of convincing and unimpeachable evidence."
3.
In consequence of acquittal of all the petitioners by the Supreme Court, the Government of Punjab vide order dated 14121995 (copy of one such order is Annexure P/1 in CWP No. 6702 of 1996) set aside the order of dismissal passed against the petitioners.
In this order, it was further stated that on a consideration of the circumstances of the case, the Government has also decided that further inquiry should be held under the provisions of the Rules against the petitioners about the allegations which led to their dismissal from service.
It was also stated in this order that the petitioners shall under sub-rule (4) of Rule 4 of the Rules be deemed to have been placed under suspension with effect from the date on which they were dismissed from service.
That part of the aforesaid orders by which the Government has decided to hold further inquiry under the rules and the decision that the petitioners shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension from the date when they were dismissed from service, is challenged in these writ petitions.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that the action of the State Government to order holding of departmental inquiry under rule 44 of the Rules read with Punjab Government instructions issued vide No. 86 (GOI) 2 GS-76, dated 23121976 is valid and justified.
5.
Mr. Chatrath, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners in CWP No. 6702/96 and CWP No. 6770/96 submitted that all the petitioners in CWP No. 6702/96 have already retired before the impugned orders dated 14121995 were issued by the State Government.
He further submitted that petitioners No. 2 and 4 in CWP No. 6770/96 have since retired on 3061996 and 30111996 respectively.
He submitted that the respondents vide the impugned orders have decided to hold departmental inquiry under Rule 4 of the 1970 Rules but the said rules were applicable only to those Government servants who were in service and these rules did not apply to the Government servants who have already retired.
With regard to writ petitioners Nos. 1 and 3 in CWP No. 6770 of 1996 who have not yet retired, the learned counsel submitted that the acts of misconduct for which the departmental inquiry had been ordered were allegedly committed in the year 1973 and as such there was substantial delay of 23 years in issuing the orders for holding the departmental inquiry against the petitioners.
He, therefore, contended that on account of this substantial delay, the decision of the Government to hold the departmental inquiry was not sustainable.
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on a judgment of Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Bani Singh and another, 1990(2) SLR 798 and a judgment rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Baljit Singh Grewal v. State of Punjab, 1994 Service Cases Today 699 (P&H) : 1994(4) RSJ 609.
6.
The learned counsel further submitted that two officers, namely, KS Sidhu and DP Tandon, who at the relevant time, were also working in the same Department and were challaned along with the writ petitioners for the same offence, were also convicted and sentenced by the learned trial court.
The order of conviction and sentence in their cases was, however, set aside by this Court and as a consequence of their acquittal from this Court, both these officers were reinstated in service in the year 1985 and in their cases, no departmental inquiry was conducted for the same acts of misconduct.
He, therefore, contended that the petitioners have thus been discriminated by the State Government in passing the impugned orders and as such, there is a clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in these cases.
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in Sengara Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 SC 1499 and Lt.
Governor of Delhi and others v. Const.
Dharampal and others, AIR 1990 SC 2059.
7.
The learned counsel further submitted that in the present case, vide the impugned orders, the writ petitioners were suspended retrospectively from the date when they were dismissed from service.
He contended that the suspension of an official with retrospective effect was not sustainable.
In support of his submissions, the learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Khemi Ram, AIR 1970 SC 214 and BJ Shelat v. State of Gujarat and another, 1978(2) SLR 88.
8.
Mr. RK Malik, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner in CWP No. 18865 of 1995 submitted that the said petitioner had already retired on 31st October, 1995, and as such, the rules of 1970 under which the impugned order had been passed were not applicable to the petitioner.
The learned counsel further submitted that vide the impugned order, the petitioner had been deemed to have been placed under suspension retrospectively with effect from the date of dismissal i.e. 5th May, 1989 but once he had been acquitted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the criminal cases, he was entitled to full back wages for the period from the date of dismissal till the passing of the impugned order.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on the following judgments of this court :  (1) Dev Raj Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) RSJ 337 : 1995(2) SCT 835 (P&H); (2) Jagwant Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) RSJ 482 : 1996(3) SCT 45; (3) Jaspal Singh Kohli v. Punjab National Bank and others, 1996(1) All Instant Judgments 160 : 1996(2) SCT 827 9.
With regard to the substantial delay in issuing the charge sheet, the learned counsel reiterated the submissions made by Shri GK Chatrath, learned counsel for the other writ petitioners.
10.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner in CWP No. 19042 of 1995 also reiterated the submissions made by Shri GK Chatrath.
With regard to the substantial delay in issuing the charge sheet, the learned counsel further submitted that by the impugned order, the Government had decided to withdraw the punishment of dismissal imposed on the petitioners and once the order of dismissal was withdrawn/set aside, a fresh order with regard to the suspension of the petitioners was required to be issued and the petitioners could not be suspended retrospectively w.e.f.
the date on which they were dismissed.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in Om Parkash Gupta v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1955 SC 600 and HL Mehra v. Union of India and others, 1974(2) SLR 187.
11.
Mr. Anil Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State, submitted that the impugned order by which the petitioners have been suspended retrospectively with effect from the date they were dismissed from the service, has been passed under Rule 4(4) of the 1970 Rules and in terms of the said rules, where a penalty of dismissal was set aside in consequence of or by a decision of Court of law and the punishing authority decides to hold further inquiry against the delinquent officials on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal was originally imposed, such an employee shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension from the date of the order of original dismissal.
He, therefore, contended that in view of rule 4(4), the impugned orders passed by the Government were legal and valid.
He, further contended that the judgments relied upon by Mr. RK Malik on this aspect of the matter were not applicable to the facts of the present case as in those cases, there were no statutory rules empowering the employer to suspend an employee retrospectively.
12.
With regard to the delay in issuing the charge sheet, the learned Deputy Advocate General submitted that the delay itself was not fatal and it depends on the facts of a given case as to whether the said delay warranted the quashing of charges.
He submitted that the charges in the present case were of serious nature and as such the impugned orders were not liable to be set aside on the ground of delay alone.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in the State of Punjab v. Kailash Nath, 1989(1) RSJ 448 and State of Punjab and others v. Chaman Lal Goyal, JT 1995(2) SC 18 : 1995(2) SCT 343 (SC).
With regard to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that another officer, namely KS Sidhu who along with the petitioners was convicted by the learned trial court but was acquitted by this court, was not issued any charge sheet, the learned Deputy Advocate General could not point out any difference between the case of the petitioners and the case of Mr. Sidhu.
13.
I have given may anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
Admittedly, all the petitioners were convicted under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and Sections 409, 466, 471, 477-A read with section 120- B, IPC by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar.
The allegations against the petitioners were that embezzlement of huge amounts by them had taken place in implementing various projects of the State Government.
After their conviction and sentence was upheld by this Court, all the petitioners were dismissed from service on the ground that their conduct which had led to their conviction was such as to render their further retention in the public service undesirable.
14.
It is also not disputed that the impugned orders have been issued on the ground that the Government had decided that further inquiry should be held under the provisions of the 1970 rules and all the writ petitioners were deemed to have been placed under suspension with effect from the date when they were dismissed, under rule 4(4) of the said rules.
In terms of rule 3 of the said rules, these rules apply to every Government employee except the employees belonging to All India Service or who are in casual employment or who are subject to discharge from service on less than one month's notice.
Under rule 2(d), the "Government employee" has been defined to mean "any person appointed to any civil service or post in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab".
From these provisions, it is clear that these rules apply only to those persons who are in the employment of the State Government.
Admittedly, JS Sidhu who is petitioner in CWP No. 18865 of 1995 and all the petitioners in CWP No. 6702 of 1996, namely Walaiti Ram Gupta, Saroop Singh, Dharam Singh Bajwa, Arjan Singh, Hukam Chand, Sham Lal Sharma and Rajinder Pal Dogra had already retired from service when the impugned orders were issued.
Since these writ petitioners ceased to be in the service of the State Government when the impugned orders were issued, no action could be initiated against them under the 1970 rules.
The impugned orders with regard to the said petitioners are, therefore, liable to be set aside on this short ground.
15.
It may be relevant to mention here that with regard to the employees who have retired from service, the State Government has the right to withhold or withdraw the pension or any part of it, under rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, but under sub-rule (b) of rule 22, the departmental proceedings against a retired employee could be initiated subject to certain conditions and one of such conditions is that such proceedings shall not be initiated in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
In the present case, admittedly, the event took place in July, 1973 and as such the departmental proceedings cannot be initiated against the retired petitioners even under rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
16.
As stated herein above, the event took place in July, 1973 and the impugned orders have been issued in December, 1995.
Thus there is a delay of more than 22 years.
The impugned orders further show that the Government had taken the decision to hold further inquiry under the provisions of 1970 rules on the allegations which led to the dismissal of the petitioners.
In the impugned order pertaining to JN Sood, JS Bagga and RK Dhir, it has been stated that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that enough evidence does not exist to hold the persons involved guilty of a criminal offence, but it has been brought out that these persons are guilty of dereliction of duty.
Keeping in view these observations, the impugned orders were passed by the State Government.
It may, however, be noted here that though the State Government had taken the decision to hold the departmental inquiry against the persons in December, 1995, the State Government has failed to serve the charge sheet on the petitioners till 6th January 1997 when the written statement in CWP No. 6770 of 1996 was filed.
Even till the arguments were heard in these cases, no document has been placed on record to show that the charge sheet had been issued to any of the petitioners.
17.
As stated earlier, the event took place in July, 1973 and in any case the charge sheet had not been issued to any of the petitioners till 6th January, 1997 when the written statement was filed on behalf of the State Government.
Thus there is substantial delay of more than 23 years.
Further there is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in not issuing the charge sheet to the petitioners.
As held by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Rajasthan v. Sh. VK Meena and others, 1997(1) SLJ 86, there is no legal bar for both proceedings to go on simultaneously though in certain situations, it may not be desirable, advisable or appropriate to proceed with the disciplinary inquiry when a criminal case is pending on identical charges.
In the present case, no explanation whatsoever has been placed by the State Government as to why the charge sheet could not be issued to the petitioners.
The impugned orders issued to all the petitioners are liable to be set aside on this ground.
The view I have taken finds full support from the case of Bani Singh (supra).
In this connection, reference may be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Chaman Lal Goyal (supra) wherein it was observed :  ".........
It is trite to say that such disciplinary proceeding must be conducted soon after the irregularities are committed or soon after discovering the irregularities.
They cannot be initiated after lapse of considerable time.
It would not be fair to the delinquent officer.
Such delay also makes the task of proving the charges difficult and is thus not also in the interest of administration.
Delayed initiation of proceedings is bound to give room for allegations of bias, mala fide and misuse of power.
If the delay is too long and is unexplained, the court may well interfere and quash the charges.
But how long a delay is too long always depends upon the facts of the given case.
Moreover, if such delay is likely to cause prejudice to the delinquent officer in defending himself, the enquiry has to be interdicted.
Wherever such a plea is raised, the court has to weigh the factors appearing for and against the said plea and take a decision on the totality of circumstances."
18.
In the above case, it was, however, held that since the charges levelled against the appellant were grave in nature and the major part of the inquiry was already over, the delay of 5-1/2 years in serving the charge sheet did not warrant quashing of the charges but in the present case, the impugned orders show that the Government had decided to conduct an inquiry with regard to the charge of dereliction of duty on the part of the petitioners.
This charge cannot be treated as grave in nature.
Besides, the substantial delay of more than 23 years has not been explained at all.
19.
As regards the contention of the learned Deputy Advocate General that the impugned orders have been passed under rule 4(4) of the 1970 Rules, it will be relevant to reproduce the said rule which reads as under :  "4.
Suspension (1).......... (4) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service imposed upon a Government employee is set aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by a decision of a court of law and the punishing authority on a consideration of the circumstances of the case, decides to hold a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement was originally imposed the Government employee shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension of (by ?)
the appointing authority from the date of the original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement and shall continue to remain under suspension until further orders."
No doubt, this rule is applicable to those petitioners who have not yet retired from service, but this rule further shows that there are certain conditions which must be satisfied in order to attract the operation of sub- rule (4) of rule 4.
One of the material conditions is that the disciplinary authority must decide to hold a fresh inquiry on the allegations on which the order of dismissal was originally passed.
As stated in the earlier part of the judgment, all the petitioners were dismissed from service on the ground that their conduct which had led to their conviction was such as to render their further retention in the public service undesirable.
From the judgment of the Supreme Court by which the petitioners have been acquitted, I find that the petitioners were convicted and sentenced by the learned trial court for the offence that the petitioners had embezzled huge amount in implementing certain projects of the State Government but the impugned orders pertaining to JN Sood, JS Bagga and RK Dhir show that the Government took the decision to hold the departmental inquiry against the petitioners with regard to the allegations of dereliction of duty on the part of the petitioners.
The Departmental inquiry, as envisaged by the Government in terms of the impugned orders, is, therefore, not an inquiry on the allegations on which penalty of dismissal was originally imposed on the writ petitioners.
Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 4, 1970 Rules thus, has no application to the facts of the present case and it could not be invoked to justify the impugned orders.
20.
The impugned orders are also not sustainable on the ground of discrimination.
As stated in the earlier part of the judgment, one officer, JS Sidhu was also convicted and sentenced along with the petitioners by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar (exercising the powers of Special Judge).
After the conviction and sentence of the said officer was set aside by this Court, the said officer was reinstated in the service of the State Government in the year 1985.
It is not disputed that no disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the said officer by the State Government.
The petitioners having been acquitted by the Supreme Court for the same offence, cannot be treated in a different manner by the State Government.
Thus, there is a clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in the present case.
The impugned orders are liable to be set aside on this ground also.
The view I have taken finds full support from the judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of Sengara Singh (supra) and the case of Constable Dharampal (supra).
21.
For the reasons recorded herein above, all the writ petitions are allowed and the impugned orders to the extent that further enquiry would be held and the petitioners shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension with effect from the date of their dismissal from service, are quashed.
22.
I further direct that the petitioners shall file an affidavit stating whether they had been gainfully employed or not during the period of dismissal from service and if so employed, they will further state in the affidavit the period of such employment.
The respondents may verify the same and will be at liberty to deduct pay and allowances during the period of such gainful employment while determining arrears of salary and allowances for the period from the date of dismissal till the date of reinstatement.
I, however, make it clear that for the purpose of seniority, promotion/deemed promotion and retiral benefits, the entire period between the dismissal and reinstatement shall be taken into account.
Let these directions be carried out within six months from today.
23.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.