R S Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the Haryana Police on November 11, 1979 and since, according to the petitioner, he had an aptitude for Photography and he has been performing the duties of a Police Photographer during investigation of heinous crime and motor vehicle accidents, he was even deputed for a basic course in Photography from January 1, 1987 to February 20, 1987, which was organised by Forensic Science Laboratory, Haryana, Madhuban.
2.
Rule 138 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, which deals with the promotion of the Constable to the rank of Head Constable, is reproduced below :-  "138.
List C - Promotion to Head Constables .
- In each district a list shall be maintained in card index form [Form 138(1)] of all constables who have passed the Lower School Course at Phillaur and are considered eligible for promotion to Head Constable.
A card shall be prepared for each constable admitted to the list and shall contain his marking under sub-rule 13.5(2) and notes by the Superintendent himself, or furnished by Gazetted Officers under whom the constable has worked, on his qualifications and character.
The list shall be kept confidentially by the Superintendent and shall be scrutinised and approved by the Deputy Inspector General of Police at his annual inspection.
(2) Promotions to Head Constables shall be made in accordance with the principle described in sub-rules 13.1(1) and (2).
The date of admission to List C shall not be material, but the order of merit in which examinations have been passed shall be taken into consideration in comparing qualifications.
In cases where other qualifications are equal, seniority in the Police force shall be the deciding factor.
Selection grade constables who have not passed the Lower School Course at the Police Training School but are otherwise considered suitable may, with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General be promoted to Head Constable upto a maximum of ten per cent of vacancies."
3.
It may be observed here that the institution of selection grade constable came to an end in the year 1980 by issuance of a notification dated March 18, 1980; therefore, the word `selection grade' is not to be read in Rule 138(2).
It is the case of the petitioner that without passing the Lower School Course he was promoted to the rank of Head Constable (Photographer) on May 13, 1993 on the basis of Rule 138(2) read with Rule 131.
It is further the case of the petitioner that the order of promotion as Head Constable (Photographer) was issued with the prior approval of Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, which was accorded vide Letter 6830/A-4 dated May 8, 1993.
This averment has not been specifically denied.
Superintendent of Police, Ambala, respondent No. 4, issued a show cause notice to the petitioner on April 23, 1997, calling upon him to show cause as to why he should not be reverted to the post of Constable.
A copy of the show cause notice has been appended as Annexure P.8 with the writ petition.
It is mentioned in the show cause notice that "the said promotion was not permissible under the PPR/Govt.
instructions issued in this regard from time to time.
This is also against judicial pronouncement delivered in this regard.
The matter has been examined in the light of observations made by the Hon'ble High Court in a number of cases.
Therefore, the Director General of Police, Haryana, has issued instructions dated 02021997 to review the cases of ad hoc promotion...." "It was further mentioned in the show cause notice that on examining the case of the petitioner, the Superintendent of Police, Ambala was of the opinion that the petitioner's promotion on ad hoc basis as Head Constable was not justifiable under the rules/instructions/judicial pronouncement.
Petitioner sent a reply to the show cause notice on May 10, 1997.
It was mentioned in the reply to the show cause notice that no rule or instruction or the judgment which might have been violated at the time the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable had been referred to in the show cause notice.
The notice was wholly vague.
In fact the petitioner's promotion was in consonance with Rule 138(2) (supra).
In the reply to the writ petition filed by the respondents it has been averred that the petitioner's out of turn promotion as Head Constable on ad hoc basis is not justifiable under any Rules of the Punjab Police and is against the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2704 of 1996 (Head Constable Brij Lal v. State of Haryana).
However, order dated June 3, 1997, copy Annexure P- 13, was passed reverting the petitioner and some other Head Constables to the post of a Constable.
This writ petition impugns the said order.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that out of turn promotion to particular categories like Sportsmen, Photographer is permissible to the extent of 10% of the cadre under Rule 138(2) (supra).
The petitioner's promotion was made with the prior approval of the D.I.G., Ambala, which was recorded vide letter No. 6830/A-4 dated May 8, 1993.
The mere mentioning that the promotion was ad hoc is meaningless as under Rule 138(2) (supra), it is a regular promotion.
He relied upon the judgment of the apex Court in Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(2) Supreme Court 157 : 1994(2) SCT 556(SC).
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent could not point out as to which particular rule or judgment was violated when the petitioner's promotion to the rank of Head Constable was ordered.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the writ petition is liable to succeed.
Under Rule 131, there is a selection tempered by seniority, efficiency and honesty are to be the main factors.
Passing of training course is necessary.
When a candidate does not pass such test, a discretion has been given in Rule 138 to the DIG of Police to relax the requirement of passing of the training and that too within the quota prescribed under Rule 138(2) and thereafter can promote a constable to the rank of Head Constable.
The Rule gives power to D.I.G.
to promote in exceptional cases.
In Rishal Singh's case (supra), the petitioner was considered in sports quota and was found to be suitable in accordance with Rule 138(2) by the D.I.G.
There also in the promotion order it was mentioned that the promotion was being ordered on ad hoc basis.
The Supreme Court in the aforesaid case observed that "it is true that due to administrative exigencies, ad hoc or temporary promotion is permissible but it must be traceable to statutory source of power or instructions having force of law.
No such rule has been brought to our notice."
Under these circumstances, the apex Court held that the only conclusion that could be drawn was that the promotion of the appellant Rishal Singh under Rule 138(2) was on regular basis though specifically said to be temporary or on ad hoc basis.
Consequently, the reversion order of the petitioner was set aside by the apex Court.
In the present case, it is not said anywhere that there was another constable senior to the petitioner who was also Photographer and his case was not considered or that there did not exist a vacancy for Head Constable and further that the promotion of the petitioner was beyond the permissible limit (i.e. 10%) provided under Rule 138(2).
That being so, the question of reversion of the petitioner will not arise though the promotion may have been made on ad hoc basis.
As observed by the Supreme Court, such a promotion under the circumstances under Rule 138(2) would be considered on regular basis.
Apart from that, the D.I.G.
had approved the promotion of the petitioner and the show cause notice is also being issued by the Superintendent of Police who is reviewing the matter on the basis of the instructions issued by the D.G.P.
6.
In Baij Nath's case (supra) the observation, which was made was to the following effect :  "We feel the State Government should make appropriate provisions by amending the Police Rules providing for promotion to outstanding sportsmen or to those who have shown excellence in discharge of their duties.
Out of turn promotions should only be ordered by the Director General of Police.
The other authorities who are competent to order promotions, should only make recommendations to the Director General of Police for granting out of turn promotion.
This amendment in the Police Rules is necessitated because police in recent times have to perform duties to which they were unfamiliar when the Police Rules were framed.
We think that the Director General of Police, Haryana, should examine the merits of each case and find out if out of turn promotions made on ad hoc basis was justified.
He will take a decision in the matter keeping in view the observations supra."
"The petitioner did not challenge the orders of reversion in appeal, revision or memorial to the Director General of Police, Haryana, as the case may be.
We direct that the writ petitions be treated as Appeals/Revisions/Memorials on behalf of the petitioner.
The Director General of Police, Haryana will dispose of the same after examining the merit of each individual case in the light of the observations made above.
Till final decision is taken by the Director General of Police, Haryana, the petitioner's reversion is stayed.
With these observations, the writ petitions are disposed of."
7.
According to the aforesaid observation, the Director General of Police was required to examine the cases of those persons who had been promoted under Rule 138(2).
It has been mentioned in the letter dated February 3, 1992, from the Director General of Police to all District Superintendents of Police, copy Annexure P-11, that after the decision in Baij Nath's case (supra), the cases of the petitioners which were decided along with Baij Nath's case had been re-examined individually.
It was observed that ad hoc promotions at present cannot be given to outstanding sportsmen but would be permissible only after the requisite amendment in the Police Rules is made in accordance with the directions in Baij Nath's case (supra).
We feel that the judgment has not been correctly read.
Only a suggestion was made that the Rules be amended to give power to Director General of Police for promoting persons under Rule 138(2).
It was never said that till the Rules are amended, promotion cannot be ordered.
Directions were issued that the Director General of Police should examine the cases of the persons who might have already been promoted under Rule 138(2).
Power of the Director General of Police to promote persons under Rule 138(2) has been specifically noticed by the apex Court in Rishal Singh's case (supra).
8.
The petitioner in the present case had been promoted in the year 1993.
There is nothing against his work and conduct.
The petitioner has rather mentioned his achievements in Para 8 of the writ petition that he was awarded 7 commendation certificates with cash awards in recognition of his outstanding performance as a Police Photographer.
Apart from the above, certain other achievements have also been highlighted.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we find that the reversion of the petitioner is not justifiable and sustainable in law.
The writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of reversion of the petitioner passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ambala, dated June 3, 1997, copy Annexure P-13, is quashed so far as it pertains to the petitioner.
However, we make no order as to costs.