Krishna Saran Shrivastav, J - The judgment shall also dispose of WP No. 15371 of 1993 and WP No. 5816 of 1990, due to commonality of law and similarity of facts.
2.
The petitioner was an ad hoc primary teacher in the Institution of the first respondent.
Her services were terminated vide proceedings No. F.B.-8/KV-NTPC/93-94/206, dated 2591993 by the third respondent, who is the Principal of the first respondent-institution.
The petitioner challenges this order as arbitrary, illegal and unconstitutional.
Similarly, the petitioner in WP No. 18014/1993 was an ad hoc primary teacher in the 1st Respondent-institution.
Her services were terminated vide proceedings No. F.B.-8/KV-NTPC/94-94/202, dated 2391993 by the third respondent who is the Principal of the first respondent-institution.
The petitioner challenges this order as arbitrary, illegal and unconstitutional.
3.
Both these petitioners had filed WP No 5816/90 for issuance of a writ of mandamus, directing the respondents to regularise their services in the category of Primary School Teachers with effect from their respective initial appointments on ad hoc basis with consequential reliefs.
During the pendency of this writ petition, the services of both the petitioners were terminated as aforesaid.
4.
The petitioner in WP No. 15371/93, G Jyothi, is BA, and has also obtained the relevant certificate from Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha, Madras.
She had enrolled her name in the employment exchange, Karimnagar.
The petitioner in WP No. 18014/93 E Sridevi, is BSc, B.Ed.
and has registered her name in the employment exchange.
G Jyothi was appointed as Primary School Teacher on ad hoc basis by the third respondent on 1671987.
Later, regular appointment of another teacher was made and, therefore, she was relieved from her duties on 21101987.
Again she was appointed by the third respondent as Primary School Teacher on 9121987 and was relieved from duties on 30.4.1988.
She was again appointed in the same capacity on 2071988 and her services were dispensed with on 21.4.1989.
She again worked as ad hoc Primary School Teacher from 371989 to 22121989 and on 211990, she was appointed as part-time Primary School Teacher on a consolidated pay of Rs. 900/- per month till 2591993, when her services were terminated.
The petitioner, E Sridevi was appointed as ad hoc Primary School Teacher by the third respondent on 3181988 and she worked till 3041989.
She again worked as ad hoc Primary School Teacher from 371989 to 22121989 and on 211990 she was appointed as part-time Primary School Teacher on a consolidated pay of Rs. 900/- per month till 2391993 when her services were terminated.
5.
The mode of recruitment to the post of Primary School Teacher is by direct recruitment only.
The educational qualifications prescribed for the post of Primary School Teacher are:  (i) Higher Secondary with JBT (2 years) or Intermediate with JBT (1 year) or plus two examination (Senior School Certificate Examination) with JBT (1 year).
(ii) Competence to teach both through English and Hindi media.
Recruitment rules of the first respondent-institution for various cadres are approved by the Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India.
It follows reservation rules of the Government of India mutatis mutandis.
6.
A notification inviting applications for recruitment to the posts so various categories of teachers including the Primary School Teachers in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan is issued by its Head Office and it is published in the Employment News Weekly.
The Selection Committee consists of eminent educationists, members of schedule caste and schedule tribes, minority communities and a lady member for selecting candidates for various categories of teachers post.
The Assistant Commissioner is a Member Secretary of this Selection Committee.
After the selection of the candidates, the select panel is forwarded to the Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan for approval and after approval, the Assistant Commissioner of the concerned region issues appointment orders.
Appointment on ad hoc/part-time basis are made by the local Vidyalaya appointment committee/by the Principal in consultation/approval of the concerned Chairman.
7.
The case of the petitioners, in brief, is that regular appointees get themselves transferred from the institution of the first respondent because it is situated in an isolated place or on other grounds and, therefore, vacancies for the posts of Primary School Teachers continue to exist and the third respondent has been continuously making ad hoc appointments every time for six months or till winter or summer vacation commences.
Therefore, the respondents are liable to regularise their appointments as Primary School Teachers in the first respondent-institution.
The had claimed the relief of issuance of a writ of mandamus against the respondents for regularising their services in WP No. 58196/1990.
8.
The petitioner succeeded in obtaining interim order in their favour on 24.4.1990 and continued in service till 2391993 and 2591993 respectively as stated above.
The respondents had filed an application for vacating the interim order dated 24.4.1990, but the interim order dated 24.4.1990 has been made absolute.
The order passed in W.V.M.P.
No. 983/90 in WPM.P.
Nos. 7435 and 7436 of 1990 in WP No. 581/90, read as under:  ``Admittedly, so far no notification calling for applications for appointments on all India basis has been issued by the respondents.
The petitioners have been continuing from 1987 as stated above with break in service during vacation.
There is therefore no justification in terminating their service even before regular appointments are notified.
In the circumstances, I am not inclined to vacate the interim order.
The interim order is made absolute.''
9.
The respondents notified in the daily newspapers in the beginning of 1992 inviting applications for filling up various categories of teaching staff in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathans spread all over the State of Andhra Pradesh including the schools at NTPC, Ramagundam, where the petitioners were working as Primary School Teachers.
The petitioners also had applied in pursuance of the said notification and interviews were conducted on 1271993.
The selection was on region-wise.
The petitioners appeared for the interview.
The petitioners were not selected and the other candidates were appointed on regular basis.
The petitioners claim that they have gained sufficient experience by serving as Primary School Teachers for six years in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan.
Not selecting them amounts to victimisation and harassment because they had approached the High Court.
The impugned orders of termination are illegal and arbitrary and are in violation of orders of this Court in WPM.P.
Nos. 7435 and 7436 of 1990 read with W.V.M.P.
No. 983/93 in WP No. 5816/90.
Therefore, the impugned orders are liable to be quashed and the respondents should be directed to regularise their services with all consequential benefits.
10.
The respondents have denied the claim of the petitioners.
Through separate counters they have alleged that procedure for appointment on regular basis and ad hoc basis is quite different.
The Assistant Commissioner is not vested with any power to appoint any candidate exercising his discretion.
The petitioners were appointed as a stop gap arrangement only.
The part-time appointments were made with specific stipulation that the appointment would not confer any right upon the appointee to claim for regularisation and an ad hoc employee has no right whatsoever for regularisation of this or her service without being subjected to the procedure prescribed by the employer.
They have denied that regular appointees get themselves transferred on one pretext or the other.
They have pleaded that the first respondent-institution could not fill up the vacancies during the years 1990-91, 1991-92 and 1992-93, because the Government of India had banned the recruitment except for the reserved categories in order to clear the backlog of reserved quota.
The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan is an all India Organisation where promotions and transfers are annual features.
If the Selection Committee finds a candidate suitable for the concerned post, his name is included in the select panel and is forwarded to the Vidyalaya Sanghathan Headquarters for approval and only when his name is approved, he is appointed in the order of merit in the nearest Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan.
They have further pleaded that the petitioners were continued as part-time Primary School Teachers only under the interim orders of this Court dated 671990.
The respondents have not violated the impugned orders of this Court because the petitioners were to be continued in service only upto the date of regular appointments of Primary School Teachers were made.
Because other suitable candidates were appointed on regular basis, the services of the petitioners were terminated and, therefore, the orders of termination are valid.
The petitioners were informed that they were not selected by the Selection Committee.
All the existing vacancies of Primary School Teachers at Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan, NTPC, Ramagundam, have been filled up.
They have alleged that, the location of the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan, NTPC, Ramagundam, is in a remote place is not at all relevant.
Under these circumstances, the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petitions.
11.
It is a matter of record that in CC No. 747/93 in WP No. 5816/90, rejecting the interpretation of the learned Counsel of the petitioners given to the aforementioned impugned order dated 671990, it has been held by this Court that, as the petitioners were working on ad hoc basis and since no notification calling for applications to fill up the post on regular basis was issued, the interim order was made absolute, that subsequently such vacancies could not be left unfilled for unduly long time, rightly a notification had been issued for filling up the vacancies on regular basis and that in fact the petitioners had been permitted to appear for interview and in those circumstances it could not be said that there was any violation of orders of this Court dated 671990 by the respondents.
It was further observed that in case there were any vacancies and if the respondents decided to fill up the same on regular basis, the claim of the petitioners should be considered for those vacancies before entertaining the applications of others.
Holding so, the contempt case was closed.
12.
Relying on Mansa Ram Zade v. M/s. Hindustan Steel Ltd. and others, AIR 1971 Cal.
178, Sahib Zada Abdul Bais Khan v. Budh Singh Bapna, AIR 1973 Raj.
201, Kumari G Srinivasulu v. State of Andhra Pradesh rep. by its Secretary, 1972(1) AWR 117 and JS Parihar v. Ganpat Guggar and others, 1996(6) SCC 291, it has been urged by the learned Counsel of the petitioners that the interim orders were passed in favour of the petitioners and against the respondents directing the respondents to continue the petitioners in service and this direction has been made absolute and subsequently by the impugned order dated 6.7.90, it was observed by this court that the petitioner had been working from 191987 with break in service during vacations and, therefore, there was no justification in terminating their services even before regular appointments were notified.
Therefore, the respondents had no power to terminate the services of the petitioners and their action amounted to contempt of Court and on this count only, the impugned orders of termination deserve to be quashed.
13.
The law emerges from the principle laid down in the aforementioned cases is that an order passed by a competent Court should be implemented and the party, against whom the interim order is passed, has to obey and comply the same.
The Court is not concerned with the legal effect of the order.
The test is whether the authority has been disregarded ?
14.
It is noteworthy that the petitioners had been appointed on ad hoc basis and later as part-time Primary School Teachers.
It is true that they have registered themselves in the employment exchange and they possess the requisite qualifications and they were appointed by the third respondent.
But, the recruitment of, inter alia, Primary School Teachers in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan is done by a different method.
First a notification is issued for inviting applications for appointment to the post of teachers in the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan on all India basis.
The duly constituted Selection Committee consisting of eminent educationists, members of schedule caste and schedule tribes, minority communities and a lady member selects the candidates for appointment as teachers with regard to the number of available vacancies.
The select panel is forwarded to the Head Office, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan, for approval and only when it is approved by the competent authority, the Assistant Commissioner of the concerned region issues order of appointment to the candidates in accordance with the directions given by the Joint Commissioner (Administration) within the region in his control and thereafter the appointment orders are issued.
15.
A look at the impugned interim order as also the order dated 671990 shows that, considering that no notification calling for application to fill the post of regular basis had been issued, the interim order was made absolute and for similar reasons, the respondents were directed to continue the petitioners in service.
Thus, the life of the impugned order dated 671990 was restricted till the appointment of Primary School Teachers on regular basis, after following the procedure referred to above is made.
It is also an admitted fact that, in answer to the notification for appointment of Primary School Teachers on regular basis, after following the procedure referred to above is made.
It is also an admitted fact that, in answer to the notification for appointment of Primary School Teachers on regular basis amongst others, the petitioner had also applied and they faced the interview, but without success.
The respondents were not restrained from issuing a notification for appointment of Primary School Teachers on regular basis either under the interim order or under the impugned interim order dated 671990 and under these circumstances, there appears to be no force in the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that, by making regular appointment of the other suitable candidates and in pursuance thereof, terminating the services of the petitioners, the respondents had disregarded the orders of this Court and had committed contempt, because there was no disobedience or violation of the impugned orders, constituting contempt of Court.
The impugned orders of termination cannot be quashed merely on this ground.
16.
It would not be out of place of mention that there is no material on record from which it can be gathered that, subsequent to the impugned order passed in CC No. 747/93, dated 11.3.1993, the respondents have filled in the existing vacancies on regular basis without considering the cases of the petitioners and, therefore, it cannot be said that the respondents have disobeyed the orders passed in the said CC No. 747/93.
17.
Relying on the case of State of Haryana and other etc. etc. v. Piara Singh and other etc. etc., AIR 1992 SC 2130 : 1992(3) SCT 201, it is contended on behalf of the petitioners that the petitioners were continued for three years and two years respectively before the institution of the Writ Petition No. 5814/90 and, therefore, the authorities should have considered their cases for regularisation because they were eligible and qualified according to the rules, particularly when their service record was satisfactory.
18.
In the case of State of Haryana (supra), the Apex Court has held that :  ``The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort should always be to replace such an ad hoc temporary employees by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange, unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange some appropriate method consistent with the requirement of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly.
An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available through the above processes.
If for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State.''
19.
As noted above, the petitioner, Smt. G Jyothi worked as Primary School Teacher on ad hoc basis from 671987 till 21101987 when the regular appointment of another teacher was made and, therefore, this period between 671987 to 21101987 cannot be taken into consideration.
Thereafter, she worked on ad hoc basis as Primary School Teacher from 9121987 to 30.4.1988 and from 2071988 to 2741989 and again from 371989 to 22121989 and then as part-time teacher from 211990 till the institution of the Writ Petition No. 5816/90, whereas the petitioner, Smt. E Sridevi, worked on ad hoc basis as Primary School Teacher from 3181988 to 3041989, then from 371989 to 22121989 and thereafter as part-time teacher from 211989 till the institution of the aforesaid writ petition.
The aforesaid periods cannot be said to be a fairly long spell so that it can be said that the authority should have considered their cases for regularisation of their services as Primary School Teachers, particularly in the light of the fact that there was a ban by the Central Government on appointment of teachers on regular basis from the years 1990-91 to 1992-93.
20.
On the authority of the law laid down in the case of State of Haryana (supra), I hold that the appointment of these petitioners on ad hoc basis and thereafter as part-time teachers was made due to the exigencies of administration and as and when the occasion arose, advertisement for regular appointment of Primary School Teachers was published so that the selected and appointed candidates would replace the ad hoc/part-time teachers.
It is not disputed before me that the petitioners were also given a chance to compete in this examination and they also took part in the interview but were not selected.
Because better candidates were selected, the services of these petitioners were terminated so as to give way to the regularly selected candidates.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that the impugned orders of termination of the services of the petitioners were arbitrary or unreasonable.
21.
In result, I see no merit in the writ petitions and, therefore, they are dismissed.
No costs.
However, the respondents are directed to call the petitioners for interview, if they apply in answer to the next advertisement as and when issued for the said post on regular basis, taking the age bar as waived (only once) and consider their cases on merits for their appointment in the said post on regular basis.
Order accordingly.