SV Maruthi, J - This writ petition is filed for a declaration declaring that the petitioner had been confirmed as a Regular Development Officer Grade I with effect from 29101987 and for Writ of Certiorari to quash the order dated 17th September, 1993 and the order dated 25th February, 1994 confirming the order dated 17th September, 1993 by the 2nd Respondent and for consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Probationary Development Officer on 6.10.1986.
ON 29101986, he joined duty on a consolidated pay of Rs. 500/- per month and on 29101987 he successfully completed 12 months of probationary period.
On 29.10.1988 he continued in service for more than 12 months.
On 28111988 he made a representation seeking confirmation of services.
On 2541989 he filed a writ petition No. 6110 of 1989 before this Court for a writ of Mandamus declaring that he is holding the post of Development Officer Grade-I (Inspector Grade-I) from 29101987 i.e., from the date of completion of probation period of 12 months.
On 2641989 the writ petition was admitted and an interim order was also issued directing the respondents to continue the petitioner in service.
On 2551989 a chargesheet was issued and on 30121991 an Enquiry Officer was appointed.
And on 26.12.1990 enquiry was conducted and on 3131991 Enquiry Officer submitted his report.
On 2951991 the Disciplinary Authority accepted the report of he Enquiry Officer and dismissed the petitioner from service.
In January 1991, the petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 9142 of 1991 challenging the order of dismissal.
On 19.2.1992 this Court disposed of the earlier Writ Petition No. 6110 of 1989 and Writ Petition No. 9142 of 1991 by a common judgment directing the petitioner to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Authority.
On 2831992 petitioner preferred an appeal pursuant to the directions issued by this Court.
On 4.10.1992 and on 20.10.1992 the petitioner issued notices to the Appellate Authority to dispose of the appeal.
In January 1993, petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 428 of 1993 seeking direction to the Appellate Authority to dispose of the appeal.
Writ Petition No. 428 of 1993 was disposed of with a direction to the Appellate Authority to dispose of the appeal within two months from the date of the judgment dated 2011993.
Contempt Case No. 219 of 1993 was filed against the Appellate Authority as they did not comply with the orders of this Honourable High Court.
However, earlier orders of termination were revoked by issuing Revocation-cum-Second show cause notice to the petitioner.
On 861993 the petitioner joined duty pursuant to the revocation order.
The petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 12745 of 1993 for payment of arrears of salary etc. On 17.9.1993 the respondents passed an order dismissing the petitioner from services.
Writ Petition No. 12745 of 1993 was disposed of on2541994 directing the petitioner to approach of on 2541994 directing the petitioner to approach the Appellate Authority for necessary relief.
On 2.11.1993 against the order of dismissal petitioner filed an appeal before the Appellate Authority who confirmed the order of dismissal on 2241994 which was received by the petitioner on 651994 against which the present writ petition is filed.
3.
The main argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that he was appointed on 16101986 and according to the appointment order the period of probation is 12 months and the said period of probation can be extended by a further period of 12 months.
He has completed the probation on 29101987 and no order extending probation was passed.
Therefore, he is deemed to have been confirmed.
When once he is deemed to have been confirmed, the respondents cannot terminate his service.
The second contention of the petitioner is that the charges framed are not proved.
The third contention of the petitioner is that Appellate Authority passed order without giving any reasons.
Lastly the punishment imposed is disproportionate to the nature of the offence.
4.
The charges framed against the petitioner are as follows :  "(1) Mr. M Nathaniel while working as Development Officer at Patancheru Branch acted contrary to the rules of the company by misappropriating company's funds and collected a premium of Rs. 2,346/- in cash from Mr. KV Rathaiah on 4.3.1988 towards insurance premium of his car and failed to deposit the same into the branch.
(2) Mr. M Nathaniel had collected an amount of Rs. 1,400/- in cash from M/s Bharat Reprographics on 2561988 towards insurance premium of Canon Automatic Xerox Plain Paper Copier and failed to deposit the same in the branch.
(3) Mr. M Nathaniel committed an act of dishonesty by not depositing an amount of Rs. 712/- collected in cash from CS John and Mrs. Mary S John on 1651988 by issuing a cover note bearing No. 534035 covering the assets of the said party under Fire and Householder's Insurance Policy.
(4) Mr. M Nathaniel has been negligent in the discharge of his duties as Development Officer by not adhering to the business rules of the Company.
(5) Mr. M Nathaniel was found irregular in attending to the duties assigned to him, from time to time, which has resulted in loss of business and reputation of the Company.
(6) Mr. M Nathaniel ahs absented himself unauthorisedly for a period of ten days from 17101988 to 26.10.1988 without prior sanction of the competent authority.
(7) Mr. M Nathaniel disobeyed and failed to adhere to the lawful instructions given to him by his superiors form time to time."
5.
On the basis of these charges, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report in accordance with the procedure under the rules.
He found that he Charge No. 1 is proved, and the petitioner has misappropriated temporarily the company's funds.
As regards Charge No. 2, he found that it has not been established.
On Charge No. 3 the finding of the Enquiry Officer is that the charged officer is guilty of charge beyond doubt and he misappropriated funds temporarily form 1651988 to 691988.
He also that Charge Nos. 4, 5, 6 and 7 were not established.
The Enquiry Officer's report was accepted and the probation of the petitioner was terminated.
6.
The order of appointment of the petitioner reads as follows :-  "3.
Initially, you will be on probation for a period of 12 months which the company may at its discretion extend by a further period not exceeding months.
4........  5.
Subject to satisfactory fulfillment of the above conditions, the company may at the end of probationary/extended probationary period consider your confirmation in service.
However, it shall be noted that your confirmation in the service shall not be automatic, on fulfillment of the above conditions, unless a letter of confirmation is specifically issued by the company.
Unless letter of confirmation or extension of probationary period is issued to you, your service shall stand automatically terminated after expiry of the period of probation.
6.
On your confirmation, you will be placed in the regular scale of Inspector.
7.
During the probationary/extended probationary period you are liable to be discharged without notice and without assigning any reason whatsoever for such discharge."
7.
The petitioner was appointed on 6.10.1986.
In the normal circumstances, the probationary period would expire by 5101987.
However, neither any order of extension of probation was issued nor any order of confirmation was made after the period of 12 months of probation.
But on 2551989 a charge memo was issued i.e. after the expiry of the period of probation.
The charges framed against the petitioner were held to be proved.
The question, therefore, is whether the petitioner continued to be on probation, or whether he is deemed to have been confirmed in the service.
I have already referred to the order of appointment according to which the period of probation is 12 months and at the cretion of he authority it can be extended for a period not exceeding 12 months.
It also syas that at the end of probationary/extended probationary period unless a letter of confirmation is specifically issued by company, his confirmation is specifically issued by company, his confirmation after the expiry of the probation or extended period probation is not automatic.
Therefore, the order of appointment contemplates an express order declaring probation and confirming the service of the petitioner.
Hence, the petitioner cannot claim that he is deemed to have been confirmed after 30101987 i.e., after the expiry of period of 12 months on the ground that no order extending the period of probation was issued.
In other words, even after expiry of the period of probation or extended period of probation he continues to be a probationer in the absence of an express order declaring his probation and order of confirmation and during probationary period he is liable to be discharged without any notice and without assigning any reason whatsoever for such discharge.
Therefore, it is open to the respondent to terminate the services of probationer during the period or even after the expiry of the period of 12 months of probation.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in the absence of an express order extending the period of probation after 30th October, 1987 the petitioner could not have been continued on probation as the maximum period for which a person can be kept under probation is only two years, therefore, after the period 2 years he is deemed to have been confirmed.
9.
This contention cannot be accepted in view of.
Clauses 5 of 7 of order of appointment of the petitioner which categorically says unless order of confirmation is issued after the period of probation or extended period of probation he cannot be deemed to have been automatically confirmed.
10.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Dharam Sing, AIR 1968 SC 1210, considered the power of authority to terminate the probation of an officer.
The relevant rule reads as follows :  "(3) On the completion of the period of probation the authority competent to make appointment may confirm the member in his appointment or if his work or conduct during the period of probation has been in his opinion unsatisfactory he may dispense with his service or may extend his period of probation by such period as he may deem fir or revert him to his former post if he was promoted from some lower post.
Provided that the total period of probation including extensions.
If any, shall not exceed three years.'
Construing the above rule, the Supreme Court held that :  "(5) In the present case, Rule 6(3) forbids extension of the period of probation beyond three years.
Where, as in the present case, the service rules fix a certain period of time beyond which the probationary period cannot be extended, and an employee appointed or promoted to a post on probation is allowed to continue in that post after completion of the maximum period of probation without an express order of confirmation, he cannot be deemed to continue, in that post as a probationary by implication.
The reason is that such an implication is negatived by the service rule forbidding extension of the maximum period fixed by it.
In such a case, it is permissible to draw the inference that the employee allowed to continue in the post on completion of the maximum period of probation has been confirmed in the post by implication."
11.
The above judgment is not relevant to the facts of the present case as there is no rue similar to Clauses 5 and 7 incorporated in the order of appointment of the petitioner.
It does not required an express order declaring probation or confirmation adn the rule fixes maximum period of probation and prohibits extension of probation beyond a particular period.
In view of the rule prohibiting extension of probation beyond a particular period, it was held after the expiry of the extended period of probation which is 3 years, he is deemed to have been confirmed as he cannot be said to be on probation.
12.
The next decision to be considered is Om Prakash v. UP Co-op SSF Lucknow, AIR 1986 SC 1844, wherein it was held that :  "Regulations 17 and 18 read together, provide that appointment against a regular vacancy is to be made on probation for a period of one year, this probationary period can be extended for a period of one year more.
The proviso to Regulation 17 restricts the power of the appointing authority in extending period of the appointing authority in extending period of probation beyond the period of one year.
An employee appointed against a regular vacancy cannot be placed on probation for a period more than two years and if during the period of probation the appointing authority authority is of the opinion that the employees has not made use of opportunity afforded to him he may discharge him from service or revert him to has substantive post but he has no power to extend the period of probation beyond the period of two years.
Regulation 18 stipulates confirmation of an employee by an express order on the completion of the probationary period.
The regulation do not expressly lay down as to what would be the status of an employee on the expiry of maximum period of probation where no order of confirmation is issued and the employee is allowed to continue in service.
Since Regulation 17 does not permit continuation of an employee on probation for a period of more than two year and the necessary result would follow that after the expiry of two year probationary period the employee stands confirmed by implication.
This is implicit in the scheme of Regulations 17 and 18."
13.
In the present case it is categorically stated in condition that confirmation in the service shall not be automatic on fulfillment of the above conditions unless a letter of confirmation is specifically issued by the company.
It also mentioned in the condition.
No. 7 of the appointment order that during the probationary/extended probationary period an employee is able to be discharged without notice and without assigning any reasons whatsoever for such discharge.
A reading of condition No. 5 of the appointment order indicates the intention of the rule that if no order of confirmation is passed after the probationary period or extended period of probation, a probationer is deemed to be on probation and he does not get the status of confirmation.
In other words, the rules explicit laid down that the status of employee where no order of confirmation is issued and the employee is allowed to continue in service, is that of probationer on other words he continues on probation.
The rule declares the status of an employee during the period i.e. before the order of confirmation and after expiry of extended period of probation.
14.
In Municipal Corporation, Raipur v. AK Mishra, 1992(6) SLR 715 : 1991(2) SCT 452 (SC) the Supreme Court considred Rule `I' of the Madhay Pradesh Civil Service (Classification Control and Appeal) Rules, 1966.
The relevant rule reads as follows :  "Probation - (I) A person appointed to a service,e or post by direct recruitment shall ordinarily be placed on probation for such period as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority may, for sufficient reasons, extend the period of probation by a further period not exceeding one year.
Note :- A probationer whose period or probation is not extended under this sub-rule but who has neither been confirmed nor discharged from arrived at the end of the period of probation shall be deemed to have been contained in service subject to the condition of his service being terminate on the expiry of a notice of one calender month given in writing by either side."
Construing the above, the Supreme Court held that :  "....Under the note to sub-rule (2) if the probationer is neither nore discharged from service at the end of the period of probation, he shall be deemed to have been continued in service as probation subject to the conditions of his service being terminated on the expiry of a notice of one calender month given in writing by either side.
As per sub-rule (6) on passing the prescribed departmental examination and on successful completion of the period of probation, the probationer shall be confirmed in the service or post to which he had been appointed.
Then he becomes an approved probationer.
Therefore, after the expiry of the period of probation and before its confirmation, he would be deemed to have been continued n service as probationer.
Confirmation of probation would be subject to satisfactory completion of the probation and to make an order of confirmation are condition precedent.
Mere expiry of the initial period of probation does not automatically have the effect of deemed confirmation and the status of a deemed confirmation of the probation.
An express order in that regard only confers the status of an approved probationer.
We are of the view that the to sub-rule (2) read with sub-rule (6) of Rule 8 manifests the legislative intent that confirmation of the probation of the respondent would be made only on successful completion of the probation and the passing of the prescribed examination..."  From the above it is clear that the present case is on all fours with the judgment in Municipal Corporation, Rajpur v. AK Mishra (supra).
In this case also an express order of confirmation is required.
Therefore, after the expiry of period of probation the petitioner continues to be on probation in absence of an express order of confirmation.
15.
In the case of State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh Khosla, 1996(4) SLR 37(SC) : 1996(3) SCT 338 (SC) the Supreme Court again considered Rule 10 of the Punjab State Co-operative Services (Class II) Rules, 1958.
The relevant portion of Rule 10 reads as follows:  "3.
If the work or conduct of any candidates or member during the period of training or probation in the opinion of Government is not satisfactory they may dispense with his service, if he had been recruited by direct appointment or may revert him to his former post if he has been recruited by promotion or by transfer.
On the conclusion of the period of probation of any member of the service, Government may, if vacancy exists, confirm him in his appointment; is his work of conduct has, in its opinion, been satisfactory may extend his period of probation by such period as it may think fit and thereafter pass such orders as it could have pased on the expiry of the first of probation, provided that the total period of probation, including extension, shall not exceed three years in any case."
Considering the above Rule the Supreme Court held that :  ".........It would thus be seen that the outer limit of three years provided under the rules is an enabling provision to allow the probationer to continue in service without being reverted or discharged from service for failure to satisfactorily complete the period of probation, but ht would nto mean that the probationer on expiry of three years' period, must be deemed to have been confirmed.
The Rule itself envisages a positive order of confirmation.
So long as the order confirmation is not made, even after expiry of probation, the probationer may continue and remain in service, but by allowing him to remain in service, but by allowing him to remain in service it cannot be concluded that he must be deemed to have been confirmed."
16.
In Dharam Singh's case (supra) rules prohibit extension of probation beyond a particular period, and there is no rule regarding an express order of confirmation therefore it was held, that after the expiry of maximum period of probation, no inference can be drawn that the officer continued on probation, and therefore deemed to have been confirmed.
While in the case of Om Prakash (supra) though an express order of confirmation is required b the rule still it was held after the extended period of probation an employee is deemed to have been confirmed.
Whereas the AK Mishra (supra) and Baldev Singh Khosla (supra) struck a different note and say that even in cases where there is prohibition extending the period of probation beyond a particular period, if rules require an express order of confirmation, the question of deemed confirmation does not arise and the status of the employee continues to be that of a probationer.
Evidently view in Om Prakash (supra) is in conflict with the view in the later cases i.e., AK Mishra and Baldev Singh Khosla (supra).
The later view in AK Mishra and Baldev Singh Khosla (supra) prevails over Om Prakash (supra).
17.
The facts of the present case squarely fall within the principles laid down in Mr. AK Mishra and Baldev Singh (supra).
Therefore, there is nto substance in the contention of the learned counsel for het petitioner that after the expiry of the maximum period of probation in the absence of an order extending the period of probation, he is deemed to have been confirmed and therefore the question to termination of probation does not arise, cannot be accepted.
18.
The next contention the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that the charges are nto proved.
I have gone through the Enquiry Officer's report.
The Enquiry Officer found that the charged officer in his explanation stated that he had collected cash of Rs. 2,346/- from Mr. KV Rathaiah towards motor vehicle premium, issued cover note No. 961712 but deposited the same by way of cheque bearing No. 542204 arranged from his friend Mr. Anjaneyulu, utilised the cash for his personal use, proposing that he will make good the amoutn on the next day, i.e. 31.3.1988 and with a request to pardon him for the lapse.
Again, as late as on 1561988 in his submission to the Regional Manager, he had reiterated the same and, however, declared that he had no intention of utilising the company money but due to unavoidable circumstance and stress and strain, which he had at that time, he was compelled to use the money thinking that he could mobislise the deficit which he could not, which lande into the present situation.
19.
In view of the explanation offered by the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer found that the charges framed against the petitioner are proved.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Mr. KV Rathaiah who is alleged to have been complained against the petitioner was not examined.
It is not a case where it is necessary to examine the complainant because the petitioner himself admitted that he has collected the cash and did not deposit the same within time.
Similarly, Charge No. 3 was also held to be proved.
This Court is not sitting as an Appellate Authority over the Enquiry Officer's finding in the report.
The Enquiry Officer found that the charges are proved.
After going through the same I found that the Charge No. 2 is supported by both oral and documentary evidence.
Therefore, I reject the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the charges are nto proved.
20.
The Appellate Authority disposed of the appeal filed by the petitioner.
After going through the order of the Appellate Authority and considering the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
I do not see any infirmity in the order of the Appellate Authority.
21.
The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the punishment is disproportionate to the nature of the offence.
22.
The petitioner was appointed as an Inspector and he had to deal with the customers and on two occasions he has misappropriated the money.
In these circumstances, I do not see that the termination of the petitioner's services is disproportionate to the nature of offence.
23.
In view of the above, writ petition does not merit consideration and is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Writ petition dismissed.