M Ramakrishana, CJ.
- This appeal is directed, against the judgment and order made by the learned Single Judge in SWP No. 1274 of 1994 dated 20th Nov 1995 by which the learned Single Judge while dismissing the writ petition of the petitioner gave liberty to the petitioner to approach the Jammu and Kashmir State Subordinate Services Recruitment Board with a representation which the Board would consider favourably.
It is this order that is called in question in this LPA for the grounds taken in the appeal.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for both the parties and perused the grounds taken in the appeal.
3.
The brief facts for the disposal of the appeal are as follows:  4.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir issued an advertisement notice No. 3 of 1991 dated 2551991 through the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board calling applications to fill up 450 vacancies, referred to the Board for being filled up.
5.
Pursuant to the process of selection having completed the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board published a select list of 412 candidates at the first instance and thereafter another list of 34 plus 4 candidates vide communication dated 3111995 and 121995 respectively for ex-servicemen, Scheduled Tribes, part-time instructors and handicap persons.
6.
The writ petitioner Ms. Swaran Kanta being one of the candidates appearing for the examination of teachers, her name did not appear in the select list.
Therefore, she presented the writ petition challenging the legality of the selection on the grounds that she being a candidate, represented a Scheduled caste, and she being figured at S.No.
1 of the waiting list, her case ought to have been considered.
Another ground taken in the writ petition was that one Chanchala Devi, a candidate claimed to be of Scheduled Caste having appeared for the selection and having been duly selected found at S.No.
15 in the select list, she died even before the issuance of the appointment order.
Therefore, that vacancy being reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates should have been reconsidered with a view to provide an opportunity to the petitioner for being selected.
7.
The learned Single Judge having considered these grounds and after hearing the learned counsel for both the sides came to the conclusion that it is not a case of issuance of a writ of mandamus.
On the other hand he gave liberty to the petitioner to approach the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board to consider her case in the light of the peculiar circumstances of the case.
8.
In the appeal these two grounds having been re-argued.
Mr. Lehar, learned counsel for the appellant has brought to our notice at the very outset that the Rules prevalent and made applicable in the selection of the candidates as Teachers by the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board were known as the "J&K Subordinate Services Recruitment Rules, 1990" (hereinafter called the Rules).
Rule 8 of the said Rules provides for preparation of the Waiting list by the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board, which reads -  "8.
Waiting List : The Board may prepare a waiting list in respect of the posts for which selection is made.
The waiting list shall not be more than 20% of the strength of the select list and shall be valid for a period of six months or any subsequent date fixed by the Board in this behalf."
9.
The argument advanced by Mr. Lehar is that in the light of the provisions of Rule 8 of the Rules, the Selection Board should have prepared a waiting list in addition to the list of 450 candidates duly selected by it, inasmuch as the object of Rule 8 is that in the event of any candidate selected in the list not being able to report for duty on being appointed or in any circumstances where the candidate fails to accept the offer of appointment by virtue of the selection, the candidates in the waiting list shall be considered in this behalf.
Unfortunately, it is argued that the Board has failed to comply with the requirement of Rule 8 of the Rules.
The alternative argument is that in the event of the Board having not complied with the requirement of Rule 8, as stated above, there is every likelihood of the petitioner being in the waiting list, if prepared.
Since the difference between the marks secured by the last candidate, namely, Chanchala Devi and that of the writ petitioner is hardly of three marks, inasmuch as, it is seen from the copy of the merit list having been produced by the learned counsel for the respondents that the deceased Chanchala Devi had secured 49 marks out of 100, whereas Swaran Kanta had secured 46 marks.
Admittedly, Chanchala Devi stood at S.No.
15 being the last candidate in that select list, the last candidate being Sushma Koushal, who secured lesser than 49 marks.
10.
Another argument advanced by Mr. Lehar counsel for the appellant, is that with a view to maintain the quota of Scheduled caste with the ratio of 8% out of the available candidates made available in the selection, the other candidates selected and listed in the final list not being available for being posted or appointed and that since Chanchala Devi died and passed away that post necessarily go to another competent Scheduled Caste candidate in accordance with the law.
This having not been done by the respondents, the petitioner-appellant has got a good chance of being considered for that post.
11.
As against this argument of Mr. Lehar, Mr. Koul, learned counsel for the respondents submits that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in State of Punjab and others v. Constable Subash Chander and others, reported in AIR 1993 SC 2321, the argument of Mr. Lehar cannot be accepted.
It is pointed out in the chourse of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the above reported case that :-  "It appears that the High Court took upon itself the decision of the claim of the respondent to be appointed to the post and, while doing so, was greatly impressed by his service record as a constable and the marks obtained by him at the selection test, however it did not take into account the merits of the selected candidates and of other candidates who, although not selected for appointment, were more meritorious than the respondent."
12.
In other words, the submission of Mr. Koul, learned counsel for the respondents, is that the candidate shown at S.No.
3 in the list among the scheduled caste candidates, namely, Veena Devi having secured 47 marks out of 100, she is higher in merit than Swaran Kanta, writ-petitioner, who has secured 46 marks.
In that way the submission is that unless we offer this one post available for being considered for this lady Veena Devi, it is not possible to issue a direction to the respodents to consider the case of the writ-petitioner/appellant.
13.
We are of the view that the first submission made by Mr. Lehar, referring to the Rules relevant for the purpose of interpretation, is in favour of the appellant (writ-petitioner) inasmuch as relevant to SRO 319. considering the J&K Subordinate Services Recruitment Rules, 1990, it is apparent that on the date of selection, Rule 8 provided for preparation of waiting list.
14.
In this behalf, the argument of Mr. Koul learned counsel for the respondents is that during the course of selection, the said Rules came to be amended by issuance of Notification under SRO 194 of 1992 dated 1881992, by which the Rules of 1990 have been amended.
His submission is that, according to these Rules of 1992, there is no provision for preparation of waiting list, as found in the earlier notification, namely, SRO 319.
Mr. Koul submits that in absence of such a provision made available in the amended provision, there is no need for the Board to prepare and publish a waiting list.
This argument is not acceptable to us for the simple reason that Rules 5 and 6 of the General Clauses Act 1977 in J&K provide as follows :-  "5.
Coming into operation of enactments - Where any act is not expressed to come into operation on a particular day it shall come into operation on that day on which the assent thereto of the Governor is published in the Government Gazettee.
6.
Effect of Repeal - Where this Act or any Act made after the commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be made, than unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not - (a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect, o"x x x".
15.
A reference is made to the provisions of Rule 24 of 1992 Rules, which provides :-  "24.
Repeal and saving - Save as otherwise provided in these rules, if immediately before the commencement of these rules or before the commencement of the Jammu and Kashmir State Subordinate Services Recruitment Board Act, 1990, there were or are in force in the State any rules, notifications or orders corresponding to these rules, those rules, notifications or orders shall stand repealed : Provided that the repeal shall not affect the previous operation of any law, rule, notification or order so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder.
Second proviso further provides - "Provided further that any application invited or received or any other process initiated for selection of candidates for recruitment to the Subordinate Service by any authority before the commencement of these rules shall be transferred to the Board and the Board may take such action as it may consider necessary".
16.
In view of the fore-going rule position, it is abudantly clear that since the process of selection having been taken before the commencement of Rule 24, SRO 319 was in operation.
Therefore, in reference to the provisions of SRO 319, the authorities concerned ought to have complied with Rule 8 of the Rules and should have prepared a waiting list of candidates to fill up the vacancies.
17.
In this context, we may also mention that regard being had to the said Rule 8, though the word `may' is implied, the court will have to interpret the said word `may' in the context of the circumstances under which the recruitment was made and the list was prepared.
If in the event of compliance of the Rule 8, as we have already observed that various candidates who have been offered the post and not being accepted this and in which event that post was to be lapsed, the same will be considered by appointing persons shown in the waiting list.
Therefore, considering from these aspects and different angles to the provisions of law and the Rule 8 of the Rules, we are of the opinion that in view of the requirement of Rule 8, in this behalf, a benefit that may be accrued to the writ petitioner, has been lost.
18.
Another aspect of the matter, as argued by Mr. Lehar, learned counsel for the appellant in support of the appeal, is that in similar circumstances where a person having been selected and another person not having been selected and if he approaches the court of law seeking for the relief, whether such a person (latter) could be considered for being selected for the available post or not.
This question came to be considered by the Supreme court in case, Sri Ashok alias Somanna Gowda and another v. State of Karnataka and others, reported in 1992(2) SCT 35 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 80, wherein the Division Bench of the Supreme Court, referring to the provisions of Art. 16, read with Art. 309 of the Constitution of India and also Rule-1 of the Karnataka State Civil Services Rules, has held as under :  "In view of the fact that appointments under the impugned rules were made as far back as in 1987 and only the present appellants had approached the Tribunal for relief the case of other candidates cannot be considered as they never approached for redress within reasonable time.
We are thus inclined to grant relief only to the present appellants who were vigilant in making grievance and approaching the Tribunal in time".
19.
This statement of law came to be re-considered by the Supreme Court by a Bench consisting of three Judges in case State of Punjab v. Constable Subash Chander and others, reported in AIR 1993 SC 2321, wherein their Lordships of the Supreme Court having re-considered the view taken by the Supreme Court in Gowda's case held as under :-  "x x x The reported case has been mentioned as a passing observation without any attempt to indicate the ratio which could be applied to the present case.
We have examined the judgment in Somanna Gowda's case and are of the view that the same is not at all applicable to the present case."
20.
Be that as it may, we are of the view that the appellant, not only being a person having merit since she had secured 46% marks, but also being a person representing the community of Scheduled Caste, is standing next to Veena Devi.
Since Veena Devi has secured 47% i.e. 1% marks more than secured by the appellant Swaran Kanta and that Veena Devi did not challenge the selection made by the Board nor did she make any grievance of such a selection, it is not known whether even today she is in need of the job, the court will consider the case of the persons who are knocking the doors of the court of law.
Therefore, we allow this appeal and the order of the learned Single Judge dated 20.11.1995 made in SWP No. 1274/94 is set aside.
A direction is issued to the J&K State Subordinate Services Recruitment Board to recommend the case of the appellant for the appointment as a teacher to respondent No. 1 within a period of six weeks.
Order accordingly.