Swatanter Kumar, J - In this Regular Second Appeal the challenge is to the judgment of the First Appellate Court dated 17111995 vide which the Court set aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court dated 22.7.1994 and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
The necessary facts for determination of the matter in issue are that one Shri Rajinder Singh claimed that he was appointed as Radio Mechanic on regular basis and in accordance with rules with effect from 27.2.1967.
He was granted all annual increments and was a member of the regular cadre and continued to serve for 13 years with the Government of Haryana.
The Government issued a gradation list of Radio Mechanics as on 111988 vide their letter dated 961988 and the plaintiff was shown at Serial No. 17 of the seniority list and other defendants No. 2 to 9 in the suit, who were junior to the plaintiff, were shown senior to him.
As the plaintiff had failed to pursue the matter successfully with the Government he filed a suit for declaration and consequential relief on 1891990.
3, The stand of the Government before the trial Court was that the plaintiff was appointed purely on temporary basis and as ad hoc employee and his services were regularised with effect from 111980 and that after the constitution of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, the plaintiff had appeared before the Board and was appointed in a regular manner.
Thereupon his services were regularised and his seniority was accordingly fixed.
4.
It is the settled principle of law that ad hoc or temporary service rendered by an employee per se is not to be counted for the purposes of determination of his seniority in the concerned cadre/grade.
The rare test for this purpose is whether the initial appointment was in accordance with rules, was upon a fair competition, was an appointment against regular posts and amongst others had rendered service in the regular grade upon availing the benefits available to a regular employee.
The basic principle underlying this proposition of law is to avoid back door entries and consequential prejudice to the candidates appointed on regular basis through proper channel and in accordance with rules.
Thus the mischief sought to be pressed by this carnet principle of law is to prevent frustration of appointments on merit and affecting adversely seniority of such candidates selected in accordance with rules and law by the persons who are picked up by individual authorities without following rules and regulations and primarily with a sense of favouritism.
5.
Before I proceed to discuss the applicability of this principle of law to the facts of the present case it is relevant that some paragraphs of the pleadings having a direct bearing on this issue be referred to, which are as under:-  ``1.
That Public Relations Department of the State of Haryana invited candidates through Sub Regional Employment Officer, Rohtak, for filling post of Radio Mechanic in the year 1967.
2.
That the plaintiff was sponsored for interview and test by Employment Exchange alongwith four other candidates whose practical and theoretical test was held on 2521967 at Distt.
Public Relations Office, Rohtak.
3.
That the plaintiff was found fit and was selected as Radio Mechanic.
He was posted as such at Sonepat Sub Centre w.e.f.
27.2.1967 as a regular employee as communicated in DPRO Rohtak letter No. RRR (EST)-67/4634 dated 1531967.
4.
That the plaintiff earned his annual increments yearly in the regular pay scale of Radio Mechanic admissible as a regular employee for all intents and purposes.''
6.
These above paragraphs of the plaint were replied by the main defendant No. 1 in the following manner:  "1.
That para 1 of the plaint is admitted.
2.
That para 2 of the plaint is admitted.
3.
That para 3 of the plaint is wrong and denied.
It is, however, submitted that the plaintiff was appointed as Radio Mechanic at Sonepat w.e.f.
27.2.1967 through Employment Exchange on purely temporary and ad hoc basis, which was approved as such by appointing authority i.e. Director, Public Relations, Haryana vide memo No. PRDH (Estt-1) 6/6458, dated 213167 (Copy at Annexure D-1) It was also made clear that his service could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason, notice or pay in lieu thereof.
4.
That para 4 of the plaint is wrong and denied.
It is, however, submitted that the plaintiff earned annual increments for the continued ad hoc appointment upto 27.2.1973 and was held up at Ist efficiency bar at the stage of Rs. 150/- in the scale of Radio Mechanic i.e. Rs. 120-5-150/6-180/8-220/10-250 w.e.f.
27.2.1974, which was paid to him w.e.f.
121978 raising his pay from Rs. 150/- PM to Rs. 180/- PM (Copy attached at Annexure D.2).''
7.
After referring to the pleadings of the parties, it is also relevant to refer to the documents which were placed by the parties before the Court.
In fact both the parties have relied on common documents.
As such there is hardly any dispute with regard to the documents.
It is only their interpretation which is disputed by the parties.
8.
It is admitted that at the relevant time the appointments were being made through the Employment Exchange.
The name of the plaintiff was sponsored by the Employment Exchange and upon due selection he was given an appointment as a Radio Mechanic.
The appointment of the petitioner is held to be with effect from 27.2.1967 forenoon.
The letter dated 1531996 which is after the appointment of the plaintiff is Exhibit Ex. P/2 as well as Ex. D.5 on record of the trial Court.
This admitted document reads as under:-  ``From  The District Public Relations Officer, Rohtak.
To  The Director, Public Relations and Cultural Affairs, Haryana, Chandigarh.
No. PRR (Estt.
)-67/4636 Dated Rohtak, the 1531967.
RECRUITMENT OF RADIO MECHANIC.
Sir,  Sh. Rajinder Singh s/o Sh. Jiwan Singh has been recruited and posted as Radio Mechanic at Sonepat Sub-Centre w.e.f.
27.2.1967 (F.N.).
Regular appointment order may be issued at an early date.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/- District Public Relations Officer,  Rohtak.''
9.
It is also admitted that the said letter was issued by the competent authority and as already noticed, this letter is in fact being relied upon by both the plaintiff and defendants in the suit.
A letter of appointment dated 2131967 shows that the plaintiff was appointed on temporary basis and approval for such appointment was accorded.
The plaintiff was placed in the regular pay scale/grade of Rs. 70-4-110/5-150/-.
The plaintiff continued to draw his salary in the regular scale and undisputedly was given annual increments in the scale and in the year 1974 was even permitted to cross the efficiency bar.
10.
The learned counsel for the State has placed heavy reliance on the expression used ``temporary/ad hoc'' in the letter of appointment.
This expression loses its meaning as defined by the learned counsel for the respondent to the disadvantage of the petitioner because even in the letter of regularisation of service when the services of the petitioner were allegedly and admittedly regularised with effect from 111980 still it was stated that the petitioner is on a temporary appointment.
11.
In view of the specific pleadings between the parties and clear admission on the part of the State in the suit to paragraphs No. 1 to 3 that the plaintiff was appointed as a regular employee in furtherance to the letter dated 1531996, the inevitable result is that the plaintiff was working in a temporary capacity but against a regular post.
He was appointed after interview, test and his name being sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
The respondents have not disputed these paragraphs and in a suit the parties have to be bound by their pleadings and it is on those facts that the law has to be applied by the Court.
It is the facts of a given case that would determine the principles of law governing the matters in issue and not the principles of law settle the facts of the case which would be governed by such principles in this regard.
12.
At this stage it will be appropriate to make a reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Excise Commissioner, Karnataka and another v. V Sreekanta, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 1564 : 1993(3) SCT 186(SC).
The Court after discussion of facts of that case accepted the appeal and held that the respondent in appeal was not entitled to the benefit of ad hoc services.
However, the real test laid down by the Supreme Court in this case reads as follows:  ``Since the respondent and some other employees were given temporary appointment without following existing recruitment rules, the Government in its anxiety to do justice to the respondent and other employees framed the said special rules of recruitment in 1970 and regularised their services.''
``The service rendered by him prior to the said date was only on the basis of ad hoc employment not made in accordance with the rules of recruitment.''
(Emphasis Applied by Court) 13.
A full Bench of this Court in another recent decision in the case of Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments page 382 : 1994(4) SCT 800(P&H), discussed the entire law on the subject and held that service rendered on ad hoc basis per se cannot be counted to determine appointee's seniority in the cadre.
The Full Bench amongst others provided the following two categories of cases where the service of an employee, though rendered on ad hoc basis, has to be counted for determining his seniority.
Clauses (A) and (B) of the conclusions of Full Bench (at pages 386 and 387) read as under :-  ``(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiating in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted.''
14.
Thus the basic criteria which the plaintiff must establish in order to succeed in such a suit is that he must satisfy the requirement of appointment in accordance with rules after fair competition and regular service in the regular cadre with some length of service.
Once these ingredients are satisfied it may not be permissible for the Court to decline the relief.
In the present case there is no dispute even as to the fact that the appointment was in accordance with the rules in force at the relevant time.
Admittedly the Haryana Services Selection Board came into being in the year 1968 but still the case of the plaintiff was never considered by the Board and the respondents took no steps obviously in that regard till 1980 as alleged which further indicates that what is admitted by the defendants in paragraphs No. 1 to 3 of their written statement is correct and the plaintiff was appointed on regular basis and was given all the benefits which an employee of a regular cadre was entitled to including crossing of the efficiency bar.
The validity of an appointment has to be adjudged in view of the rules in force at the relevant time of appointment and not subsequent thereto.
The exception to this could only be that the initial appointment of an employee stipulated such confirmation upon coming into force of such new rules.
15.
It is admitted that the letter of appointment and even the letter of approval issued by the competent authority did not contain any such stipulation.
The State cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong and act to the prejudice of the employees.
In fact the State in the facts and circumstances of this case, would be estopped from challenging the claim of seniority of the employee in the face of the above letters and their own pleadings in the written statement.
The seniority list was admittedly circulated in the year 1988 disturbing the seniority of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff had pursued his remedy with the department and then served notice under the defendants under Section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code and had then filed the suit on 1791990 without any inordinate delay.
The issue of limitation on proper evidence was decided by both the Courts below in favour of the plaintiff and rightly so.
16.
The reasons given by the First Appellate Court on issues Nos. 1 and 2 are not sustainable in law.
The learned First Appellate Court also failed to consider the effect of Rule 17 of the Haryana Public Relations Department (Technical Group-C) Services Rules, 1985 where the seniority for all members of the service has to be determined by length of continuous service on any post in the service.
There is no dispute to the fact that the plaintiff in the suit had worked continuously uninterrupted in regular pay scale for all this period.
17.
In view of the above discussion, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment of the learned First Appellate Court dated 17.11.1994 is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored.
The respondents are directed to fix the seniority of the appellant giving him benefit of the service rendered with effect from the initial date of his appointment in accordance with the principles laid down by Full Bench of this Court in the case of Chambel Singh (supra).
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.