RS Mongia, J - This writ petition was dismissed by us on January 8, 1997, and it was observed that the reasons thereof would be recorded later on.
We proceed to give reasons.
2.
The point that calls for determination in this case is that in the absence of a fixed date indicated in the advertisement or Rules or Regulations, what should be the date for seeing eligibility of the candidates who may apply for a particular post ?
According to the petitioner, it should be the date of selection and according to the respondent-University it should be the last date for making the application for the post mentioned in the advertisement.
3.
Briefly, the facts of the case may be noticed.
The respondent-Panjab University had issued an advertisement in the Daily Tribune of February 13, 1995, inviting applications for various posts including one for Lecturer in Mass Communication.
The last date for submission of the applications was March 10, 1995.
Apart from other qualifications with which we are not concerned, the candidate applying for the post of Lecturer in Mass Communication was required to have M. Phil./Ph.D.
degree and those who did not have that degree, were required to have qualified the National Education Test (in short NET) conducted by the University Grants Commission (in short UGC).
The petitioner did not have M. Phil./Ph.D.
degree.
He had appeared in the NET conducted by the UGC in December, 1994, but her result had not been declared by May 10, 1995, the last date for submission of the application.
Her result was declared on July 7, 1995, and the same was communicated to the University on July 13, 1995.
The date for interview was fixed as September 14, 1995, but the petitioner was not called for interview, precisely on the ground that she did not have one of the requisite qualifications till the last date for submission of the application.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
4.
The point for consideration as has been mentioned in the opening paragraph of this judgment, according to us fully stands answered in favour of the University by the judgment of the Apex Court reported as Mrs. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan and others, Judgments Today 1993(1) SC 220 : 1993(2) SCT 279(SC).
It was held by the apex Court therein that in the absence of a fixed date indicated in the advertisement/ordinance, the only certain date for scrutiny of qualifications will be the last date for submission of the application for a particular post as may be specified in the advertisement.
In para 12 of the reported judgment, it was observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court as under :  ``The contention that the required qualifications of the candidates should be examined with reference to the date of selection and not with reference to the last date for making applications has only to be stated to be rejected.
The date of selection is invariably uncertain.
In the absence of knowledge of such date the candidates who apply for the posts would be unable to state whether they are qualified for the posts in question or not, if they are yet to acquire the qualifications.
Unless the advertisement mentions a fixed date with reference to which the qualifications are to be judged, whether the said date is of selection or otherwise, it would not be possible for the candidates who do not possess the requisite qualifications in praesenti even to make applications for the posts.
The uncertainty of the date may also lead to a contrary consequence, viz, even those candidates who do not have the qualifications in praesenti and are likely to acquire them at an uncertain future date, may apply for the posts thus swelling the number of applications.
But a still worse consequence may follow, in that it may leave open a scope for malpractices.
The date of selection may be so fixed or manipulated as to entertain some applicants and reject others, arbitrarily.
Hence, in the absence of a fixed date indicated in the advertisement/notification inviting applications with reference to which the requisite qualifications should be judged, the only certain date for the scrutiny of the qualifications will be the last date for making the applications.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that when the selection Committee in the present case, as argued by Shri Manoj Swarup, took into consideration the requisite qualifications as on the date of selection rather than on the last date of preferring applications, it acted with patent illegality, and on this ground itself, the Selections in question are liable to be quashed.
Reference in this connection may also be made to two recent decisions of this Court in AP Public Service Commission, Hyderabad and another v. B. Sarat Chandra and others, 1990) 4 SLR 235 and, District Collector and Chairman, Vizianagaram (Social Welfare Residential School Society), Vizianagaram and another v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi, (1990) 4 SLR 237.''
It may be observed here that certain guidelines were also issued by the apex Court for future guidance.
While laying down five guidelines A to E, the apex Court observed as under:  ``... ... ... ... We, however, feel it necessary to emphasise and bring to the notice of the University that the illegal practices in the selection of candidates which have come to light and which seem to be followed usually at its end must stop forthwith.
It is for this purpose that we lay down the following guidelines for the future selection process.''
Out of the guidelines A to E, we are concerned with guideline B, which is as under:  ``B.
The candidates selected must be qualified as on the last date for making applications for the posts in questions or on the date to be specifically mentioned in the advertisement/notification for the purpose.
The qualifications acquired by the candidates after the said date should not be taken into consideration, as that would be arbitrary and result in discrimination.
It must be remembered that when the advertisement/notification represents that the candidates must have the qualifications in question, with reference to the last date for making the applications or with reference to the specific date mentioned for the purpose, those who do not have such qualifications do not apply for the posts even though they are likely to acquire such qualifications and do acquire them after the said date.
In the circumstances, many who would otherwise be entitled to be considered and may even be better than those who apply, can have a legitimate grievance since they are left out of consideration.''
5.
It would be seen that reference was made by the Apex Court to an earlier judgment of that very Court in AP Public Service Commission, Hyderabad and another v. B. Sarat Chandra and others, 1990(4) S.L.R.
235.
In that case, the candidates applying for the post of Deputy Superintending of Police in Andhra Pradesh under Rule 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Police Service Rules, 1966, were required to have a particular minimum and maximum age on the Ist day of July of the year in which selection is made.
The Supreme Court went to the extent of holding that the year of selection in the aforesaid Rule means the year when the advertisement calling upon the candidates to apply is issued.
The Rule that called for interpretation in this case was in the following terms :  ``The candidate must have completed 21 years on the Ist day of July of the year in which the selection is made.
He should not have completed 26 years as on that day.''
The candidate in that case had applied for the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police in response to an advertisement issued on August 25, 1983.
On July 1, 1983, the candidate was not 18 years of age but was short by 19 days.
In 1984, the Public Service Commission conducted preliminary examination for eligible candidates.
Final examination was conducted in 1985 and in 1986, candidates were called for interview.
In March, 1987, the list of selected candidates was prepared.
In these circumstances, the question arose as to when the selection is said to be made ?
The candidate's argument was that in fact the selection had taken place in March, 1987, when he was eligible so far as age was concerned.
The Apex Court observed as under:-  ``If the word `selection' is understood in a sense meaning thereby only the final act of selecting candidates with preparation of the list for appointment, then the conclusion of the Tribunal may not be unjustified.
But round phrases cannot give square answers.
Before accepting that meaning, we must see the consequences, anomalies and uncertainties that it may lead to.
The Tribunal in fact does not dispute that the process of selection begins with the issuance of advertisement and ends with the preparation of select list for appointment.
Indeed, it consists of various steps like inviting applications, scrutiny of applications, rejection of defective applications or elimination of ineligible candidates, conducting examinations, calling for interview or viva-voce and preparation of list of successful candidates for appointment.
Rule 3 of the Rules of Procedure of the Public Service Commission is also indicative of all these steps.
When such are the different steps in the process of selection, the minimum or maximum age for suitability of a candidate for appointment cannot be allowed to depend upon fluctuating or uncertain date.
If the final stage of selection is delayed and more often it happens for various reasons, the candidates who are eligible on the date of application may find themselves eliminated at the final stage for no fault of theirs.
The date to attain the minimum or maximum age must, therefore, be specific, and determinant on a particular date for candidate to apply and for recruiting agency to scrutinise applications.
It would be, therefore, unreasonable to construe the word selection only as the factum of preparation of the select list.
Nothing so bad would have been intended by the Rule-making authority.''
The aforesaid judgment was again followed in Judgements Today 1996(4) SC 189.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner cited Ashok Kumar Sharma and another v. Chander Shekher and another, 1993(1) SLR 379 : 1993(2) SCT 208(SC) where a similar question arose.
In that case in the Notification inviting applications, it was mentioned that the ``candidates who fulfil the qualification prescribed for appointment to the posts advertised shall alone be eligible for being called for interview and others need not therefore apply.''
This recruitment was not through the Public Service Commission.
However, rule 37 of the Public Service Commission Rules of the Jammu & Kashmir was in the following terms :  "Rule 37.
Applications of candidates who have appeared in the examination the passing of which may make them eligible to appear in an interview for recruitment to a post to be made otherwise than by a competitive examination, but results whereof have not been declared upto the date of making of the application, may be entertained provisionally, but no such candidate shall be permitted to take the interview if he is declared as having failed in the examination or if the results are not available on the date the viva-voce test is held.''
In that case, the appellants before the apex Court had passed the requisite examination by the time they were to appear for interview though they did not have the requisite qualifications by the last date of the submission of the applications.
They were allowed to sit for the interview and in fact had been appointed.
TK Thommen, J and V Ramaswami, J (two out of the three Judge Bench) after noticing that since principle of rule 37 of the Public Service Commission noticed above was being generally followed by the State of Jammu and Kashmir, upheld the view of the learned Single Judge on peculiar facts of the case and upset the judgment of the Division Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court.
The third Hon'ble Judge was of the view that the State Government could not justify the action by saying that they were following the principle of rule 37 of the Public Service Commission Rules.
It was observed by the Judge as under :  ``A rule framed under one Statute, therefore, cannot be invoked for carrying out the objective of another enactment.
I have, therefore, grave doubt if rules framed by the Public Service Commission could be utilised for purposes of construing the notification issued by the department of government which has separate set of rules.''
However, on the facts of the case, the Hon'ble Judge allowed the appeal and concurred in the conclusion of the other two Judges.
7.
It will be seen that the case has no application to the facts of the present case.
Not only that the decision was on the peculiar facts of that case but the past practice followed by the State Government in following the principle of Rule 37 of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission Rules was brought into play.
Learned counsel for the respondent also cited Charles K Skaria and other v. Dr. C Mathew and others, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 1230.
That was a case for giving certain weightage or advantage to the candidates who had post-graduate degree to their credit.
Even in that case, in para 26 of the reported judgment while summing up it was observed as under:  ``To sum up, the applicant for post-graduate degree course earns the right to the added advantage of diploma only if (a) he has completed the diploma examination on or before the last date for the application, (b) the result of the examination is also published before that date, and (c) the candidate's success in the diploma course is brought to the knowledge of the selection committee before completion of selection in an authentic or acceptable manner.''
It will be seen from the above that the apex court in that case also observed that the result of the examination should be published before the last date of the submission of the application and only then the credit of that qualification can be given.
According to us, this authority is of no help to the petitioner.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also argued that in some cases, the University had allowed the candidates to take the interview though they did not have the requisite qualifications by the last date of the submission of the application.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in no case, it has been done so.
The cases were where the office had raised an objection that the qualifications of a particular individual were not equivalent to the qualifications which were prescribed.
In such cases, only a decision was taken by the Vice Chancellor or other competent authority that in fact the qualifications of the candidate were equivalent to the prescribed qualification but the relevant date in all those was the last date of the submission of the applications.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.