AR Lakshmanan, J.- The nine petitioners in WP No. 16302 of 1995 who are working as Junior Assistants, Assistants, Superintendents and Assistant Revenue Officers and the two petitioners in WP No.16913 of 1995 who are working as Junior Assistant and Assistant, in the Madurai Unit of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, have filed the writ petitions challenging the common order dated 17111995 of the Managing Director of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, transferring them from Madurai to various places.
According to them, the impugned order is illegal and an unfair labour practice and that the same has been passed by way of punishment for their trade union activities.
According to the petitioners in WP No. 16302 of 1995, they have served only for a short period in the present station in which they were working as detailed below:  1st petitioner-One year and seven months  2nd petitioner-Seven years  3rd petitioner-Five years 4th petitioner-Six months 5th petitioner-Six months 6th petitioner-Two years  7th petitioner-Three years 8th petitioner-Five months 9th petitioner-One year and 11 months.
According to the petitioners in WP No. 16913 of 1995, they have completed only a short period in the present station.
2.
It is stated in the affidavit filed in support of WP No. 16302 of 1995 that on 10.10.1995 one Superintendent by name G Meenakshisundaram was assaulted by the Executive Engineer Mr. Natarajan, Divisional Accountant Mr. K Palaniappan and the Assistant Mr. Varadharajan.
In that assault, the said Meenakshisundaram sustained grievous injuries and he was hospitalised, where he had undergone an operation.
Since one of the staff members was brutally attacked by the higher official, condemning this act and to take legal action as against the concerned officials, the Joint Council of all Union Employees of the Housing Board, Madurai submitted a representation to the Managing Director on 17101995 and since no action was taken till 31101995, on 2111995 the Joint Council submitted a representation expressing their intention to go on mass Casual Leave on 10111995 showing their protest for not taking any action against the officials who has assaulted the Superintendent.
3.
Subsequent to this, basing on the instructions of the Managing Director, the Superintending Engineer, Madurai, by memo dated 8111995 instructed the Executive Engineer to bring to the notice of the employees that disciplinary action will be taken for taking mass casual leave.
Meanwhile, the Joint Council instructed the employees to withdraw the mass Casual Leave on the basis of the discussions it had with the Managing Director in this regard on 6111995, and basing on the assurance given by the Managing Director, the Joint Council had informed the Managing Director that the employees have withdrawn the mass Casual Leave.
In addition to this, each individual also submitted a letter on 10111995 withdrawing the casual leave and attended to the work, which fact was also informed by the Joint Council to the Managing Director.
4.
According to the petitioners, though First Information Report was filed in the Criminal Case as against the three officials, no action was taken against them.
On the other hand, in order to wreak vengeance for their union activities, the petitioners, who are prominent members of the union, were transferred by way of punishment.
It is stated that the petitioners were not transferred for any administrative lapses or for any other irregularities but for putting forth a rightful claim for an unjust act.
Neither any disciplinary proceedings are pending nor the petitioners are undergoing any punishment so as to warrant the transfer.
Mass transfer can be ordered only during general transfer period and during the middle of the academic year, the petitioners cannot be disturbed arbitrarily.
The petitioners' children are studying in Madurai and in the present office they have completed only a short period.
Besides, the transfer order has been made in order to wreak vengenance against the petitioners for raising their voice as against an unlawful act of higher officials.
5.
The same is the contention in WP No. 16913 of 1995 filed by the two other employees of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board.
6.
The respondents filed a counter affidavit dated 4121995 through the Secretary and Personnel Officer of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board.
It is stated that the petitioners who were working in the four offices in Madurai viz., Madurai Circle, Madurai Housing Unit, Madurai Special Division and Tamil Nadu Urban Development Project, Madurai Division, for several years continuously were transferred purely for administrative reasons.
As many as 20 persons serving in various categories were transferred from the above mentioned four offices to various other places by six different orders dated 17111995.
In the above orders, 20 persons were transferred from Madurai and 20 other persons were posted in the vacancies that arose at Madurai out of the said order of transfer.
7.
According to the respondents, apart from the transfer orders relating to Madurai area, some other persons were also ordered to be transferred in the said proceedings from one place to another totally unconnected with the Madurai Area.
One N. Ramakrishnan, Superintendent, who was working at Salem Housing Unit was transferred to Special Division 11, Coimbatore; one S Thirugnanam, Divisional Accountant was transferred from KK Nagar Circle, Madras, to Ramanathapuram Housing Unit; one N Durairaj, Divisional Accountant, Villupuram Housing Unit was transferred to TNUDP, Tiruchirapalli Division; and one G Gladson, Junior Assistant from Vellore Housing Unit to Tirunelveli Housing Unit and likewise.
8.
It is stated in the counter-affidavit that the following categories of persons were transferred from the four offices located at Madurai to various places;  Executive Engineer One Allottee Service Manager One Division Accountant.
One Section Officer/Asst.
Revenue Officer/Superintendent.
Five  Assistant/Junior Assistant Eleven Out of the abovenamed persons, only nine persons alone have approached this Court aggrieved against the said order of transfer.
It is also denied in the counter-affidavit that the petitioners have served only for a short period at Madurai.
The break up details of total period of service put in by the petitioners at Madurai are found in paragraphs 5 of the counter affidavit, which is reproduced hereunder:  A. Jeevanandam (1st petitioner) 16 years 6 months  R. Pushpavanam, (2nd "), 21", 5"  E. Muruganandam, (3rd"), 19" 10"  V. Eswaran, (4th "), 20 ", 10 "  S. Mohan, (I) (5th "), 12 ", 10-1/2 "  R. Pandy, (6th "), 12 ", 7-1/2 "  P. Periakaruppan, (7th "), 22 ", 8-1/2 "  N. Nageswaran, (8th "), 27 ", 10 "  S. Arulanandam, (9th "), 24 ", 4-1/2 "  9.
It is also stated in the counter-affidavit that a case has been registered under Sections 341, 323 and 506, IPC, by Tallakulam Hl Police Station in Crime No. 1485 of 1995 against one K Natarajan, Executive Engineer and Administrative Officer, Madurai Special Division, Palaniappan, Divisional Accountant, Madurai, Special Division, and Varadharajan, Assistant, Madurai Special Division, on the basis of the complaint given by one Meenakshisundaram, Superintendent, Madurai Special Division, on 12101995 and since the said case is pending, the respondents are awaiting the outcome of the said case, reserving liberty to proceed further on the basis of the result of the criminal case.
The respondents have also denied that the impugned order has been passed by way of punishment or pursuant to any disciplinary proceedings.
10.
The petitioners filed a reply affidavit dated 7111995 to the counter- affidavit filed by the respondents.
In the reply affidavit, the petitioners have furnished certain particulars in regard to the names of persons/individuals who are serving at Madurai for more than 15 to 20 years.
The respondents filed an additional counter-affidavit dated 811996 and another additional counter-affidavit dated 2211996.
11.
I have heard Mr. K Alagiriswami, learned Senior counsel for the petitioners and Mr. N Kannadasan, learned counsel for the respondents.
12.
Mr. K Alagiriswami reiterated the contentions raised in the affidavit and mainly contended that the order of transfer is punitive in nature because of the petitioners' union activities and that the petitioners, who were working for a short period in the present office, were transferred to other places en masse for their union activities.
Inviting my attention to the particulars furnished in the reply affidavit, Mr. K Alagiriswami contended that the petitioners alone have been discriminated and persons who were working for more than 15 to 20 years in the same station (Madurai) were not at all disturbed, which would amount to discrimination.
He further said that the persons who are transferred from other stations in the place of the petitioners have not joined and therefore the order of transfer impugned in these writ petitions is liable to be set aside.
In support of his contentions, Mr. K Alagiriswami cited the following decisions reported in P Pushpakaran v. The Chairman, Coir Board, Cochin, 1979(1) SLR 309; Biman Kumar Roy v. S Lakhshminarayanan, 1978(2) SLR 139 (Cal); C Ramanathan v Acting Zonal Manager, Food Corporation of India, Madras, 1980(1) SLR 309 (Madras); Prakash Chandra Sexana v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1980(1) SLR 788; Mohammad Thekkethil v. Director of Panchayats, 1982(2) SLR 390 (Kerala); and KK Jindal v. General Manager, Northern Railway, 1996(2) CAT 27.
13.
Mr. N Kannadasan, per contra, contended that the order of transfer has been made only on administrative grounds and that the petitioners have been working in Madurai itself for more than 16, 21, 19, 20, 12, 12, 22, 27 and 24 years respectively as per the particulars furnished in paragraph 5 of the counter-affidavit.
It is contended that the petitioners cannot claim, as a matter of right, to stick on at Madurai itself for the entire length of their service and that the break up details furnished in paragraph 5 of the counter-affidavit would disclose that in their entire tenure of office the petitioners were allowed to work at Madurai itself for a very long period and that all of them have served in stations other than Madurai only for a short period and as such, no motive could be attributed to the impugned orders of transfer.
Since the impugned orders of transfer were passed purely for administrative reasons, no motive could be alleged as if the impugned order has been passed by way of punishment.
This apart it is contended that several orders of transfer were passed on the same day viz., 17111995, which involve nearly 45 persons in the entire State but only the petitioners alone have come forward to this Court alleging mala fides against the said orders of transfer.
In support of his contentions, Mr. N Kannadasan cited the following decisions reported in Union of India v. SL Abbas, AIR 1993 SC 2444 : 1995(4) SCT 455(SC); Rajendran Roy v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1236 : 1993(2) SCT 65(SC); Union of India v. NP Thomas, 1994(1) SCT 46 (SC) : 1993 Supp.
(1) SCC 704 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. SS Kourav, 1995(1) SLJ 350 : 1995(2) SCT 195(SC).
14.
I have carefully considered the arguments of the learned counsel appearing on either side.
I have also gone through the decisions cited on either side.
I do not propose to individually refer to decisions cited by both sides in view of the settled position of law as discussed infra.
15.
A cursory perusal of the particulars furnished in paragraph 5 of the counter-affidavit would disclose that the petitioners have served in Madurai Region itself for several years as extracted in paragraph 8 above.
A perusal of the break up details would disclose that the petitioners have worked in Madurai itself for a very long period and have served in other stations only for a very short period.
16.
It is true that criminal prosecution has been launched against three of the officers and the matter is pending before the Criminal Court and that the Board was awaiting the outcome of the said case, reserving liberty to proceed further on the basis of the result of the criminal case.
A complaint has been registered under Sections 341, 323 and 506.
IPC, by Tallakulam Hl Police Station in Crime No. 1485 of 1995 against K Natarajan, Palaniappan and Varadharajan.
17.
The motive alleged for transfer is the demonstration made by the petitioners against the management for not taking action against the aforementioned three officials for assaulting one G Meenakshisundaram, a member of the petitioners' union.
It is now represented that a complaint has already been lodged and the matter is taken on file by the competent Criminal Court.
It is also stated that they are waiting for the outcome of the Criminal case for proceeding against the officers who are involved in the assault case.
Therefore, no motive can be alleged for transfer of the petitioners to other stations.
18.
The further averment of the petitioners that the impugned order of transfer has been passed by mass order is also incorrect and the same has been denied specifically by the Housing Board.
As stated already, several orders of transfer have been passed on the same day, i.e., 17111995 involving about 45 persons in the entire State.
It is not in dispute that only nine persons have come forward before this Court alleging mala fide against the order of transfer.
The mala fide alleged, in my opinion, has no basis at all.
The petitioners, as a matter of right cannot claim to stick on at Madurai itself for the entire length of their service.
It is also pointed out to me that one N. Ramakrishnan, Superintendent, who was working at Salem Housing Unit was transferred to Special Division II, Coimbatore; one S Thirugnanam, Divisional Accountant was transferred from KK Nagar, Madras, to Ramanathapuram Housing Unit, one N Durairaj, Divisional Accountant, Villupuram Housing Unit TNUDP, Tiruchirapalli Division; and one G Gladson, Junior Assistant from Vellore Housing Unit to Tirunelveli Housing Unit.
The above facts would amply demonstrate that the orders of transfer were issued purely for administrative reasons and not confined to the petitioners alone.
It is also pertinent to notice that all the posts which have fallen vacant because of the transfer of the petitioners were already filled up by persons who were also ordered to be transferred from other offices.
It is further contented by the respondents that excluding the last grade servants such as Officer Assistants, there are about 391 or more persons working in Madurai as officers out of which only 20 persons were transferred.
Therefore, in my opinion, it cannot be termed that the petitioners alone were transferred by virtue of a mass transfer order.
As rightly contended by Mr. N Kannadasan, the impugned orders of transfer were passed purely for the purpose of stream-lining, re-organising and toning up the quality of administration in various offices throughout the State and therefore, there is no mala fide or motivation on the part of the administration in effecting the said orders of transfer.
I see much force in the above contention of the learned counsel for the respondents.
19.
In the course of argument it is contended by the petitioners that the substitutes who were posted in the posts that were occupied by the petitioners were forced to join duty for the sake of record and none of them was working as on the said date after joining their respective posts at Madurai Division.
It is also contended that the substitutes immediately after reporting for duty have gone on leave and not working there continuously.
This Court directed the respondents to ascertain and inform this Court about the veracity of the statement made by the petitioners.
In this connection, an additional counter-affidavit was filed by the respondents stating that the statement made on the side of the petitioners is absolutely false and not correct.
It is stated in the additional counter-affidavit that for the 11 posts from which the petitioners were transferred, all the 11 substitutes have joined immediately after availing joining time and ten persons are continuously working from the date of their joining duty at Madurai Office and that only one individual by name R Santhanam, who has joined duty on 27111995, is on leave on medical ground and all the remaining persons except two individuals who have gone on leave for a short while are working continuously from the date of their joining duty.
The two individuals who have availed leave for a short while have also subsequently joined duty and are working there continuously.
20.
In the course of arguments Mr. K Alagiriswami, made a further plea to the effect that the petitioners can be retained at Madurai till the end of the academic year.
The matter was adjourned for the said purpose.
Mr. N Kannadasan, after consulting the respondents, submitted that this request of the petitioners will create certain administrative problems as detailed in the additional counter-affidavit filed on 811996.
They are :  a.
The sanctioned strength of the Board/Circle/Unit/Division would increase in the event of reposting the petitioners once again in the same office,  b.
Two persons cannot be appointed or posted to a single vacancy.
Further, there is no extra work load in the Madurai Office which can be entrusted to the petitioners since the work has already been allocated among the existing staff and the persons who were posted as substitutes have already joined duty.
c. The work relating to the offices wherein the petitioners were posted would be affected and dislocated if the said posts are kept vacant and the same would adversely affect the administration in other offices.
d. Frequent shifting of personnel will cause dislocation to both the offices i.e., the office at Maduari as well as the offices where the substitutes were posted in the place of the petitioners leading to let up in service to the general public and allottees.
e. As per the Service Regulations of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, the posts in which the incumbents have been working are transferable within the offices of the Board which are located throughout the State including in the middle of the academic year for administrative reasons.
f. All the petitioners were transferred purely on administrative grounds and to streamline the functioning of the officers for which no mala fide could be attributed.
In view of the explanation offered by the respondents, as stated above, I am of the view that it is not for this Court to interfere with the orders of transfer which have been made on administrative grounds.
21.
Another additional counter-affidavit was filed on 2211996 to clarify the plea raised by Mr. K Alagiriswami, on the previous hearing date with regard to the memorandum dated 27121995 issued by the Executive Engineer and Administrative Officer, Madurai, Housing Unit to some of the writ petitioners.
It is submitted that the Executive Engineer has issued the said memo to the individuals concerned when he came to know that they are in the habit of availing casual leave/earned leave without obtaining any prior permission resulting in dislocation of routine work of office.
The Executive Engineer and Administrative Officer have, therefore, issued the said memo in order to point out the lapses on the part of the individuals concerned and even though they were directed to submit a reply within a period of three days, no action was initiated against any of the individuals consequent on the memo dated 27121995.
22.
The allegation of victiminisation alleged by the petitioners, in my opinion, has to be rejected as the petitioners cannot claim any immunity from transfer merely by reason of their being office-bearers of the union.
The fact that they had organised protests and agitations is not a ground from which intention to victimise the petitioners can be inferred.
Apart from the general allegation that their trade union activities have led to their transfer, there is no other material from which it could be inferred that the transfers were effected with a view to victimise the petitioners.
Therefore, I reject the contention of Mr. Alagiriswami, that the transfers were made by way of punishment and also for the trade union activities of the petitioners.
23.
Transfer of employees has been considered by this Court in numerous decisions and it has been held by this Court that transfer is a general condition of service of the employees, that such transfers are to be effected for the administrative convenience and that the Court does not sit in appeal nor call for details of administrative exigencies.
It is not alleged by the petitioners that because of the transfer order there is any loss of emoluments or any loss to their status.
Therefore in my view, it cannot be characterised as an amount of punishment.
In fact, l myself have held in a number of cases that the Housing Board or the Electricity Board is entitled to transfer any of its employees if the transfer is necessitated by administrative exigencies.
It is worthwhile to remember that no employee has a right to work in a particular place.
As already seen, the petitioners have worked in Madurai itself ranging from 10 to 20 years.
As pointed out by Mr. N Kannadasan, the order of transfer need not necessarily be passed on the balance of convenience and an order of transfer is passed purely on administrative exigencies.
It is also settled law that Courts do not exercise supervisory control over orders of transfer.
It is a necessary concomitant of every service.
This is what the various High Courts including this Court and the Supreme Court have consistently laid down.
24.
The allegations of mala fide were not made out on the facts of this case.
Only in cases where the order of transfer is found to be mala fide or in cases where such orders are in colourable exercise of power, the orders would become wholly illegal and void.
In this case, it has not been made out by any acceptable material that the order of transfer has been made with any mala fide intention.
In a recent decision in NK Singh v. Union of India, 1994(5) JT (SC) 298 : 1995(1) SCT 269(SC) the Supreme Court has observed as follows :  ``No roving enquiry into the matter is called for or justified within the scope of judicial review of a transfer scrutinised with reference to the private rights of an individual....
Transfer of a Government servant in a transferable service is a necessary incident of the service career."
25.
In my opinion, there are no compelling or strong circumstances to cancel the order of transfer.
In my considered opinion, the order of transfer is not vitiated by any mala fides or extraneous considerations as contended by Mr. K Alagiriswami.
The transfer of the petitioners is in accordance with the Regulations of the Housing Board and it is not for this Court to enter into a roving enquiry into the matter to ascertain the precise nature of the administrative exigency and judicially review the same.
This apart, as a matter of fact, all the persons who were transferred to the posts of the petitioners have already joined and they are working in the said posts.
26.
For the foregoing reasons, I hold that there are no merits in any of the contentions raised by the petitioners.
Accordingly, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.