GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to pay the arrears of pay consequent upon the revision of pay scales of the petitioners with effect from 111973 and also for issue of a direction to the respondents to consider the cases of the petitioners for promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme with effect from 111983 and to remove efficiency bar at the stage of 1300/-.
Prayer has also been made for the issue of an appropriate direction to consider the cases of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Reader.
2.
All the petitioners joined service of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, between 1973 to 1977 as Research Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 300-800.
In the year 1978 the Governor of Punjab accorded approval to the revision of pay scales of the staff of the Punjabi University, Patiala and the respondent-Guru Nanak Dev University.
One of the categories of posts for which the revision was effected was that of Research Assistants.
Their pay scales were revised from Rs. 300-800 to Rs. 550-750 and Rs. 700-1600.
The grade of Rs. 700-1600 is said to have been approved for the existing incumbents of the posts of Research Assistants.
As per this order, revision of pay scales was to be effected from the date of issue of letter dated 911978.
In its meeting held on 2521978 the Syndicate of the respondent- University resolved that the recommendations made by the Finance Committee on 621978 regarding the revision of the pay scales of the Research Assistants be approved.
It was also resolved to enquire from the Punjabi University, Patiala, whether the pay scales of Research Assistants had been revised with effect from 111973 or from 911978.
Similarly other clarifications regarding maximum of grade for future vacancies of Research Assistants were also sought.
In the meeting held on 1761978 the Syndicate of the respondent-University further decided to give revised grade of Research Assistants with effect from 111973 as was done by the Punjabi University, Patiala in the cases of their Research Assistants.
The resolution passed by the Syndicate on 1761978 was considered by the Senate of the respondent- university and it was unanimously approved.
In a meeting of the Vice- Chancellors of the Universities held on 6111979 at Chandigarh it was decided that fixation of pay in the revised scale be done with effect from 111973 but the arrears shall not be paid between 111973 to 8.1.1978.
On the same line resolution was passed by the Syndicate of respondent No. (sic) on 2931980.
The petitioners made representations to the respondent-University for grant of actual benefit of the revised pay scales with effect from 111973 but the same have been turned down by the University.
3.
The petitioners have challenged the denial of arrears of pay with effect from 111973 to 8.1.1978 on the ground that the action of the respondent- University in denying the aforesaid benefit to them amounts to hostile discrimination inasmuch as the holders of all other posts have been given the benefit of arrears of revised pay fixation and those were working as Research Assistants in the Punjabi University have also been given the actual benefit of revised fixation with effect from 111973.
Another claim made by the petitioner is that under the Merit Promotion Scheme formulated by the University Grants Commission in the year 1982 they have a right to be considered for promotion because the post of Research Assistant is at par with that of Lecturer and they were in fact designated as Lecturers vide Annexure P-11 dated 2591982.
4.
In its reply the respondent No. 2 has raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that remedy of civil suit is available to the petitioners for claiming arrears of revised pay scale.
On merits respondent No. 2 has pleaded that the posts in research and teaching are not equivalent.
According to respondent No. 2, the pay scale of Research Assistants was revised as per University's own decision keeping in view the instructions issued by the Government vide Annexures P2 and P-5 but at the same time it was decided not to give arrears to the Research Assistants with effect from 111973 and, therefore, the petitioners do not have any right to claim any arrears of the revised pay scale.
The respondent has pleaded that the Punjabi University has acted in violation of the instructions issued by the Government vide Annexure P5 and, therefore, on the basis of an erroneous action taken by the Punjabi University the petitioners cannot claim benefit of arrears of salary.
Regarding the Merit Promotion Scheme the respondent has stated that the Merit Promotion Scheme of the UGC has been implemented qua the petitioners from the date they got the grade of Rs. 700- 1600 and from that date their services will be counted for the purpose of UGC Merit Promotion Scheme.
The respondent has further stated that the University had requested the Government vide Annexure R2/1 dated 23111978 to approve the grant of revised pay scales to the Research Assistants with effect from 111973 but the Government declined to accept the proposal of the University and conveyed its rejection vide Annexure R2/2 dated 1211978 and the University is bound to act according to the instructions issued by the Government.
5.
Before coming to the merits of the case it is necessary to deal with the preliminary objection raised by Shri Patwalia, counsel for respondent No. 2, namely, that the petitioners should be relegated to the remedy of civil suit for claiming arrears of revised pay scale.
Learned counsel argued that for claiming monetary benefits in terms of the revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 the petitioners were entitled to file a civil suit and the Civil Court was competent to pass an appropriate decree in their favour and, therefore, there is no warrant for exercise of jurisdiction by this Court.
On the other hand, Dr. Balram Gupta, counsel for the petitioners, argued that the objection of alternative remedy is no more available to respondent No. 2 because the writ petition was admitted after hearing both the parties.
6.
Record of this case shows that the writ petition was filed on 14101985 and on 15101985 a Division Bench of this Court directed the issue of notice of motion for 911986.
On 911986 the case was adjourned to 11.3.1986 in order to enable respondent No. 2 to file reply.
It was once again adjourned to 25.8.1986 to enable respondent No. 2 to file reply.
Yet another adjournment was given to respondent No. 21 on 2681986 to file reply by 5111986.
On 5111986 the Court called upon respondent No. 1 to explain as to why it had not approved the payment of arrears in respect of the enhanced pay scales to the petitioners in the same manner as it had been done in the cases of other categories of employees of Guru Nanak Dev University and Punjabi University, and the case was adjourned to 1211987.
On 1211987 the Court granted one month's further time to respondent No. 1 for filing reply.
Yet another adjournment was granted on 2851987 in order to enable the State counsel to produce instructions.
The same story was repeated on 2871987.
Ultimately on 23111987 the writ petition was admitted.
The record further shows that respondent No. 2 had filed its reply some time in October 1986 and respondent No. 1 filed its reply on 2011987.
From these facts it is evident that the case had remained pending before this Court for two years after the issue of notice of motion and only thereafter it was admitted by the Court.
During this period respondents Nos. 1 and 2 filed their replies and more than one opportunities were given to the respondent-Government to disclose the reasons for discrimination between the petitioners on the one hand and the employees of the Punjabi University as well as of the respondent-Guru Nanak Dev University on the other in the matter of grant of arrears.
When the Court heard the case for admission, replies filed by respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were available before it and after considering the replies, including the preliminary objection regarding entertainability of the writ petition on the ground of availability of alternative remedy, the Court admitted the writ petition.
This clearly shows that the Division Bench of this Court did not feel inclined to relegate the petitioners to the remedy of civil suit.
The order of admission of the writ petition does not show that it was subject to objection of respondent No. 2 regarding alternative remedy.
It is, therefore, reasonable to presume that the Division Bench did not find any substance in the preliminary objection raised by respondent No. 2 to the entertainability of the writ petition.
This being the position, I do not find the slightest reason to non-suit the petitioners on the ground that they did not avail of the alternative remedy at suit.
7.
There is another reason for not accepting the objection of respondent No. 2.
The writ petition had remained pending at the motion stage for over two years.
After admission it has remained pending before this Court for almost eight years.
Whatever be the reason for this delay, the fact remains that this Court has not been able to hear and decide the objection for one decade.
If at all the Court had heard and dismissed the writ petition in the year 1985 or in the year 1987 on the ground of availability of alternative remedy, the petitioners may have availed the remedy of civil suit.
Therefore, at this belated stage it is neither possible nor justified for the Court to shirk from its responsibility to make adjudication on merits of the grievance made by the petitioners.
The Court will be singularly failing to discharge its constitutional duty towards the citizens if it were to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of availability of alternative remedy.
After it has remained pending for 10 years, there is no reason for the Court to give a short shrift to the case of the petitioners and lessen its burden by throwing out the petition on the ground that the petitioners did not avail the remedy of civil suit.
8.
Moreover, if at this stage I was to dismiss the writ petition on the ground that the petitioners had alternative remedy of civil suit and they should have availed the same, this would amount to an unwarranted presumption that the two learned Judges who heard the matter on 23111987 did not apply their mind to the pleadings of the parties or the arguments advanced by them and the basics of judicial discipline warrant that no such order is made by the Court which gives rise to a presumption like this.
Secondly the petitioners cannot be made to suffer injustice merely because in the year 1985 or 1987 the Court thought it proper to entertain the writ petition and to hear it on merits.
The petitioners cannot at this stage avail the remedy of civil suit as time barred and it is well recognized principle of jurisprudence that no man can be punished due to the mistake of the Court.
9.
Yet another ground for not accepting the preliminary objection raised by respondent No. 2 is that the writ petition involves adjudication of the claim made by the petitioners that the respondents have acted in contravention of the constitutional provisions incorporated in Articles 14 and 16.
Thus, in substance the petitioners are seeking enforcement of their fundamental right of equality and for breach of their fundamental right the petitioners could have invoked the jurisdiction of the Apex Court by directly filing a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution Therefore, there is no reason, whatsoever, to refuse relief to the petitioners.
10.
Before closing this part of the discussion, I consider it necessary to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Hirday Narain v. IT Officer, Bareilly, AIR 1971 SC 33.
In that case also objection to the entertainability of the writ petition was raised on the ground that the petitioner could have moved the Commissioner of Income Tax for revision of the order passed by the Assessing Authority.
While repelling that contention the Supreme Court held that though the remedy of revision was available to the petitioner, the petitioner could not have been non-suited after the High Court had entertained the writ petition and the same was heard on its merits.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the preliminary objection to the entertainability of the writ petition is rejected.
12.
On the merits of the case I shall first deal with the contention of Dr. Gupta that the action of the respondents in denying benefit of arrears to the petitioners between 111973 to 8.1.1978 is discriminatory while Dr. Gupta argued that the denial of the arrears of the revised pay scale to the petitioners is patently arbitrary and discriminatory and is devoid of any rationality, Shri Patwalia, learned counsel for the respondent-University argued that the benefit of revised pay scale cannot be claimed by the petitioners with effect from 111973 in the face of the clear decision taken by the Syndicate and the Government.
Learned counsel argued that even though the University may not be strictly bound by the decision of the Government, it was perfectly justified for the Syndicate to decide against the payment of arrears keeping in view the fact that the posts held by the petitioners were to be frozen and were converted into that of Lecturers.
Shri Patwalia argued that the petitioners constitute a class upto themselves and, therefore, they are not entitled to make a grievance of discrimination.
13.
Perusal of annexures Pl and P2 shows that in the first instance the Government of Punjab decided to approve the revised pay scale of Research Assistants with the rider that the revision be made effective with effect from the date of issue of Annexure Pl i.e. 911978.
Thereafter the Syndicate passed resolution dated 2521978 and approved the grant of revised pay scale.
However, the Syndicate directed that inquiries be made from the Registrar, Punjabi University, Patiala, whether the benefit of revised pay scales has been given to their employees with effect from 111973 or 911978.
Resolution Annexure P3 was passed by the Syndicate on 1761978 and while affirming the grant of revised pay scale of the Research Assistants, the Syndicate decided to give this benefit with effect from 111973 as had been done by the Punjabi University, Patiala.
The Senate of the University approved the Syndicate's proposal in its meeting held on 1691978 as would appear from Annexure P-4.
In this regard it will be profitable to quote the extracts of Annexures P3 and P4, which are as under :  Annexure P3 "The Syndicate while approving the above recommendation had resolved as under:-  RESOLVED THAT THE above mentioned recommendations of the Finance Committee dated 621978, be approved with the modification that enquiries be made from the Registrar, Punjabi University, Patiala whether the grade of the Research Assistants had been raised by them from 111973 or from 911978, and whether the maximum of the grade for future vacancies of the Research Assistants was Rs. 750/- or 950/- in view of the fact that the maximum of existing grade of the Research Assistants was Rs. 800/-.
The Vice-Chancellor further stated that in pursuance of the above decision of the Syndicate, a communication was addressed to the Registrar, Punjabi University, Patiala requesting him to intimate the date from which the revised grade of Research Assistants hat been given.
The Registrar, Punjabi University, Patiala had intimated that the revised grade to their Research Assistants had been given with effect from 111973.
On the above analogy the Research Assistants of this University be also sanctioned the Revised grade with effect from 111973.
This was agreed to.
RESOLVED: That the Research Assistants of this University be given the revised grade with effect from 111973 as had been done by the Punjabi University Patiala in the case of their Research Assistants."
Annexure 4 ``Proceedings of the Senate Meeting held on 1691978.
VI.
The recommendations of the Syndicate as contained in item Nos. 6-11 were read out and unanimously approved i.e. :-  ``6.
That the Research Assistants of this University (be) is given the revised grade w.e.f.
111973 as had been done by the Punjabi University, Patiala in the case of this University :-  Existing Pay Scales Revised Pay Scales  Rs. 300-25-350/25-400-30-610/30-40-800 (a) Rs. 700-40-1100-EB50-1300-Assessment-1600 (b) 550-25-750 for existing and future incumbents.
(Syndicate Para 60(1) dated 1761978)."
From these two resolutions it is more than evident that the Punjabi University, Patiala gave benefit of revised pay scales to the Research Assistants with effect from 111973 and the same benefit was decided to be given to the employees of respondent No. 2.
It appears that subsequently on a communication sent by the University to the Government on 23111978 to approve the grant of revised pay scale with effect from 111973, the Government did not accept the proposal of the University and the Syndicate of the University passed resolution Annexure P6 not to pay arrears to the Research Assistants with effect from 111973.
It is thus evident that the decision of the Syndicate to deny benefit of arrears to the petitioners is based primarily on the Government's refusal to approve and accept the proposal of the University.
On its own the University did take positive decision to give benefit of revised pay scale to the Research Assistants with effect from 111973.
Refusal of the Government to accept the request made by respondent No. 2 cannot in my opinion be made a rational basis for denying the benefit of arrears of revised pay scales to the Research Assistants of respondent No. 2, particularly when the decision of the Government is not based on any reason or rhyme.
14.
I may also refer to the provisions contained in the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Act, 1969, and the statutes framed by the University.
By virtue of the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Act, 1969 (for short `the Act') the University has been created as an independent autonomous statutory body having perpetual succession and common seal.
Section 12 of the Act specifics the various authorities of the University which include the Senate and the Syndicate.
Section 13(1) of the Act specifies the composition of the Senate.
Section 14 specifies the composition of the Syndicate.
Section 17 lays down that subject to the provisions of the Act, the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the University shall be provided for by the Statutes.
Section 18 specifies the subjects on which the statutes may be made.
Section 19(1) lays down that first statute of the University shall be made by the State Government and notified in the official Gazette.
Section 19(2) empowers the Syndicate to make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes.
In terms of Section 19(6) every new Statute or addition to the Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the approval of the Chancellor.
Section 20 deals with the ordinances and Section 21 prescribes the procedure to make an ordinance.
Section 23 speaks of grants by the State Government for meeting the capital, recurring or other expenditure of the University.
The annual report of the University is required to be prepared under the direction of the Syndicate in terms of Section 24 and it has to be placed before the Senate in accordance with the statutes.
Annual accounts of the University are required to be submitted to the Government for examination and audit.
Section 28 confers special temporary power(s) on the Government to remove difficulties with respect to establishment of the University or in connection with the first meeting of any authority of the University or otherwise in first giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
Chapters I to VII of the Calendar (Vol.I) of the respondent university (1993 Edition) contains the various statutes framed by the University Chapter-II deals with creation of departments and appointments of staff etc.
Statute 37 deals with classification of the staff.
Statute 39 specifies the mode of appointments.
In respect of Class-A posts power of making appointments rests with the Syndicate.
Appointment of Class-B posts can be made by the Vice-Chancellor and in respect of Class-C posts appointment can be made by the Registrar or Head of the Department subject to the control of the Syndicate.
In terms of Para 82 of this Chapter the salaries and grades of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other persons holding teaching posts in the University and University Colleges are required to be fixed by the Syndicate.
From the provisions of the Act and the Statutes it is clear that it is the Syndicate of the University which is empowered to prescribe the pay scales and allowances etc payable to the employees who are connected with teaching and research work.
This being the position, it was not at all justified for the University to have sought sanction from the Government for giving benefit of revised pay scale to the petitioners with effect from 111973, particularly when the Syndicate and the Senate of the University had unequivocally resolved to give the benefit of the pay scale of Rs. 700- 1600 with effect from 111973.
The stand taken by respondent No. 1 in its reply fortifies this conclusion of mine.
In para 19 of the reply of respondent No. 1 the following statement has been made:-  "The petitioners have sought relief against Respondent No. 2.
The petitioners are employees of Respondent No. 2, an autonomous body competent to take independent decisions through its various academic and administrative bodies.
The State only provides funds to Respondent No. 1 in respect of various schemes.
The appropriate order, if any, the Hon'ble Court feels pleased to pass may be in respect of Respondent No. 2 only.
The petition qua respondent No. 1 be dismissed with costs."
In view of the above, it must be held that the Syndicate of the University was not at all justified in passing the resolution Annexure P-6 to the effect that no arrears will be payable to the Research Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 on the basis of their fixation with effect from 111973.
15.
There is another reason for holding that the action of the University is unjustified.
There is no denying that on the basis of information received from Punjabi University, Patiala the Syndicate and Senate of the respondent-University had passed resolutions Annexures P3 and P4 to give benefit of revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
These decisions did not contain any rider that the arrears will not be payable to the Research Assistants.
The subsequent turn of face by the Syndicate is not supported by any rationale or reason.
It appears that the Syndicate modified its decision to give the benefits of revised pay scales to its employees with effect from 111973 solely because the Government had expressed its inability to approve the decision taken by the Syndicate and the Senate.
Once it has been found that the Government has itself recognized the independent decision-making powers of the University bodies, there can be no doubt that the Syndicate acted illegally in passing the resolution Annexure P6 so as to deny the benefit of arrears to the petitioners payable to them as a result of fixation of pay with effect from 11973.
16.
Even otherwise there is no reasonable ground or justification for discriminating the petitioners vis-a-vis other employees.
In the writ petition the petitioners have come out with a specific plea that all the categories of employees of the respondent-University as well as the employees of the Punjabi University, Patiala, have received the benefit of revised pay scales with effect from 111973.
The Research Assistants employed by the Punjabi University, Patiala, have also been paid the pay scale of Rs. 700- 1600 with effect from 111973.
In the absence of any plausible explanation showing tangible difference between the Research Assistants of the respondent-University and other employees of the same University or between the Research Assistants of the respondent-University and the Research Assistants of the Punjabi University, Patiala, it has to be held that respondent No. 2 has acted arbitrarily in denying the benefit of actual pay fixation to the petitioners with effect from 111973.
17.
Argument of Shri Patwalia that the cadre of Research Assistants is a dying cadre and, therefore, the grant of higher grade of Rs. 700-1600 to the petitioners as a special case is negatived from the material placed on record.
As per Annexure Pl, P2 and P3 it is clear that existing Research Assistants have been equated by the University and the Government at par with Lecturers and they have been given the benefit of higher grade.
For future recruits to the cadre of Research Assistants the Syndicate has prescribed the pay scale of Rs. 550-750.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the submission of Shri Patwalia that the discrimination has been made between the petitioners and others on the ground that the cadre of Research Assistants was a dying cadre.
18.
On the basis of the above discussion it is held that respondent No. 2 has acted illegally and arbitrarily and has thus deprived the petitioners of their right to equality under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India by not giving them the actual benefit of pay fixation in the grade of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
19.
The second grievance made by the petitioners is in regard to the non- consideration of their claim under the Merit Promotion Scheme with effect from the date of their fixation in the Lecturers grade, i.e., 111973.
Perusal of Annexure P10 shows that the Syndicate of the University had decided to give designation of Lecturers to the existing Research Assistants in the grade of Rs. 700-1600.
This decision has been reiterated in Annexure P11.
Even in the reply respondent-University has conceded that the Merit Promotion Scheme has been implemented qua the petitioners from the date they got the grade of Rs. 700-1600 and that their services will be counted as Lecturers for the purpose of UGC Merit Promotion Scheme.
This being the factual position, the petitioners have a right to be considered in the Merit Promotion Scheme by being treated as Lecturers with effect from 111973, particularly when their claim for grant of actual benefit of the grade of Rs. 700-1600 has been found as correct and justified.
20.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision taken by the Syndicate of the University in Annexure P6 and the consequential rejection of the claim of the petitioners to be paid arrears vide Annexure P7, are declared illegal.
The respondent-University is directed to pay the benefit of actual fixation of pay to the petitioner in the grade of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
The petitioners shall get the benefit of arrears with effect from that date.
The respondent-University is further directed to consider the cases of the petitioners under the Merit Promotion Scheme on the premise that they were redesignated as Lecturers and they are entitled to the actual benefit to grade of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
Appropriate action in compliance of this direction shall be taken by respondent No. 2 within three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.