RL Anand, J - The State of Haryana has filed the present appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1161984 passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Ambala, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 28.2.1983 passed by the Sub Judge Ist, Class, Ambala City who decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent Mohinder Partap for declaration that the order of dismissal dated 3061978 passed by the Assistant Inspector General/Government Railway Police, Haryana was unconstitutional, ab-initio void and bad in the eyes of law and declaration was also given in favour of the plaintiff-respondent to the effect that he would be treated into service and would be entitled to pay and allowances from the date of his dismissal.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Mohinder Partap filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order of dismissal dated 3061978 passed by the Assistant Inspector General, Government Railway Police, Haryana is unconstitutional, ab-initio void and bad in the eyes of law and for setting aside the same.
The plaintiff also sought declaration to the effect that he was entitled to the pay and allowances from the date of his dismissal and the case set up by the plaintiff was that he was enrolled in the police department on 1151972.
He passed the Courses namely, Finger Print Course from Finger Print Bureau, Rohtak and Weapon Course from Jahan Khelan in the year 1972.
He worked at different stations.
The allegations against him are that on 11.4.1972, while Ishwar Singh, Chief Drill Inspector, GRP Lines, Ambala was executing the punishment of drill to the plaintiff previously awarded to him by the SDO/GRP, Hissar, the plaintiff refused to undergo the punishment and told the Drill Inspector in an undisciplined tone that he would not do so and he may be awarded other punishment.
These allegations have been levelled due to enmity with the AIR/GRP, Haryana, who wanted that the plaintiff should do his domestic work but he refused to do the same; hence AIR nursed a grouse and tried to inflict punishment on one excuse or the other.
According to the plaintiff these allegations are fabricated.
It has also been alleged against the plaintiff that on 2231978 he was found slack on platform duty on the basis of which fifteen days' drill was awarded to him.
On the 7th day of the drill, the plaintiff fell ill due to the harshness of the punishment.
He was incapacitated and there was chances of his collapse.
The plaintiff requested Ishwar Singh that due to illness he was unable to do drill.
He requested with folded hands to convey the authorities but Shri Ishwar Singh was bent upon to award punishment the plaintiff under the influence of his superiors, who wanted to take revenge against the plaintiff.
False allegations were concocted against the plaintiff and a wrong entry was made in the roznamcha that the plaintiff refused to obey the commands of the drill Inspector in an undisciplined manner.
The plaintiff never behaved in an undisciplined manner.
The enquiry which was conducted is assailed as being not according to rules.
His defence was not taken into consideration.
Further it was alleged against the plaintiff that he left the gun.
In fact, the plaintiff deposited the gun in the armoury.
The plaintiff alleged that he is a poor constable; whereas the high -ups were interested to take revenge against him.
The punishment which has been awarded to him is out of all proportions and it smacks of mala fide on the part of the defendant.
The plaintiff was not given opportunity of show cause against such a heavy punishment of dismissal.
The appeal of the plaintiff was illegally dismissed by AIR/GRP, Haryana vide orders dated 2991978.
The plaintiff served a notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure before filing the present suit.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendant-State.
The defendant denied the allegations of the plaintiff that the enquiry was conducted against the plaintiff due to enmity.
The plaintiff was never asked to do the domestic work nor there was any occasion.
It was pleaded that the allegations of indiscipline, disobedience, and rude behaviour towards the Senior Officers were found to be true in the departmental enquiry and the plaintiff was held guilty.
Fifteen days' drill was not wrongly awarded to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff was found slack in the performance of his duties on the platform on 2231978.
The other material allegations levelled by the plaintiff were also denied, and it was pleaded that the enquiry conducted against the plaintiff was in accordance with the rules.
The plaintiff was asked to file the list of witnesses but he gave a written application dated 1951978 that he did not lead any defence.
It was also pleaded that the plaintiff abandoned his service rifle and went away without depositing it in the armoury and it was subsequently deposited by HC Ishwar Singh.
The defendant admitted that the plaintiff gave notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure but ultimately prayed for the dismissal of the suit.
4.
The plaintiff filed replication to the written statement in which he reiterated his allegations made in the plaint by denying those of the written statement and from the above pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  (1) Whether the order of dismissal passed on 3061978 by the Assistant Inspector General, Government Railway Police, Haryana, is unconstitutional, ab-initio void, mala fide, and to bad in the eyes of the law, and deserves to be set aside ?
OPP.
(2) Whether no cause of action accrued to the plaintiff against the defendants ?
OPD (3) Relief.
5.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case and on the conclusion of the trial, issue No. 1 was decided in favour of the plaintiff and issue No. 2 was decided against the defendant and finally the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree, the State filed the first appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Ambala who vide impugned judgment dated 1161984 dismissed the appeal and affirmed the findings of the trial Court.
The State was not satisfied with the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court; hence the appeal, which is being disposed of with the assistance of Shri Azad Singh, AAG, Haryana and Shri PS Saini, Advocate, who appeared for the respondent and with their assistance, I have gone through the records of this case.
6.
The trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff by holding that the department did not comply with the mandatory provisions of Rule 1624(1)(vi) of the Haryana Police Rules.
The trial Court held in para No. 7 of the judgment that the enquiry was liable to be quashed because the plaintiff was dismissed from service on account of his previous bad conduct.
It has been mentioned in the summary of allegations that he had already suffered six major punishments and two minor punishments but the details of which have not been given in the summary of the allegations.
The enquiry report also does not mention the details of punishment previously suffered by the plaintiff.
The show cause notice served upon the plaintiff is also vague regarding the details of previous punishment.
The Punishing Authority has mentioned in the show cause notice that on careful consideration of the findings of the enquiry officer, evidence on record and the defence statement and in particular of the conclusions reached by the Enquiry Officer in respect of the charges framed against the plaintiff, he is provisionally of the opinion that penalty of dismissal be enforced upon the plaintiff.
The Punishing Authority had stated in the show cause notice that he desired to give the plaintiff an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken.
The trial Court also while relying upon AIR 1964 Supreme Court 506 came to the view that the Punishing Authority did not comply with the Police Rules 1624(1)(vii) and that the plaintiff was not given the gist of the previous punishment on the basis of which he was dismissed nor his explanation was called in that regard.
Therefore, the order of dismissal dated 3061978 was unconstitutional.
This view of the trial Court was affirmed by the first Appellate Court which repelled the argument of the learned Government Pleader that there was no necessity on the part of the Punishing Authority to supply the gist of the previous punishment to the delinquent official in the second show cause notice when the previous punishments were duly notified in the charge-sheet and duly noticed by the Enquiry Officer in his enquiry report.
7.
Shri Azad Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has drawn attention to the citation reported as 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments 448, a judgment of the Division Bench in which it was held that if a delinquent official remains absent from duty and he is habitual of remaining absent from duty and does not reform himself and whose record has been alluded to by the Appellate Authority and on going through the same if it reveals that on previous occasions to the delinquent official has been awarded punishment on different occasions for remaining absent from duty and such delinquent official remains absent from duty continuously for 5 months and five days, and there are repeated acts of remaining absent from duty for which he has been awarded punishment, in such circumstances if the Punishing Authority has taken into consideration the past record of such official while awarding the punishment of dismissal, the action of Punishing Authority does not suffers from any infirmity.
In my opinion, this authority of the Division Bench is not applicable to the facts in hand, because the Hon'ble Division Bench was interpreting the provisions of Rule 1621 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and in the cited case the punishment of dismissal was awarded to the constable on the allegations that he remained absent from duty.
In that context his previous record was taken into consideration before invoking the provisions of Order 1621.
Here, in the present case, we are concerned with the interpretation of Rule 1624(1)(vii) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 which reads as under:-  "The enquiring officer shall then proceed to pass orders of acquittal or punishment, if empowered to do so, or to forward the case with his finding and recommendations to an officer having the necessary powers.
Whenever the Officer passing the orders of punishment proposes to take into consideration the adverse entries on the previous record of the accused police officer, he shall provide reasonable opportunity to the defaulter to defend himself, and a copy or at least a gist to those entries shall be conveyed to the defaulter and he shall be asked to give such explanation as he may deem fit.
The explanation furnished by the defaulter shall be taken into account by the officer before passing orders in case.''
8.
A bare perusal of the provisions of the aforesaid Rule would show that a copy of the gist of previous punishment, a list has to be furnished to the delinquent official.
In the present case, a perusal of the show cause notice dated 3061978 would show that gist of the previous punishment was not supplied to the plaintiff.
In the show cause notice it is simply mentioned by the Punishing Authority that the Enquiry Officer appointed to enquire into certain charges against the delinquent official has submitted his findings and on consideration of the same, the Punishing Authority has made up his mind provisionally for the imposition of penalty of dismissal.
In this context, the delinquent official was given the opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken against him and an option was given to the official to submit his representation in writing within 15 days failing which it would be presumed that he had nothing to say in the matter.
Above show cause notice thus is not in conformity with the provisions of Rule 1624 but the Punishing Authority did take into consideration the gist of the previous punishment, which were awarded to the plaintiff at the time of the passing of the impugned order dated 3061978.
The learned counsel for the respondent, however, has relied upon Mahipat v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 337(P&H) : 1994(3) RSJ 13 in which Rule 1624(1) was being interpreted and it was held that it was incumbent on the part of the Punishing Authority to apprise the delinquent official of the fact that while awarding the punishment his previous record was taken into consideration.
In other words gist of the previous punishments was supposed to be supplied to the delinquent official and if those mandatory provisions of law have not been complied which, the action with is taken by the Punishing Authority in dismissing the official from his services would amount to the violation of the mandatory provisions and such orders are not sustainable.
The ratio of this authority is fully applicable to the facts in hand.
The Hon'ble Judge held in para No. 6 of the judgment as follows:-  "It is discernible from reading of the impugned orders that while awarding the punishment of dismissal, the authority did take into consideration that the petitioner was a habitual absentee from duty and was earlier punished six times according to the record.
It is clear beyond argument that the Punishing Authority did take into consideration the past record of the petitioner.
There is nothing on the record nor it was pointed out during the course of argument by the counsel for other party that the petitioner was ever made aware of the fact that while awarding the punishment of dismissal, his previous record would be taken into consideration.
No explanation or no opportunity to explain his previous conduct resulting into the alleged six times punishment for absence from duty was granted.
It is violation of principles of natural justice.
It is envisaged by Rule 1624(vii) that in the eventuality of the Punishing Authority, while awarding the punishment, proposes to take into consideration the previous record of the delinquent police officer, he shall provide a reasonable opportunity to the defaulter to defend himself.
The rule in its mandatory form is in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
Herein, as observed above as well as obvious from the record, the petitioner was never made aware of the consideration of the previous record while awarding the punishment.
The said action of the Punishing Authority is violative of the mandatory provisions of the Rule.
No opportunity was granted to the petitioner to present or explain his previous conduct.''
9.
The counsel for the respondent has also drawn my attention to State of Haryana v. Lachhman Singh, 1992(2) SCT 545(P&H) : 1992(2) Recent Services Judgments 398 and submitted that while passing the orders dated 3061978 the Punishing Authority did not take into consideration the length of the service of the plaintiff and his claim for pension.
There is force in the submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondent as the impugned order does not indicate that the Disciplinary Authority took into consideration the length of the service of the plaintiff and his claim to pension.
In these circumstances, the order of dismissal being in violation of the statutory rule has to be held invalid.
10.
In view of the above, I am not in agreement of the learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
Thus, I affirm the finding of the trial Court as well as of the first Appellate Court on issue No. 1 and hold that those findings are perfectly justified.
Thus I do not see any merit in this appeal and dismiss the same, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.