SV Maruthi, J - The petitioner is an Ex-Havaldar.
He was tried for an offence under Section 46(a) of the Army Act, for committing an unnatural offence on the person of Recruit-Zala Mahiji Bhai on 1341992.
Since the petitioner confessed the offence committed by him, a charge-sheet was issued and Court-martial proceedings were initiated and after following the procedure of giving one opportunity, a punishment of one year rigorous imprisonment was imposed and he was also dismissed from service.
Out of one year of rigorous imprisonment, six months was remitted by the confirming authority at the time of confirmation of the sentence.
Challenging the proceedings of the Court-Marshal, the present writ petition is filed.
2.
The Counsel for the petitioner raised the following contentions:  (1) That there was no preliminary investigation before recording the summary of evidence; (2) That the confession alleged to have been made by the petitioner was not made by him at all; (3) That the authorities relied on hearsay evidence; and (4) That even if the petitioner is dismissed, he is entitled for pension and other reliefs.
3.
In the counter affidavit, the respondents have stated that ``during the preliminary investigation held on 1841992, the petitioner was given full opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and which opportunity he had declined.
This aspect was recorded by Lt. Col. HS Bajwa, the then officiating Commanding Officer in Appendix `A' to Army Order 70 of 1984.
The petitioner had also signed in the said Appendix.
With regard to pre-trial advice, para 3 of Deputy Judge Advocate General, Headquarter Southern Command Pune letter No. 3357/HAG/92, dated 2181992 is reproduced below :  ``The record of proceedings before the Commanding Officer complied in accordance with Appendix `A' to Army Order 70/84 and received in this office along with the pre-trial documents, in respect of each accused, have been perused and found to be in order.''
4.
Taking up the first contention of the petitioner, in view of the statement in the counter-affidavit that the petitioner declined to avail the opportunity in the preliminary investigation held on 1841992, the contention cannot be accepted and it is rejected accordingly.
5.
The 2nd contention of the petitioner is that he never confessed at all and in support of his contention that there was no confession at all, he relied on a number of circumstances.
I have perused the record of evidence and the proceedings of the Court Martial.
In the record of evidence, the petitioner was given an opportunity to cross-examine Lt. Col. HS Bajwa.
Lt. Col. HS Bajwa, while deposing stated as follows :-  ``....During the investigations, the accused as well as NK Arvind Patil, at this stage, the Judge Advocate apprises the defence counsel that the witness is likely to make statement that the accused had confessed his guilt and ask him whether he would be like object about its admissibility and like to examine or cross-examine witnesses in support of his contention before the said statement is produced and brought on record.
The defence counsel submits that he would like to cross-examine the witness at a later stage after examination in chief.''
Thereafter Lt. Col. HS Bajwa completed his evidence.
Then, the defence counsel i.e., the petitioner's counsel cross-examined him.
The cross- examination reads as follows :-  ``I came to know of the incident on 15.4.1992 at about 1200 hours.
It was Sub Maj who informed me about the incident of 1341992.
I had also enquired regarding the incident from the recruit Zala Mahiji Bhai and it was definitely before the accused were marched on 1841992.
I received the statement made by the accused on 1841992.
The said statement was not written by the accused in my presence.
It is incorrect to say that I had not enquired anything from the accused and also he had not made any confessional statement.
It is incorrect to say that I have deposed falsely before the court on this point.
The accused was not given any direction and he had decided to make statement voluntarily and it was also written by him.
It is incorrect to say that Capt.
S Raman had forced the accused to write the statement.
The witness volunteers to say that Capt.
S Raman had only done the translation in English of whatever statement was written by the accused in Hindi.
It is incorrect to suggest that Sub Satwant Singh had forced NK Arvind Patil to write statement.
It is incorrect to say that in order to support the manipulated statements, I have deposed falsely before the Court.
Re-examination is declined by the prosecutor.''
It is evident from the cross-examination of the witness by the Defence Counsel i.e., petitioner's Counsel that the petitioner made the confession to Lt. Col. HS Bajwa and it was not written in his presence.
He denied the suggestion that he was deposing falsely and that the petitioner did not make a confessional statement and he decided to make the statement voluntarily.
He also stated that Capt.
S Raman has done only the translation into English, of the statement of the accused, which was in Hindi.
Therefore, the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that there was no confession at all, cannot be accepted.
In the alternative, the learned Counsel submitted that the petitioner was made to confess by bringing pressure on him.
There is inconsistency in the argument of learned Counsel for the petitioner.
If he was made to confess by bringing pressure, the contention that there was no confession at all, cannot be sustained.
This contention of the learned Counsel for petitioner that the confession was made on account of the pressure brought on him cannot also be sustained as there is absolutely no evidence.
When the Judge Advocate asked Lt. Col. HS Bajwa, he stated that no one till date including the accused have reported to him that the statement was forcibly obtained from him.
There is no cross-examination on this aspect.
It is for the petitioner to establish that the confession was obtained by force, and since he has not adduced any evidence, the contention cannot be sustained, and it is accordingly rejected.
6.
The 3rd contention is that hearsay evidence was relied upon.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner stated that ``written hearsay'' evidence, which is admissible, was allowed to come on record, thereby causing the minds of the members of the Court to be abused.
I have gone through the entire proceedings.
I do not find any infirmity or any inadmissible evidence was relied upon by the Court Martial.
Therefore, this contention is also rejected.
7.
The next contention relates to the admissibility of the pension.
In Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCC 371 a bench consisting of S Ratnavel Pandian and K Jayachandra Reddy, JJ., of Supreme Court, held under similar circumstances, that :-  ``.... the Court Martial has been inflicted any other punishment of forfeiture of pension or other service benefits of the petitioners.
Therefore, they are also entitled to these benefits.
Accordingly, the respondent is directed to pay the entire pension, gratuity and provident fund under the rules to each of these petitioners.''
In the above case, the authorities were directed to pay the entire pension, gratuity and provident fund under the rules to the petitioners therein.
8.
In Union of India v. RKLD Azad, 1995(4) SCT 849 (SC) : 1995(4) SCALE 73, under similar circumstances, the Supreme Court held that `an Officer dismissed from service is not entitled for any pension'.
It is necessary to refer to the facts of this case of brief, viz., the respondent was employed as a Junior Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army and he was arrested on 7.8.1990.
Since he was due to retire on 31.8.1990 on attaining the age of superannuation, the Army authorities passed an order dated 2381990 extending his subjection till completion of the trial.
In the trial he was convicted.
Challenging the orders of conviction, a writ petition was filed in the High Court which was allowed.
In the writ appeal, the order of the single Judge was confirmed.
A Special Leave Petition was filed in the Supreme Court.
The question before the Supreme Court was whether a Junior Commissioned Officer of the Indian Army, who has to his credit the minimum period of qualifying service required to earn a pension or gratuity, is eligible for the same in case he is dismissed from service under the provisions of the Act.
While answering the above question in the negative, the learned Judges referred to Chapter III of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
The relevant Regulation 113(a), reads as follows :-  ``113(a) An individual who is dismissed under the provisions of the Army Act is ineligible for pension or gratuity in respect of all previous service.
In exceptional cases, however, he may at the discretion of the President be granted service pension or gratuity at a rate not exceeding that for which he would have otherwise qualified had he been discharged on the same date.
(b) An individual who is discharged under the provisions of Army Act and the rules made thereunder remain eligible for pension or gratuity under these Regulations.''
The learned judges held that the dismissed Officer is not entitled for pension and gratuity on the basis of his previous service.
However, it was also observed that, in view of the discretion conferred on the President to grant pension in exceptional cases, the learned Judges observed that the dismissal of the writ petition does not stand in the way of the delinquent officer to make representation, seeking exercise of the discretional powers of the President under Regulation 113 to grant pension or gratuity.
9.
A perusal of the judgment in Major GS Sodhi case (supra) makes it clear that there was no reference to the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
Regulation 113(a) was not brought to the notice of the learned Judges.
Further, the learned Judges relied on Harbans Singh Sandhu v. Union of India, which is a judgment of a bench of three judges, wherein an Army Officer who was cashiered was held to be entitled for pension, and gratuity under the Rules.
The learned Judges while granting pension and other reliefs, took into consideration the fact that no other penalty forfeiting the pensionary benefits was passed.
10.
In the latter judgment i.e., Union of India v. RKLD Azad (supra), the learned Judges while rejecting the claim of petitioner referred to the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
Therefore, the latter view has to be followed and if the latter view is followed, the petitioner is not entitled for any pension, gratuity and other reliefs as per Regulation 113(a).
Therefore, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is also rejected.
11.
However, this judgment will not stand in the way of the petitioner to make a representation, seeking exercise of the discretionary power of the President, under Regulation 113 to grant pension or gratuity in respect of his previous service.
If such a representation is made, the authorities are directed to dispose it of, after giving an opportunity to the petitioner, within four weeks from the date of such representation.
12.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.