G Bikshapathy, J - The Writ Petitioner assails the Award of the Labour Court, Godavarikhani in ID No. 138 of 1990, dated 15.10.1990.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as driver in the Corporation.
He was on duty on 531989 and 631989 on the route Godavarikhani-Borlagudem.
A charge sheet was issued to him with the following charges:  (1) For having driven the vehicle AAZ 5676 on 6389 on route Borlagudem-Godavarikhani in a drunken condition.
(2) For having detained the vehicle No. AAZ 5676 on 6389 at Koyyur thereby causing inconvenience to the travelling public.
After conducting the enquiry, the petitioner was removed from service by orders dated 3181989.
After availing the appeal remedy unsuccessfully, the petitioner raised Industrial Dispute before the 1st respondent in ID No. 138/90.
The Tribunal found the charges against the petitioner proved and according, passed an Award on 15.12.1990 confirming the order of the removal of the petitioner passed by the Respondents.
3.
In this case, it has to be noted that the petitioner filed Memo dated 19.9.1990 after giving notice to other side requesting the Labour Court to decide the industrial dispute on the material available and on merits under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Therefore, the arguments were heard on merits as the petitioner did not challenge the validity of the enquiry conducted by the management.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the charges as framed against the petitioner are absolutely false and frivolous.
There is no evidence that the petitioner was driving the vehicle under drunken condition and he had intentionally stopped the vehicle at Koyyur.
Thus, he submits that the findings of the Enquiry Officer are perverse.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondent Corporation submits that there was sufficient evidence to establish that the petitioner was in drunken condition as the passengers themselves including the Conductor has stated that the petitioner had consumed alcohol.
It was also in evidence that he was made to drink curd and water was poured on him so as to eliminte the inebriated condition of the petitioner.
It was also found that the petitioner was driving the vehicle in a jig, jag manner under the influence of alcohol and he was not able to control the steering.
Therefore, the use was halted on the way for about one hour.
Under those circumstances, the Tribunal held that the charges as framed against he petitioner are fully proved and the Tribunal was not inclined to take any lenient view in the matter.
Accordingly, the Award was passed on 15.10.1990 upholding the order of removal.
The learned counsel thus submits that the impugned award is unassailable and the same has to be upheld.
5.
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and or the learned Standing Counsel for A.P.S.R.T.C.
6.
It is now well settled that under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Labour Court is clothed with the powers of the appellate authority over the orders of punishment passed by the Management.
It is entitled to scrutinise the material available on record and satisfy itself whether the findings in the enquiry are legal and valid and whether the punishment is commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct committed by the employee.
It is also equally well settled that if the Tribunal fails to exercise the jurisdiction vested in it under Section 11-A of the Act or proceeds in excess of the jurisdiction, it is open for the High Court to interfere with the Award and grant necessary relief which the Tribunal could have granted under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act (See: Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, 1980 LLJ 137.
In the instant case, the allegation is that the petitioner was in drunken condition while driving the public carriage and that he had also stopped the bus at one place causing inconvenience to the passengers.
The Tribunal after considering the entire evidence found that the charges are fully established on the basis of the evidence adduced in the enquiry.
I am in agreement with the conclusions reached by the Labour Court that the charges are established.
But, however, the question that remains for consideration is whether on the basis of the proved charge, the punishment of removal from service is justified.
The Driver was found to be in a drunken condition while on duty and generally, it would not be desirable to keep such persons in service.
But the fact remains that in it is a solitary instance and it is not the case that the petitioner has been indulging in such activities on earlier occasions also.
In similar identical case, the Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh v. Pepsu Roadways Transport Corporation and Another, 1984(1) LLJ 33, held that the punishment of dismissal was rather heavy and therefore reduced the punishment.
The Labour Court directed reinstatement without backwages with a keep to the Appellant within the bounds of well disciplined conduct.
The Supreme Court imposed further punishment of deferment of increments on the principles of adequate penalty for misconduct proved.
7.
Following the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in the above said case, I am convinced that the punishment of removal from service totally denying the livelihood of the petitioner is unduly harsh and Labour Court failed to consider this aspect of the matter while exercising the power under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Accordingly, I am inclined to set aside the Award of the Labour Court.
8.
In the result, the Award is set aside and the punishment of removal passed by the Management is held to be unjustified.
9.
The Writ Petition is disposed of with the following directions:  (i) That the petitioner shall be reinstated into service as Driver within a period of two months from the daste of receipt of copy of this order.
He shall not be entitled for the backwages from the date of removal till the date of reinstatement and the said period shall be treated as suspension without pay.
(ii) A further punishment of deferment of increment for two years with cumulative effect should be imposed on the petitioner.
(iii) In case of any proved misconduct on the part of the petitioner in future, the same shall be dealt with seriously.
There shall be not order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.