SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - On 20th September, 1988 the petitioner was issued a so-called notice.
This notice recited that it has been decided by the competent authority under the Rules to prematurely retire, the petitioner in public interest.
He was further informed that he would stand retire within three months of the so-called notice or on 20th December, 1988 whichever is later.
Feeling aggrieved against the said order, the petitioner made a representation on 11th October, 1988, which came to be rejected on 21st October 1988.
The said decision was not communicated to the petitioner.
The petitioner thereafter made a representation to the higher authority i.e. Commissioner on 24th November, 1988.
The petitioner has not received any intimation in regard to the decision on the said representation.
consequently as 20th December, 1988 was approaching, the petitioner was Constrained to file the present writ petition.
In the writ petition Rule was issued but no interim relief had been granted.
Thus during the pendency of the petition, the petitioner was prematurely retired.
2.
An affidavit in reply has been filed in which it has been stated that the petitioner has been prematurely retired by virtue of Rule 10(4)(b) of the Mahasrashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982, after assessing the petitioner's work and an opinion was formed to the effect that the petitioner should be retired prematurely in the "public interest".
The opinion was formed by respondent No. 1 upon the overall assessment of the work of the petitioner and there is no mala fide intention behind the order of premature retirement.
It is pointed out that after attaining the age of 55 years, the petitioner was given an extension by the office order dated 27th March, 1987 for one year only.
However, during the said extension period i.e. 1987-88, his work was not found satisfactory and hence the Review Committee has taken a decision not to give him further extension.
This is the only reason put forward by the respondents.
3.
We have heard Counsel for the parties.
It is submitted by Mr. Joshi, Counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner could have been prematurely retired only if his case fell within the purview of Government of Maharashtra Circular No. SRC-1077/XV dated 2nd September, 1977.
It is submitted by Mr. Joshi that the said circular provides that Class III Government servants will be liable to be retired at any time after they attain the age of fifty five years.
The circular further provides that the cases of Class-I and Class-II officers should be reviewed twice i.e. at the age of 49 years and 54 years.
In the case of Class-III employees, review is to be done only at the age of 54.
It is at this stage that it is to be decided whether a person is to be retained in service beyond the age of 55 years.
In case of special circumstances it is open to a competent authority to place before the Appropriate Special Review Committee, for a fresh review the case of any Government servant who was previously found suitable for continuance in service beyond the age of 50 or 55 years as the case may be, but whose work or conduct was subsequently found to have so deteriorated as to require consideration of the question of his further continuance in service.
Clause 4 of the said circular provides that there should be a single uniform criterion for determining the suitability of Government servants of all classes for continuance in service beyond the age of 50 or 55 years as the case may be.
He lays special emphasis on the provision that no Government servant should be held to be unfit for continuance in Government service, unless his record is below average or he is physically unfit or his integrity is found to be doubtful on the basis of strong prima facie evidence.
On the basis of the above it is submitted that having granted an extension to the petitioner to continue beyond the age of 55 years, the respondents had no valid reason for issuing the impugned order.
Mr. Joshi submits that not only is the impugned order passed against the criteria laid down in the circular dated 2nd Sept 1977 mentioned above but the order is not passed in the public interest.
In fact, it is the submission of Mr. Joshi that the order smacks of arbitrariness, legal mala fides and capricious exercise of power.
This, it is the submission of Mr. Joshi, is clearly contrary to the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India which guarantees that all executive authorities when passing orders must act fairly and on the basis of principles of nature justice.
On the other hand Mr. Zambre appearing for the respondents states that in fact no decision was taken to the effect that the petitioner will continue until the age of 58 years.
When the case of the petitioner was reviewed at the age of 54 he was given extension only for a period of one year after the age of 55.
Therefore, it was within the competence of the Respondents not to give any further extension on the basis of the work of the petitioner in the year 1987-88.
It is further submitted by Mr. Zambre that the law has now been settled by the Apex Court to the effect that the order of premature retirement is not a punishment.
The said order can also be passed on the basis of uncommunicated adverse remarks.
Thus the order cannot be set aside purely on the ground that in passing the order uncommunicated remarks have been taken into consideration.
He relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. VP Seth, 1995(4) SCT 626(SC) : (AIR 1994 SC 1261).
It is now settled that an order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
Order of compulsory retirement usually does not attach any stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
However, the facts and circumstances of the present case are quite different.
The petitioner has a blemish-free record from 1957 to 1987.
In 1988 an order is issued wherein it is mentioned that it is decided to prematurely retire the petitioner in public interest.
This orders, which is styled as a notice, does not disclose anywhere as to what are the reasons for retiring the petitioner in public interest.
No particular ingredient or public interest is mentioned.
furthermore, it has not been stated anywhere that the record of the petitioner is below average.
It is not stated that he is physically unfit.
His integrity has not been found to be doubtful.
Thus it is the submission of Mr. Joshi that it could not be said that the petitioner falls within the criteria for premature retirement as given in the instructions.
We are inclined to agree with the submissions made by Mr. Joshi.
A bald statement has been made in the affidavit in reply that the work of the petitioner was found to be not satisfactory during 1987-88.
No material whatsoever has been placed on the record to show that the case of the petitioner falls within the parameters given in the instructions.
Furthermore, it has nowhere been disclosed that the petitioner has outlived his utility as a member of the service.
No reasons have been disclosed to show as to why he would be a burden on the service if he was permitted to continue in service.
In short, no ingredient of public interest has been satisfied by the respondents.
It is settled law that the validity of orders issued by statutory functionary must be judged by the reasons so mentioned in the order and the same cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of an affidavit or otherwise.
We are supported in this view of ours by two judgments of the Supreme Court.
It was held in Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election Commissioner and others, reported in AIR 1978 SC 851, as follows:  "When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out."
In the aforesaid authority, the Supreme Court had referred to its earlier decision in the case of Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, reported in AIR 1952 SC 16.
The Supreme Court observed as under :  "An attempt was made by referring to the Commissioner's affidavit to show that this was really an order of cancellation made by him and that the order was his order and not that of Government.
We are clear that public order, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations subsequently given by the officer making the order of what he meant, or of what was in his mind or what he intended to do.
Public orders made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect the acting, and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and must be construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself."
In view of the settled law, it would not have been open for the respondents to support the order by giving additional reasons in the affidavit.
However, even otherwise, nothing has been pointed out to us to show that the decision to retire the petitioner has been arrived at by taking into consideration the relevant factors as pointed out in the circular dated 2nd Sept 1977.
Mr. Joshi has further submitted that under no circumstances could it be said that it was in public interest to retire the petitioner.
He further submits that it was for the respondents to satisfy this Court as to why it was in the public interest to retire the petitioner.
They having singularly failed to give any justification, the impugned order is liable to be quashed.
He has made a reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in 1980(3) SLR page 1 wherein the Supreme Court has held as under :  "8.
This takes us to the meant of the matter, viz. whether the appellant was retired because and only because it was necessary in the public interest so to do/ It is an affirmative action, not a negative disposition,.
a positive conclusion, not a natural attitude.
It is a terminal step to justify which the onus is on the Administration, not a matter where the victim must make out the contrary.
Security of tenure is the condition of efficiency of service.
The Administration, to be competent, must have servants who are not plagued by uncertainty about tomorrow.
At the age of 50 when you have family responsibility and the sombre problems of one's own life's evening, your experience, accomplishments and fulness of a fitness become an asset to the Administration, if any only if you are not harried or worried by `what will happen to me and my family?"
"Where will I go if cashiered ?"
How will I survive when I am too old to be newly employed and too young to be superannuated ?.
These considerations become all the more important in departments where functional independence, fearless scrutiny, and freedom to expose evil or error in high places is the task.
And the Ombudsmanic tasks of the office at audit vested in the C & AC and the entire army of monitors and minions under him are too strategic for the nation's financial health and discipline that immunity from subtle threats and oblique overawing is a very much a public interest.
So it is that we must emphatically state that under the guise of `public interest', if unlimited discretion is regarded acceptable for making an order of premature retirement, it will be the surest menace to public interest and must fail for unreasonableness, arbitrariness and disguised dismissal.
To constitutionalise the rule, we must so read it as to free it from the potential the mischiefs we have just projected.
The experience of power must be bona fide and promote public interest.
There is no demonstrable ground to infer mala fides here and the only infirmity alleged which deserves serious notice is as to whether the order has been made in public interest.
when the order is challenged and its validity depends on its being supported by the public interest the State must disclose the material so that Court may be satisfied that the order is not bad for want of any material whatever which, to a reasonably man reasonable instructed in law, is sufficient to sustain the grounds of `public interest' justifying forced retirement of the public servant.
Judges cannot substitute their judgment for that of the Administrator but they are not absolved from the minimal review well-settled in administrative law and founded on constitutional obligations.
The limitations on judicial power in this area are well, known and we are confined to an examination of the material merely to see whether a rational mind may conceivably be satisfied that the compulsory retirement of the officer concerned is necessary in public interest.
9.
We will consider this question to the extent disclosed by the record and in the light of the submissions made by both the parties.
The whole purpose of the rule is to weed out the worthless without the punitive extremes covered by Article 311 of the Constitution.
After all, administration, to be efficient, must not be manned by drones, do nothings, incompetents and unworthiness they may not be delinquent who must be punished out may be a burden on the Administration is by insensitive, insouciant, unintelligent or dubious conduct impede the flow or promote stagnation, in a country where speed, sensitivity, probity and non-irritative public relations and enthusiastic creativity are urgently needed but paper-logged processes and callous cadres are the besetting sin of the administration.
It is in public interest to retire a never-do, well but to juggle with confidential reports when a man's career is at stake is a confidence trick contrary to public interest.
Moreover, confidential reports are often subjective, impressionistic and must receive sedulous checking as basis for decision making.
The appropriate authority, not the court, makes the decision, but even so, a caveat is necessary to avoid misuse."
4.
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the respondents have acted wholly arbitrarily in issuing the impugned order.
There was no justification whatsoever for issuing the order of premature retirement of the petitioner.
5.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is quashed.
The Respondents 1 and 2 are directed to nominally reinstate the petitioner in service.
He is entitled to full back wages till the ate of superannuation with all consequential increases in the retiral benefits.
Rule is made absolute in the aforesaid terms with no order as to costs.
Benefits accruing to the petitioner in the form of back wages and the increased retiral benefits be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
Petition allowed.