Ashok Bhan, J - This is a petition by the workman, Sanwar Mal, filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, for quashing the termination order dated 741981 and the award of the Labour Court dated 17.11.1986.
2.
Workman Sanwar Mal was appointed as a Conductor in the Haryana Roadways at Bhiwani.
He was suspended from service in the year 1974 on the charge of embezzlement.
He was a Bus-Conductor in the Haryana Roadways Bus No. HRB-4385 plying from Mathura to Bhiwani on 24.9.1974.
A surprise inspection of the aforesaid bus was made by Sh. Raj Kumar Inspector.
Ten passengers were found travelling without tickets.
The Inspector found that the Bus-Conductor, Sanwar Mal, had collected a sum of Rs. 18/- from eight passengers as bus- fare from village Losi to Palwal and Rs. 5/- from two passengers travelling from Hodal to Sohna without tickets.
The petitioner was thereafter suspended, vide order dated 10101974.
A departmental enquiry was conducted and an order of termination was passed on 741981.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute against the termination order, whereupon a reference was made by the State Government of Haryana to the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
3.
The Labour Court framed the following three issues:-  1.
Whether the enquiry conducted by the Management is fair and proper ?
2.
Whether the termination of service of Shri Sanwar Mal was justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief is he entitled ?
3.
Whether the workman is covered under section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ?
The Labour Court examined issue No. 1 as a preliminary issue and answered it in favour of the workman.
The Labour Court thereafter proceeded to record the evidence of the parties on the surviving issues.
The employer, namely, the Haryana Roadways, was allowed to prove the allegation of misconduct by adducing evidence before the Labour Court.
Three witnesses, namely, JS Yadav, General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Bhiwani; Raj Kumar Inspector and Jaipal Singh, Assistant, were examined as witnesses of the employer.
The evidence of Raj Kumar Inspector was most relevant because he was the person who had inspected the bus and had found that the Bus Conductor, namely, the petitioner, had collected bus fares from certain passengers but had not issued tickets to them.
Raj Kumar Inspector gave the details about his inspection.
On the basis of the evidence, the Labour Court reached a conclusion that the workman was not entitled to any relief.
4.
The petitioner has raised several questions in the present petition including the one against the uncorroborated statement of the Inspector.
It has been contended that the Labour Court relied upon the evidence of the Inspector without there being any corroboration to his evidence.
This is said to be totally unreasonable and unjustified.
Moreover, when once the departmental enquiry was found to be neither fair nor proper, there was no occasion, much less any justification, to look into the allegations of misconduct again and to allow the employer to lead evidence so as to prove the charge.
It is also stated that the Labour Court took into consideration the previous record of the petitioner and was influenced by the allegations made by the employer that the petitioner had been punished on 32 occasions in the past.
The consideration of the past conduct is said to be irrelevant so far as the determination of the charge under enquiry was concerned.
Moreover, the petitioner was never given an opportunity to see as to what were punishments which were said to have been awarded to the petitioner in the past.
It was also been argued that the petitioner, at the time of inspection of the bus, was in the process of issuing tickets to the passengers and, therefore, cannot be faulted for having not issued all the tickets to all the passengers.
The passengers, who were found to be without tickets, had boarded the bus from the earlier bus stand where there was no arrangement for advance booking.
Since the petitioner was issuing tickets to the passengers, there is no reason to raise suspicion that it was a case of embezzlement.
5.
The finding given by the Labour Court that the departmental enquiry was not fair and proper would not vitiate the further proceedings which were held by the Labour Court so as to determine whether the petitioner was guilty of the charge of misconduct.
The Labour Court proceeded to examine the charge after giving due opportunity to both the parties.
Therefore, the finding given by the Labour Court on the basis of the evidence on record cannot be said to be vitiated simply for the reason that the departmental enquiry was held to be not fair and proper.
If the Labour Court proceeded to look into the charge afresh, there was nothing illegal about it.
Reference to the previous record is also found to be not of any consequence against the employer because reference to the punishments given to the petitioner in the past was made while determining the punishment.
The Labour Court first determined the charge on the basis of the evidence led by the parties and, after reaching the conclusion that a charge of embezzlement stood proved against the petitioner, looked into the earlier punishments and thereafter upheld the termination on the ground of misconduct.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a decision of this Court in Kuldip Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala and another, 1996(1) Recent Services Judgments 187.
That decision arose from the facts where no opportunity was afforded to the plaintiff before considering his previous record.
In the present case of the petitioner, a list of the previous punishments had been given to him along with the show-cause notice during enquiry.
6.
It has also been argued that the Inspector referred to a written version of the passengers but that document could not be considered inasmuch as the passengers had not been examined during enquiry nor the said document could be treated to be admissible in evidence.
This argument has no force because the Inspector has, during the course of his evidence, referred to the proceedings he had drawn at the time of inspection and tendered that document in evidence.
7.
The allegation made by the petitioner, that he was not given due opportunity by the Labour Court, does not appear to be correct because nothing has been brought on record to show that the petitioner was denied any opportunity to lead evidence.
There is also nothing on record to substantiate the petitioner's plea that he was in the process of issuing tickets when the Inspector arrived on the scene and found 10 passengers travelling without tickets.
Money had been collected but tickets had not been issued.
There is nothing to show that the Inspector acted in a mala fide manner and framed a false charge against the petitioner.
8.
The petitioner has put forward an alternative plea that, if the termination is sustained, the petitioner was nevertheless entitled to back wages up to the date of the award.
Since the termination order dated 741981 was held to be not fair and proper, that termination stands vitiated and it is from the date of the award that the termination can be given effect.
Reliance has been placed on a decision of this High Court, dated 1281986, in CWP No. 2212 of 1986.
It was held in that case that the termination order shall take effect from the date of the award of the Labour Court and not from the date on which the employer had terminated the service of the workman where the Management had terminated the services without holding an enquiry and where the misconduct was established for the first time before the Labour Court.
Reliance had been placed on two decisions of the Supreme Court in DC Roy v. Presiding Officer, Madhya Pradesh Industrial Court, Indore, AIR 1976 SC 1760 and Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 1896.
This plea has to be accepted because the Labour Court treated the termination order passed by the employer, as not fair and proper and thereafter looked into the charge independently.
9.
The charge against the petitioner is found proved and there is no invalidity in the order of the Labour Court except to the extent that the petitioner is held entitled to the wages up to the date of the award, i.e. 17.11.1986.
10.
The writ petition is dismissed.
However, the respondent No. 2, namely, the Haryana Roadways, is directed to pay full back wages to the petitioner from the date of termination (741981) to the date of the award (17.11.1986), within a period of three months from the date of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.