RL Anand, J - This is defendant's appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 20.11.1995 passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Rohtak who set aside the judgment and decree dated 17.1.1994 passed by the Sub Judge Ist Class, Rohtak who dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent Anil Kumar minor son of Ram Kumar Singh.
The first Appellate Court granted a money decree for a sum of Rs. 10,000/- by way of damages to the plaintiff on all counts.
2.
The case set up by Anil Kumar plaintiff in the trial Court was that he was a student of 10th Class in Govt. High School, Gorar and he appeared in the Matriculation Examinations conducted by the defendant i.e. Board of School Education, Haryana, as a regular candidate during the year 1990-91, under Roll in 72405.
He attempted his papers well and hoped to get good marks in all the subjects.
However, on declaration of result on 1261991, he received a shock that he had obtained only 280 marks out of 600 and had failed in the paper of Mathematics obtaining 19 marks vide Mark-Sheet No. 115983.
It is alleged that plaintiff being a sensitive person was mentally shaken and became depressed and started observing like an abnormal person.
Father of the plaintiff sent an application for revaluation of the answer sheet of the plaintiff.
The defendant-Board however, replied that there was no mistake and the paper of Mathematics had been correctly evaluated, but the plaintiff was not satisfied, he again represented to the Board on 2671991.
In reply to the said representation the defendant Board admitted the mistake vide letter No. 4322-24/RC dated 2081991 that extra loose sheets with the main answer book were found missing and in order to rectify the mistake, the defendant- Board allowed the plaintiff to reappear in the paper of Mathematics.
In re- appear examination, the plaintiff could not justify himself as he remained under mental depression.
He was treated by a doctor of Psychiatry Department.
Medical College Hospital, Rohtak and he is still under the treatment.
The plaintiff alleges that dues to callous negligence on the part of the defendant, he lost his one precious year of education and his future also became uncertain due to mental depression.
It is stated that the plaintiff's father and his entire family was going through mental trauma and had to spend their hard-earned money for the treatment of the plaintiff.
On the above allegations, the plaintiff claimed Rs. 30,000/- as damages due to the loss of education and future prospectus and Rs. 1000/- as special damages as cost of medical expenses.
The suit was filed by the plaintiff through Shri Ram Kumar, his father, being the next friend and natural guardian.
3.
The defendant contested the suit on the ground that it was not maintainable as the plaintiff has already re-appeared in the examination; that the civil court has no jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the matter.
The defendant admitted that plaintiff had submitted a form for re- checking the paper.
There was no provision for re-evaluation of the paper and only rechecking was done.
It was also admitted by the Board that plaintiff's father had submitted his representation on 2671991 and on checking of the record it was found that the plaintiff took three extra sheets but he did not attach those extra sheets with the answer book and did not fill the relevant column prescribed for this purpose on the first page of the answer-sheet.
It was stated that the plaintiff might have purposely not attached the extra sheets with the main answer sheet.
The loose sheets were not available in the record of the respondent.
However, the plaintiff was given chance to re-appear in the month of September, 1991 and he cleared the examination.
The plaintiff was given chance to re-appear keeping in view his future interest.
It was stated that the defendant did not commit any mistake in evaluating the answer book of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff did not remain under mental tension as alleged by him.
The plaintiff had appeared in the examination held in September, 1991 and cleared the same.
4.
The above pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues:-  (1) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get the damages to the extent of Rs. 31,000/- due to the negligence on the part of the defendant ?
OPP (2) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD (3) Whether the court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD (4) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD (5) Whether the plaintiff has no right to file the suit ?
OPD (6) Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their claim and on the conclusion of the trial, the learned trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent and it will be useful for me to incorporate the reasons advanced by the trial court, which are reproduced in para No. 12 of its judgment:-  ``The plaintiff has merely stated that due to negligence of the Board, his entire answer-book was not checked and as such, he obtained less marks.
But it is also the negligence on the part of the plaintiff because it was is duty to fill the first page of the answer-book, whether he has attached any continuation sheet or not, because a specific column has been provided for doing so.
The non-examination of the plaintiff also draws a presumption against the plaintiff.
Because plaintiff himself was the best witness to depose about the exact position.
The plaintiff would have been in the best position to say whether he had attached any continuation sheet or not.
The best evidence has been withheld.
The plaintiff has merely seemed to have filed a luxury suit.
Ex. D 3 is copy of regulation No. 110 in which it is stated that a candidate whose paper is lost then he shall be allowed a chance to reappear in the paper and if he obtained pass marks then he shall deem to have been passed.
The plaintiff has been unable to show which rule and regulation of the Board, the defendant No. 1 had flouted.
Moreover, no mala fide intention and negligence on the part of the Board is proved.
As such the plaintiff is not entitled to the damages claimed''.
5.
Unsuccessful plaintiff was not satisfied with the judgment and decree of the trial court and he filed the first appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Rohtak who set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and granted money decree for a sum of Rs. 10,000/- on all counts as stated in the earlier portion of the judgment.
While reversing the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the learned Appellate Court has given the findings which are incorporated in para No. 12 of the judgment and I would like to incorporate the same in order to appreciate the submissions which have been raised before me by the learned counsel for the parties:-  ``12.
The main question to be determined in the present case is whether the plaintiff suffered any mental depression due to the negligence on the part of the defendant or that he had suffered only financial loss on account of mental depression on account of loss of education and future prospects.
According to the plaintiff, he had taken five continuation sheets besides the main answer sheet, however, those continuation sheets were not evaluated and he was awarded only 19 marks by evaluating only main answer- book.
It is admitted by the respondent in the written statement that on verification, it was a found that the plaintiff had taken three continuation sheets, but those continuation sheets were not attached with the main answer book by the plaintiff.
He has not even mentioned the number of continuation sheets in the prescribed column on the main answer book.
It is stated that the plaintiff had either mis-used those continuation sheets or he wanted to take advantage purposely of his own wrong.
The continuation sheets were not available with the Department and, therefore, the plaintiff was allowed to appear in the examination held in September, 1991 without payment of examination fee.
From the admission of the respondent, it is apparent that plaintiff had taken three extra continuation sheets and the entries regarding the same were found in the record of the respondent Board.
It is also clear that the evaluation of marks was only done on the basis of the main answer sheet only.
It seems that the department/Board was negligent by not evaluating all the continuation sheets of the plaintiff.
There is no evidence on record that plaintiff had taken away those five continuation sheets out of the Examination Hall.
As regards the plea of the defendant that the number of continuation sheets should have been mentioned in the column meant for this purpose in the main answer book, does not have any force.
It has been admitted by the defendant Board that three extra sheets were taken by the candidate.
It might be possible that due to paucity of time, the candidate could not have filled in the column in main answer book.
It is, however, admitted by the defendant that those three extra sheets were got detached from the main answer book.
ND Chawla DW 1, Assistant in re-checking Branch, stated that after the examination is over, the sheets are given to the Superintendent of Examination, who receives the sheets after checking them.
It was also the duty of the Superintendent to check atleast whether the column on the main answer book have been filled in or not.
It is the admitted case of the defendant that the plaintiff was given a chance to appear in the examination without payment of examination fee in September, 1991.
Learned counsel for the defendant-respondent argued that according to Regulation No. 110 of the Board, a candidate whose paper is lost after being received by the Superintendent of examination and if the candidate has passed in all other subjects, he may be permitted by the Vice Chairman or Chairman of the Board to re-appear in that one paper which has been lost and if he obtains pass marks in that paper, he shall be deemed to have passed in the examination and in view of this Regulation, the candidate was given the chance to re-appear.
Be that as it may, but one thing is certain that three extra continuations sheets were taken by the candidate but the same were not evaluated for the purpose of his result which certainly caused mental depression on the mind of the plaintiff''.
6.
I have heard Shri KK Gupta, Advocate, on behalf of the appellant and Shri Kulvir Narwal, Advocate, on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
The judgment of the first Appellate Court has been assailed by the learned counsel for the defendant-Board mainly on the ground that the first Appellate Court erred in granting a money decree to the plaintiff-respondent even when the plaintiff did not appear in the witness box to make out his case.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the plaintiff might have adopted unfair means when he did not make a mention in the relevant column of the main answer sheet that he attached five continuing sheets.
Chances cannot be ruled out that the plaintiff might have taken the continuing answer sheet to his house in order to utilise the same on the subsequent days to undertake the examination in different subjects.
The learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that plaintiff failed to prove any mala fide on the part of the defendant.
The bona fides of the defendant are proved when it allowed the plaintiff to reappear in the mathematics examination of September, 1991 and plaintiff also cleared mathematics paper.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that plaintiff himself was negligent when he did not make a mention in the relevant column that he utilised 5 continuing sheets as his case is.
The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant has been resisted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent who submitted that continuing sheets cannot be used by the candidate in the subsequent answer dates because the Board or its representatives who conduct the examination make a note of every day about numbers of the continuing sheets and continuing sheets issued on a particular day cannot be used on the subsequent dates.
Although the plaintiff was a little bit negligent when he did not make a mention about the number of continuing sheets utilised by him on the day when he appeared in mathematics paper but there is a corresponding record with the officials of the Board to show how many continuing sheets were utilised by a particular candidate.
It was their duty to attach the continuing sheets with the main answer sheet.
The defendant himself admits that three continuing sheets were issued to the plaintiff.
Those sheets must have been received by the staff of the Board on the conclusion of the examination.
No report` was ever lodged against the plaintiff that he committed theft of the continuing sheets by taking it to his house or that he adopted unfair means while undertaking the examination in other papers.
So much so, the defendant-Board realised its mistake and allowed the plaintiff to appear in the mathematics paper in September, 1991.
The negligence on the part of the Board itself entitles the plaintiff to claim damages and he need not prove the special loss irrespective of the fact that the plaintiff suffered mentally and he had to consult various doctors for his treatment.
The non- appearance of the plaintiff in the witness box cannot dis-entitle him from claiming the damages as his father has deposed about the mental condition of the plaintiff who was a minor.
With the admission on the part of the defendant regarding its negligence, the plaintiff is entitled to the damages as prayed for and the first Appellate Court had already reduced the claim of the plaintiff from Rs. 31,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- only.
No legal aspect is involved in the second appeal which could be decided.
8.
After hearing the rival contentions of the parties and on going through the record of this case, I am of the considered opinion that the appellant has no case.
The admitted facts are that the plaintiff appeared in the Matriculation Examination held by the Board in April, 1991.
Though the case set up by plaintiff is that he utilised five continuing sheets but the defendant-Board admits that three continuing sheets were supplied to the plaintiff.
It is also the case of the defendant-appellant that only the first main sheet was evaluated and the plaintiff got only 19 marks in the paper of Mathematics.
The other continuing sheets remained in the possession of the defendant-Board and those sheets were not evaluated not marks of those sheets, if any, were added in the marks sheet or given credit to the plaintiff.
The defendant Board and its staff maintain the record as to how many continuing sheets were issued to a particular candidate.
The defendant- Board and its staff was supposed to keep an account of all the continuing sheets which have been received along with the main answer sheet after the conclusion of the examination.
The defendant-Board or its staff cannot shirk of its responsibility.
It is a common case of the parties that till today the Board has not taken any action against the plaintiff that he adopted unfair means by taking out the continuing sheets in the subsequent papers.
Rather the Board allowed the plaintiff to appear in Mathematics subject in September, 1991 and the act of the Board amounts to equitable negligence when it did not properly evaluate all the answer sheets of the plaintiff.
This court can well imagine the plight of a child who claims himself to be brilliant and when he sees his result which was beyond his expectation in the present case no special loss was required to be proved.
The action on the part of the defendant-Board itself entitled the plaintiff to claim damages for its negligence.
Otherwise, in the present case there is ample evidence led by the plaintiff that after coming to know about the result, he became depressed.
Dr. AK Gupta, appeared as PW 2 and stated that plaintiff's was a case of psycho-motor retardation.
His insight and judgment was impaired.
Plaintiff was a case of schezophenia and treatment was given.
The patient was examined on 2491991 and thereafter, he was again examined on 641992.
It has also come in evidence of Dr. Gupta, that medicines were prescribed to the plaintiff on 24th and 28th of September, 1991.
Dr. Bhargava also examined the plaintiff on 3.3.1992 and again by Dr. Gupta on 681992.
It has also come in evidence that when the plaintiff again appeared in the examination which was allowed by the Board, the plaintiff got 58 marks out of 100 which clearly indicates that plaintiff was good in his studies.
The compensation awarded by the first Appellate Court i.e. amount of Rs. 10,000/- cannot be held to be excessive or harsh or unreasonable.
The suit of the plaintiff cannot be dismissed on the ground that he himself did not appear in the witness box.
The plaintiff had no special fact to his knowledge which he could prove but has not been stated by him.
His father appeared in the witness box and he was well competent to say about the factual aspects of the case and about the mental condition of his son.
Resultantly, I do not find any merit in this appeal, which is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.