RL Anand, J - Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala (for short 'the Board') defendant in the trial Court, has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 30.10.1992 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Sangrur, who set aside the judgment and decree dated 15.2.1990 passed by the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Sangrur and granted a decree for mandatory injunction in favour of the plaintiff-respondent Kulbir Singh, as prayed for.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Kulbir Singh filed a suit for mandatory injunction against the Board and its Superintending Engineer, seeking directions that the defendants be directed to count the ad hoc service rendered by him as Lineman for the purpose of seniority with effect from 2391976 and the case set up by the plaintiff is that minimum qualification required for the post of Lineman as per rules and regulations of the Board is Matriculation and he fulfils the qualification.
He joined the service with effect from 2391976.
There was no break in his service except on 23121976.
With effect from 24121976 he was considered on ad hoc basis and thereafter there was no notional break.
3.
The plaintiff was to be considered by the appointing authority for regularisation as per decision and policy of the Board.
The work and conduct of the plaintiff was quite satisfactory and against the regular vacancy, which was occupied by the plaintiff with effect from 2391976, he is entitled to the seniority right from the date of his initial appointment by taking the benefit of ad hoc service.
The plaintiff avers that he was selected as Lineman by the Board on application, subsequently by the Selection Committee and was offered the post of Lineman on 631980, but for the purpose of seniority his service with effect from 2391976 to 531980 is not being counted and that he is being deprived of the service benefits from the date of his initial appointment.
The plaintiff further states that his ad hoc service, which is followed by regular service without any break, is to be counted for the purpose of seniority and he is entitled to be regularised with effect from 2391976.
Since the Board has failed to perform his legal duties and the plaintiff has been discriminated as one Shri Surinder Kumar, Lineman, has been made regular which effect 1.4.1978, but such benefits have been deprived to the plaintiff.
Hence the Suit.
4.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants, who filed the written statement and took the stand that it is liable to be stayed under Section 10, C.P.C.; that it is barred under the principles of res judicata; that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit; that is barred by time.
On merits it is averred that the seniority of the plaintiff could not be counted with effect from 2391976 as per rules and regulations of the Board; the plaintiff was selected on ad hoc basis as Lineman but the seniority could not be given to him, as per Board's instructions/clarifications.
After denying the other material averments of the plaint, the defendant Board prayed for dismissal of the suit.
5.
With the above pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mandatory injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is liable to be stayed under order 10 CPC ?
3.
Whether the suit is barred under Order 2 Rule 2 CPC ?
4.
Whether the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the present suit ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the Civil Court has no territorial jurisdiction ?
6.
Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case and on the conclusion of the trial, issue No. 1 was decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the Board.
Issues Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5 were, however, decided against the defendants, and finally on the strength of the findings given under issue No. 1 the plaintiff-Kulbir Singh was non-suited.
6.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the unsuccessful plaintiff Kulbir Singh filed first appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Sangrur, who vide the impugned Judgement and decree dated 30.10.1992 set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff for mandatory injunction as prayed for.
This time the Board has come in the present appeal, which is being disposed of with the assistance of Shri JPS Sandhu, Advocate, who appeared for the Board, and Shri BS Sehgal, Advocate, who appeared for the respondent-Kulbir Singh, and with their assistance I have been able to go through the record of this appeal as well as the records of the trial Court.
7.
The only point for determination, which is being repeatedly raised before this Court as well as the Courts below, is whether the ad hoc service of an employee can be counted for the purpose of seniority.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has drawn my attention to a Full Bench authority of our own High Court reported as Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 382, wherein it was held that ad hoc service per se cannot be counted to determine appointee's seniority in the cadre.
My attention has also been invited to the authority of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC) : 1993(3) Recent Services Judgments 113, in which it was held that when a person has been appointed on ad hoc basis for a fixed period and that his ad hoc service has been extended from time to time till regularisation by relaxation of conditions of service, such ad hoc service cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority and benefit of ad hoc service cannot be given.
Similar view has also been expressed in Excise Commissioner, Karnataka and another v. V Sreekanta, 1993(3) SCT 185 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 1564, in which it was laid down that while determining the seniority of an ad hoc employee, whose services were regularised later on, the seniority of such an employee should be counted from the date of his regularisation and not from the date of appointment.
Thus, the consistent view of this Court as well as the Hon'ble Supreme Court is that ad hoc service per se cannot be reckoned for the purpose of seniority until or unless it is shown that such ad hoc appointment was against the regular vacancy.
8.
In the light of the above background, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant then drew my attention to the circular (Ex. D-1) dated 14121987 wherein the matter was again clarified in view of the earlier confusion prevailing in the Department as to how the seniority of an ad hoc employee was to be counted and it was clarified in the light of the instructions that in the event of any junior person becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service, superseding a senior, the promotion of such junior person should be done on ad hoc basis till such time his senior attains the prescribed years of experience to avoid any supersession.
As such the junior person is only to be promoted to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service and benefit towards seniority cannot be given to him.
9.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent drew my attention to the circular dated 19th September, 1978 issued by the Board and submitted that as per this circular the seniority of ad hoc employees, whose appointments are regularised in terms of the policy contained in the circular should be determined in the manner as mentioned in the circular and that the plaintiff is entitled to be regularised with effect from Ist April, 1978 though wrongly regularised with effect from 23rd September, 1976.
I am not in agreement with the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondent because the circular dated 19th September, 1978 cannot be read in isolation with the circular Exhibit D-1 and both the circulars are supposed to be read harmoniously.
Moreover the circular (Ex. D-1) is of a subsequent date.
Further though in this circular there is no specific reference to circular dated 1991978, yet the circular Exhibit D-1 is on the point in issue, wherein it has been clarified that in the event of any junior person becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service superseding a senior, the promotion of such junior person should be made on ad hoc basis till such time his senior attains the prescribed years of experience to avoid supersession.
As such, the junior person is only to be promoted to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service and the benefit towards seniority could not be given.
This point has also been dealt with in Ashok Kumar Gulati v. BS Jain, 1986(4) SLR 1, wherein it has been held that according to the accepted cannons of service jurisprudence, seniority of a person appointed must be reckoned from the date he becomes a member of the service and that ad hoc or fortuitous appointment on temporary stop gap arrangement could not be taken into account for the purpose of seniority even if the appointee was qualified to hold the post on a regular basis.
As such that temporary tenure hardly counts for seniority in any system of service jurisprudence.
The learned first appellate Court fell in error and had not rightly appreciated the import and interpretation of circular (Ex. D-1) by which a miscarriage of justice has been done.
Wrong appreciation of evidence can always be rectified by a superior Court.
Learned counsel for the respondent has not been able to cite any law contrary to the one relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants.
10.
Resultantly, I accept this appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court and by restoring the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
11.
I dismiss the suit of the plaintiff-respondent leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.