RL Anand, J - Nestle India Limited, Moga, District Faridkot, through its factory Manager, has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari and for the quashment of the order dated 2351994 passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, on the petitioner's application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') vide which respondent No. 2 withheld the approval of respondent No. 1's dismissal from service.
The petitioner has further prayed for the issuance of direction to respondent No. 2 to approve the dismissal of respondent No. 1 Jaswinder Singh.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that respondent No. 1 was an unskilled worker in the employment of the petitioner since 12101989 and he was on duty in the factory of the petitioner at Moga on 881992 from 2 pm to 10 pm At about 510. p.m. on that day, Mr. Amit Arora, Junior Technical Officer of the petitioner Company and the superior incharge of respondent No. 1 found the latter and one temporary worker Baljit Singh coming from the locker/cloak room and the officer made inquiries from respondent No. 1 and his co-worker Baljit Singh as to where they were coming from.
Respondent No. 1 replied to the officer that he and his companion were returning after visiting the toilet.
Mr. Amit Arora was not satisfied with the answer.
It is alleged that thereafter respondent No. 1 Jaswinder Singh behaved (with) Mr. Arora in an insulting tone and threw a challenge that Mr. Arora might file a complaint against Jaswinder Singh and his companion wherever he pleased.
It is further alleged that on the same day at 1015 pm, i.e. immediately after the closure of the B-shift when Mr. Arora accompanied by has colleague Mr. GS Kalra was returning to his home on a motor-bicycle, near the gate of the factory after the duty hours, Jaswinder Singh respondent No. 1 accompanied by a few other temporary workers including Baljit Singh intercepted Mr. Arora by giving him a signal.
Upon this Mr. Arora stopped the motor-bicycle and enquired from respondent No. 1 and his companion as to what was the matter, upon which respondent No. 1 caught hold of Mr. Arora from his wrist and said "You have just joined the management and started bossing over."
Thereafter Jaswinder Singh commanded Mr. Kalra, the pillion rider of the motor-bicycle to step aside and warned him against any interference and finally respondent No. 1 Jaswinder Singh in the presence of his companions and in the presence of Mr. Kalra gave slaps five times on the face of Mr. Arora and also warned him against reporting the incident to others.
Nevertheless Mr. Arora reported the matter immediately to the management.
3.
Respondent No. 1 was charge-sheeted and inquiry was held by which respondent No. 1 was held to be guilty and charges were found to be proved and finally respondent No. 1 was dismissed from service vide management order dated 4121992 (Annexure P1).
An amount of Rs. 2489/- by way of one month's wages was also tendered to respondent No. 1 with the order of dismissal.
4.
Thereafter the management moved an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act before the Industrial Tribunal, seeking approval to the orders of dismissal of respondent No. 1 by pleading that domestic inquiry was fair and in accordance with the principles of natural justice and reliance was placed on the Certified Standing Orders under Section 5 of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (for short 'the Standing Orders').
As per item No. 10 of the said orders drunkenness, fighting, riotous or disorderly behaviour, a conduct endangering the life or safety of any other person or any act subversive of discipline and efficiency and any act involving moral turpitude on the premises of establishment is an act of grave misconduct.
The application was resisted by respondent No. 1 whose main contention was that the alleged incident had taken place in the street of the town and thus would not fall within the definition of "Misconduct".
It was also pleaded by the worker that the inquiry conducted by the management was not fair.
It was not impartial.
It was also alleged that one month's wages amounting to Rs. 2489/- by cash were not given.
The Tribunal framed issues on the application moved by the management and the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, vide order dated 2351994 declined the approval sought for by the Management and the reasons given are as follows :-  "The allegation against Jaswinder Singh is that on 8th August, 1992, his duty was from 2 pm to 10 pm and at about 5 pm his supervisor Amrit Arora, Junior Technical officer saw him along with a temporary workman Baljit Singh coming from Lockers/Tower room.
He asked both of of them as to where they are coming from.
The reply given by him is that they have come from toilet and when Shri Arora questioned as to why they did take so long in the toilet, Jaswinder Singh replied in an insubordinate manner that he does not care.
The further allegation made against him is that at 1015 pm Shri Arora accompanied by Shri GS Kalra left the factory's new gate on Motor Cycle and when Shri Arora was driving the Motor Cycle, Jaswinder Singh waived Shri Arora to stop.
It is further alleged that Jaswinder Singh caught hold of wrist of Shri Arora and spapped him.
The Inquiry Officer found the charges proved and the management dismissed him.
The allegations has been denied by Jaswinder Singh.
During arguments, the main contention raised by the representative of Jaswinder Singh is that only forty-eight hours' time was given to file the reply whereas he was required to get six days' time for submission of his explanation.
The incident took place in the street of town and the Standing Orders of the Company say that it will be misconduct if someone misbehaves in the company.
The order of the Certified Standing Orders of the applicant-management reads as under :- "Drunkenness, fighting, riotous or disorderly behaviour, a conduct endangering the life or safety of any other person or any act subversive of discipline and efficiency and any act involving moral turpitude on the premises of the establishment."
As the incident took place in the street outside the factory premises, there is no provision in the Standing Orders for treating the same as misconduct by the Company.
A reference has been made to the Supreme Court judgment reported as Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd v. Labour Court, Meerut and others, 1984(1) LLJ page 16.
It is an admitted case that the incident took place outside the factory premises.
It is also in evidence that no police case is registered against Jaswinder Singh, as the Enquiry Officer did not join any police officer in the enquiry nor any finding was given in the enquiry.
The crucial question is that the Standing Order of the Company only provides for misconduct in the factory premises.
If something happens beyond the premises of the factory in the town involving employee of the factory, it is to be seen whether disciplinary action can be taken against an employee for such action.
Action against Jaswinder Singh has not been taken for his rude behaviour in the factory premises with Shri Arora nor he could be dismissed for such a minor misconduct.
Action has been taken against him for the act of slapping Shri Arora in the street of town.
But for such misbehaviour, there is no provision in the Standing Orders which may provide it as misconduct entitling the management to punish the respondent.
The representative of the workman submits that the case of the workman is covered by the judgment of Supreme Court in Glaxo Laboratories India (Ltd) (supra) and the dismissal of Jaswinder Singh cannot be upheld and approval to the action sought by the applicant-management cannot be given.
The management, on the other hand, has referred to certain judgments saying that each case depends upon its own facts.
I have gone through the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd (supra) and I am of the view that Jaswinder Singh's case is covered by the aforesaid judgment.
There were similar Standing Orders in that case also as in Jaswinder Singh's case.
The incident in that case had also taken place outside the premises of the MIll where the dispute was the strike going in the Mill.
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that dismissal cannot be justified for an action committed outside the premises of the Mill."
The main reliance was placed by the Tribunal on Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd's case (supra).
5.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Industrial Tribunal, the present writ petition has been filed by the management, which is being disposed of with the assistance of Mr. TN Gupta, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, and Mr. JS Chahal, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents.
6.
While declining the approval, the Tribunal has given two main reasons : Firstly that the incident relied upon by the management has not taken place inside the factory premises and that the Standing Order of the Company only provides for misconduct which may take place in the factory premises and if something happens beyond the premises of the factory in the town, involving employees of the factory, the disciplinary action cannot be taken against an employee for such action.
The second conclusion which was drawn by the Tribunal is that the act of respondent No. 1 was a minor misconduct when he maltreated and manhandled Mr. Amit Arora by giving slaps five times on his face.
Need not to mention here that after this incident Amit Arora left the employment of the management and the stand of the management is that he left the employment due to the shame and insult which he could not tolerate.
7.
In Lalla Ram v DCM Chemical Works Ltd and another, (1978) 3 Supreme Court Cases 1, Section 33(2)(b) of the Act was considered and it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as under :-  "In proceedings under Section 33(2)(b), the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is confined to the enquiry as to, (a) whether a proper domestic enquiry in accordance with the relevant rules, Standing Orders, and principles of natural justice has been held; (b) whether a prima facie case for dismissal based on legal evidence adduced before the domestic tribunal is made out; (c) whether the employer had come to a bona fide conclusion that the employee was guilty and the dismissal did not amount to unfair labour practice and was not intended to victimise the employee regard being had to the settled position that though generally the award of punishment for misconduct under the Standing Orders is a matter for the management to decide and the Industrial Tribunal is not required to consider the propriety or adequacy of the punishment or whether it is excessive or too severe, yet, an inference of mala fides may, in certain cases, be drawn from the imposition of unduly harsh, severe, unconscionable or shockingly disproportionate punishment; (d) whether the employer has paid or offered to pay wages for one month to the employee; and (e) whether the employee has, simultaneously or within such reasonable short time as to form part of the same transaction, applied to the authority before which the industrial dispute is pending for approval of the action taken by him.
If these conditions are satisfied, the Industrial Tribunal would grant approval which would relate back to the date of dismissal.
If the domestic enquiry suffers from any defect or infirmity, the labour authority will have to find out on its own assessment of the evidence adduced before it whether there was justification for dismissal.
If it so finds, it will grant approval of the order of dismissal which would relate back to the date of dismissal, provided the employer had paid or offered to pay wages for one month to the employee and the employer had, within the time indicated above, applied to the proper authority for approval."
8.
The background leading to the order of dismissal of respondent No. 1 is very important.
The entire proceedings can be divided into two parts; firstly, the incident took place at about 5 pm inside the factory premises when Mr. Amit Arora was shown insubordination by respondent No. 1 and his companion Baljit Singh.
The conduct of Mr. Arora being a supervisory officer was quite fair and he could make reasonable inquiry from respondent No. 1 and his companion as to where the latter two were returning from.
When he was not satisfied with the answer of respondent No. 1, he must have told respondent No. 1 to behave properly in future, which remarks of Mr. Amit Arora were not digested and liked by respondent No. 1 and his companion.
The second incident, which took place at about 10 pm just after the factory hours of B shift and very near to the main gate of the factory, directly flows from the first incident which took place at about 5 pm and it cannot be segregated and cannot be looked into in isolation from the one.
Both the incidents are of the same date and have nexus with each other and I am of the opinion they would formulate one transaction.
The incident which occurred at 1015 pm could be in continuation of the earlier incident which took place at 510. p.m.
In Narayanan v. B.P.L.
System (Private) Ltd., 1994(1) LLN 749, a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court came to the conclusion that if an assault on the staff officer, who was leading non-striking workmen into the factory near factory premises, takes place, it has an intimate connection with employment in factory, though it has not taken place within factory.
Such assault on the part of a worker would fall within the definition of "misconduct".
The dictum was taken from the authority of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Lalla Ram v DCM Chemical Works Ltd (supra), where the Supreme Court was pleased to hold that "if there was nexus with the 'misconduct' and the 'employment', that was sufficient."
The authority of Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd (supra), which has been relied upon by the Tribunal was also taken into consideration where the facts where quite different because in that case the incident had taken place inside the town, and had no nexus with any earlier alleged incident like the present one, where both the incidents cannot be separated and looked into in isolation.
In Mulchandani Electrical and Radio Industries Ltd v. The Workmen, (1975) 4 Supreme Court Cases 731, it was held as follows :-  "The allegation of assault was an act subversive of discipline.
On a plain reading of the clause, the word, "within the premises or precincts of the establishment" refer not to the place where the act which is subversive of discipline or good behaviour is committed but where the consequence of such an act manifests itself.
In others words, an act, wherever committed, if it has the effect of subverting discipline or good behaviour within the premises or precincts of the establishment, will amount to misconduct under the standing order.
9.
The ratio of Tara Oil Mills Co Ltd v. The Workmen, AIR 1965 SC 155, is that the fighting must have rational connection with employment of assailant and victim.
Even in the Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd (supra), relied upon by the Industrial Tribunal, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold as under :-  "..........
Such acts of misconduct would be misconduct punishable only if committed within the premises of the establishment or in the vicinity thereof.
What constitutes establishment or its vicinity would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case."
10.
Reverting to the facts of the present case it has been proved in the domestic inquiry that the second incident took place just after the closure hours of the B-shift and very near to the factory in a lane leading to the factory when Mr. Amit Arora was returning to his home in the company of Mr. GS Kalra, when they were intercepted by respondent No. 1 and his companions.
This incident had taken place in pursuance of the one which allegedly took place inside the factory at about 5 pm when Mr. Amit Arora found respondent No. 1 and Baljit Singh coming from the side of the cloak room.
Both these incidents cannot be looked into separately.
In Ram Asrey and others v. Labour Court II, Kanpur and another, 1991 II LLJ 427 (All.
), it was held whether a workman assaulted a Junior Officer outside the office premises or precincts of establishment, it would amount to "misconduct" irrespective of the fact that the assault took place at the factory gate.
In this case the assault had taken place right in front of the factory gate as soon as the concerned Junior Officer came out of the factory after finishing his day's work.
It was held that the assault amounted to misconduct being connected with the performance of the Junior Officer's duty and it is subversive of discipline and efficiency within the mill premises.
11.
From the above discussion it is held that the learned Tribunal fell in patent error by making a limited interpretation that the Standing Order of the petitioner would not be attracted as the second incident had taken place outside the factory premises, for which the management was not justified in taking the action.
12.
This leads me to discuss whether the proved act of misconduct on the part of the workman justifies the management to pass the orders of dismissal and in that regard the findings of the Tribunal can be sustained or not.
As stated above, the Tribunal held in the impugned order that the complained act of the workman-respondent No. 1 was a minor one and was not a grave misconduct.
No doubt one of the objects of the Industrial Disputes Act is to keep harmony between the management and the workmen for the industrial growth and to protect the workman concerned from victimisation of the employer, yet discipline is the backbone of an industrial establishment.
A workman is supposed to show respect inside and outside the factory to his superior and he is not supposed to take the law in his own hands.
The proved act on the part of respondent No. 1 is that he slapped his superior on his face five times and also threatened him in case he reports the matter to the management.
Whether the act is grave misconduct depends upon many factors and also how one accepts and takes it.
It is the proved case of management that after this incident Mr. Arora left the job of the factory (petitioner) as he felt insecured to serve in the given circumstances.
As I stated above, the scope and jurisdiction of the Tribunal was confined to see if proper domestic inquiry in accordance with relevant rules had been conducted and whether the order of dismissal did not amount to unfair labour practice or was not passed with the intention to victimate the employees but not to be swayed on other considerations giving benefit to the employee.
In the present case no defect in the domestic inquiry or in the application filed by the management for approval of the dismissal order has been brought to my notice.
It is proved that there was a rational nexus between the conduct of respondent No. 1 and his employment and that of Mr. Arora.
The order of dismissal has not been passed by way of victimisation on the part of the management.
The second conclusion drawn by the Tribunal was also not justified, when it held that the misconduct on the part of respondent No. 1 was minor.
13.
In this view of the matter, the present writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 2351994 (Annexure P5) is set aside and directions are given to respondent No. 2, i.e., Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, to approve the dismissal of respondent No. 1 from service, as prayed for by the management in the application.
No order as to costs.