GS Singhvi, J - Although in the writ petition the petitioner has made several prayers including a prayer to strike down Rules 2(12), 3 and 5 of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I Public Works Department (Buildings & Roads) Rules, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as '1960 Rules') and for issue of mandamus to the respondents to promote him as Executive Engineer with retrospective effect, during the course of hearing learned counsel for the petitioner has confined his arguments in regard to the prayer to quash Annexure P.3 dated 1611975 issued by the Governor of Haryana in the purported exercise of his powers under proviso to Rule 9(3) of '1960 Rules' for retrospective promotion of respondent No. 3.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
30th June, 1965 on the basis of his appointment under the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II Public Works Department (B&R) Rules, 1965.
He was promoted as officiating Executive Engineer on 27.5.1971.
He was declared suitable for grant of senior scale under '1960 Rules ' w.e.f.
1.10.1973.
This decision was taken by the Government in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Respondent No. 3 joined service as Assistant Executive Engineer on 30th August, 1971.
He was placed on probation for a period of two years vide Annexure P.3.
Respondent No. 3 has been treated as promoted on the post of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
2791973 in the scale of 750-1300 by order Annexure P.3 issued under proviso to Rule 9(3) of '1960 Rules'.
This order has been challenged by the petitioner on the ground of arbitrariness, mala fide and non-application of mind.
Grievance of the petitioner is that by virtue of the impugned order respondent No. 3 has been placed above him in the seniority list of Executive Engineers and on that basis has been given promotion to the higher post earlier than him.
3.
The respondents have resisted that writ petition by filing separate written statements.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as well as respondent No. 3 have raised an objection of delay and laches by stating that the writ petition has been filed after 8 years of issue of the impugned order and there is no explanation for this long delay.
On merits the respondents claimed that the impugned order has been passed by the competent authority after proper application of mind to the service record of the respondent No. 3 and keeping in view the requirement of public interest.
4.
During the course of arguments learned counsel for the petitioner produced gradation lists issued by the Government of Haryana in various years showing the position of members of service and pointed out that in all the lists, the petitioner has been shown above the respondent No. 3 with his date of promotion as 27.5.1971 as against respondent's date promotion as 2791973.
He further pointed out that the Government has itself considered the seniority position of respondent No. 3 as tentative when it recorded a note in Annexure P-10 that placement of respondent No. 3 at Sr. No. 44 is provisional and is subject to the decision of the writ petition pending in the High Court.
Learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 produced a photostat copy of the typed order dated 2791973 issued by the Secretary, Government of Haryana, public Works Department in the name of the Governor for promotion, appointment/posting and transfer of the officers of Haryana PWD, B&R Branch.
In this order name of respondent No. 3 has been shown at Sr. No. 1 with his posting as Officer on Special Duty (Design-III) in the office of Chief Engineer, Haryana.
In para 2 of this order it has been written that respondent No. 3 and Shri PC Sharma will work against the posts of Executive Engineer and will draw Rs. 50/- as special pay in addition to their pay as Assistant Executive Engineer/Assistant Engineer.
By this order respondent No. 3 was to relieve the petitioner who was holding dual charge at that time.
Learned counsel has also placed on record of copy of the charge handing over report signed by the petitioner and respondent No. 3 on 8.10.1973.
He also produced certain gradation lists showing the position of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 in the cadre of Executive Engineers.
5.
Before considering the argument of Shri Goyal on merits, I consider it appropriate to decide the preliminary objection raised by the learned Deputy Advocate General and Shri ML Puri, namely, delay and laches in the filing of the writ petition.
Both the learned counsel argued that the petitioner is guilty of gross negligence in prosecuting his remedy and, therefore, long delay of 8 years should be treated as sufficient to non-suit him.
Shri Goyal on the other hand argued that the petitioner had no knowledge of the order Annexure P-3 till be received summons of CWP No. 5371/81 filed by respondent No. 3.
He pointed out that the paper book of this writ petition contained a copy of the order dated 1611975 and from that the petitioner acquired knowledge of the impugned order.
By referring to the various gradation lists issued in the years 1975-76 etc. Shri Goyal pointed out that in all the gradation lists the name of the petitioner had been shown above the respondent No. 3 and, therefore, he had no occasion to think that respondent No. 3 has been given retrospective promotion as Executive Engineer vide order dated 1611975 and, therefore, petitioner should not be non-suited on the ground of delay in filing the writ petition.
6.
I have thoughtfully considered the rival contentions.
Article 226 does not specify any period of limitation within which a writ petition can be filed by an aggrieved person.
Therefore, it can be said that there is no constitutional provision prescribing period of limitation for filing of the writ petition under Article 226 or 227.
However, in last four decades the Courts have evolved many rules of self-imposed limitation one of which is that the Court will not entertain belated petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The policy underlining this self-imposed restraint is that the court should not unsettle the settled rights of the parties and encourage litigation after long lapse of time.
However, no hard and fast rule has been laid down indicating as to in what type of cases the Court would exercise jurisdiction despite delay and in what type of cases relief would be declined to the petitioner.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, their lordships indicated that even in the absence of any period of limitation having been specified, the Court should normally decline to entertain a petition filed after expiry of period of limitation prescribed for filing a suit on similar cause.
In M/s Tilokchand Motichand and others v. HB Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898, the Apex Court held that question is one of discretion of the Court and it is always not necessary to give the total time of limitation but in a suitable case the Court may entertain a petition even after the limitation.
In Ram Chander Shankar Deodhar v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 259, their Lordships held that the writ petition involving violation of fundamental rights should not ordinarily be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches unless rights of third parties have intervened.
From these decisions it is clear that there is neither any upper limit nor any lower limit of time within which a petition filed under Articles 226 or 227 deserves to be entertained.
It will always depend on the facts of a given case and in each case the Court will have to examine whether the party has been vigilant in prosecuting its remedy and also whether during the passage of time some rights have come to vest in favour of other persons and it would be inequitable to upset those rights.
7.
In this case there is no doubt that there is a time gap of 8 years between the date of issue of impugned order and date of filing of the writ petition but I am of the opinion that the petitioner cannot be held guilty of laches.
What the petitioner has stated in para 32 about his lack of knowledge of the impugned order has gone uncontested.
In their reply respondents No. 1 and 2 have stated that copy of the impugned order was not required to be endorsed to the petitioner.
In his reply respondent No. 3 has not chosen to deny the assertion made in para 32 of the writ petition.
Therefore, there is no reason to disbelieve the petitioner's assertion that he had no knowledge of the order dated 1611975 till the receipt of summons of CWP No. 5371/81.
In addition to this, I find that in all the gradation lists the petitioner has been shown above respondent No. 3 and, therefore, he had no occasion to suspect that the Government had passed some order giving respondent No. 3 retrospective promotion.
In this view of the matter preliminary objection raised by the respondents is overruled.
8.
On merits Shri Goyal argued that the retrospective promotion accorded to respondent No. 3 by exercise of power under Rule 9(3) (1) of '1960 Rules' is patently illegal apart from being arbitrary.
Learned counsel argued that there was no material available with the Government for forming an opinion that it was in public interest to give retrospective promotion to respondent No. 3 and, therefore, the impugned order does not satisfy one of the conditions precedent for exercise of power under second proviso of Rule 9(3) of '1960 Rules'.
Shri Goyal further argued that no reasons have been recorded by the Government for granting retrospective promotion to respondent No. 3 and, therefore, the impugned order should be declared as violative of Rule 9(3).
Last limb of the argument of Shri Goyal is that power under Rule 9(3) could be exercised for reducing the period of experience prospectively and there could be no justification for grant of retrospective promotion to the respondent No. 3 by reducing the required experience.
Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the impugned order has been passed by the Government keeping in view the requirement of service and the fact that respondent No. 3 had already been posted as Executive Engineer vide order dated 2791973 and he had in fact discharged the duties of the post of Executive Engineer for a period of more than one year and three months when the impugned order was issued.
Learned counsel pointed out that it is not a case of retrospective promotion but merely a recognition of the fact that respondent No. 3 had already been promoted a as Executive Engineer.
Shri Puri pointed out that the petitioner himself got similar benefit, inasmuch as he was promoted as Executive Engineer w.e.f.
27.5.1971 even before completion of six years service although as per the '1960 Rules' as Assistant Engineer could be promoted only after completion of eight years service.
Learned counsel submitted that if relaxation granted in case of the petitioner could be treated as valid, there is no reason why similar relexation could not be granted to respondent No. 3.
Shri Puri placed reliance on the decision of the apex Court in AN Sehgal and others v. Raje Ram Sheoram and others, AIR 1991 SC 1406, and argued that issue relating to grant of relaxation in the requirement of service experience must be treated as res integra in view of the aforementioned decision.
9.
The factual position which emerges from the record of this writ petition and the documents produced during the course of hearing is that respondent No. 3 had taken charge of the post of Executive Engineer in pursuance of order dated 2791973 and he physically discharged the duties of that post w.e.f.
8.10.1973.
The impugned order also refers to the order dated 2791973 and by taking cognizance of the fact that respondent No. 3 started working as Executive Engineer pursuant to the order dated 2791973 the Governor reduced the required experience and treated respondent No. 3 as promoted on the post of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
2791973.
In my opinion, this order cannot be termed as one by which respondent No. 3 has been given retrospective promotion.
Rather it is an order issued in recognition of the fact that respondent No. 3 has been working as Executive Engineer from 1973.
In other words, it can be said that the Government has given legal shape to the de facto status of respondent No. 3 as Executive Engineer.
It can also be treated as an order recognising the fact that respondent No. 3 enjoyed the status of Executive Engineer and discharged the duties of that post in compliance of order dated 2791973.
Therefore, the impugned order cannot be nullified on the ground that the respondent-Government had acted illegally in invoking its power under proviso to Rule 9(3).
It may have been a different situation if by issue of order dated 1611975 the Government has promoted him with retrospective effect for the first time.
10.
Coming to the argument of Shri Goyal that the impugned order is contrary to second proviso to Rule 9(3) it is necessary to take note of the fact that when order dated 2851971 (Annexure R.1) was issued by the Governor of Haryana for promotion/posting and transfer of as many as 10 officers, including the petitioner, the following notes were recorded therein :-  "The promotion of S/Shri RN Jindal, PP Luthra, MR Gupta, ML Thapar & Bhagat Ram is on provisional basis for a period of six months."
"S/Shri PP Luthra & MR Gupta have been promoted before completion of eight years service as Asstt.
Engg.
and as such their promotion is subject to the condition that their pay shall be fixed in accordance with the instructions contained in Govt. letter No. 4175-7ES- 61/12943, dated 17/2041961.
They should give their consent to the fixation of pay as above before taking over charge of the post of Executive Engineer."
11.
From these two notes the assertion of learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 that the petitioner had also been promoted by relaxation in the requirement of experience is fully buttressed and it is reasonable to take a view that the petitioner has himself taken advantage of the provision regarding relaxation in the requirement of experience.
In my opinion, the petitioner cannot, after having taken advantage of the provision regarding relaxation in the requirement of experience, challenge the action of the Government to grant such relaxation in the case of respondent No. 3.
The petitioner cannot be heard to say that the relaxation granted in favour of respondent No. 3 should be treated as arbitrary and mala fide or contrary to the rules although identical benefit has been given to him.
That apart, I find force in the submission of the learned Dy.
Advocate General that such relaxation was necessitated due to non-availability of sufficient number of eligible persons.
That, in my opinion, afforded valid justification for exercise of power under second proviso to Rule 9(3) and mere absence of reasons in the order cannot be a ground to invalidate the exercise of power by the Government.
12.
It is also significant to mention that in Civil Appeal No. 4094/84 decided by the Apex Court in 541991 AN Sehgal and others v. Raje Ram Sheoram and others, AIR 1991 SC 1406, the petitioner MR Gupta was one of the appellants and respondent No. 3 Raje Ram Sheoram was the main respondent.
Though that case relates to inter se seniority between the appellants and the respondent, in paragraph 4 of the judgment their Lordships have clearly observed that the issue of relaxation should be treated as concluded in view of two earlier decisions of the Apex Court.
This would be evident from the following observations made in the aforementioned decision AN Sehgal and others v. Raje Ram Sheoram and others :-  "The counsel for parties agreed that we should decide the principles on consideration of the Rules and leave the matter for the State Govt. to determine the inter se seniority by applying the law, so far as the controversy relating to relaxation of the length of service is concerned it is set at rest by this Court in JC Yadav v. State of Haryana, (1990) 2 SCC 189 and KK Khosla v. State of Haryana, (1990) 2 SCC 199 : AIR 1990 SC 1069 by a bench of three Judges to which one of us (KN Singh, J) was a member."
13.
From this decision also it can be inferred that the Apex Court did not find any irregularity in the grant of relaxation in favour of respondent No. 3.
14.
No other point has been argued.
15.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is held to be without merit and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.