Swatanter Kumar, J - The main argument in this Regular Second Appeal on behalf of the appellant is that the judgment of the first Appellate Court is contrary to the well-settled principles of law as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad V B Karunakar, 1993(1) SCT 319(SC) : 1993(3) (sic) Supreme Court 1.
2.
In order to appreciate the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the appellant it is necessary to refer to certain facts necessary for proper determination of the question.
The plaintiff (Dr. KK Sharma) filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order imposing penalty upon him dated 25.7.1990 passed by the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and order dated 791990 is illegal, wrong, ultra vires, against rules and is liable to be set aside.
The plaintiff was selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission on 25.2.1974.
At the relevant time, the plaintiff was working as Senior Medical Officer and was forced to proceed on leave.
His application for long leave was rejected.
The plaintiff submitted his joining report on 2151987.
He was served with the charge-sheet that he remained absent unauthorisedly and without leave and sanction of the proper Authority.
To this charge-sheet a detailed explanation was filed by the plaintiff on 1621988.
Departmental enquiry was held against the plaintiff and ultimately the plaintiff was dismissed from service with immediate effect as per order dated 25.7.1990 and published in the gazette notification on 791990.
The plaintiff alleged that enquiry was of a cryptic nature.
There was violation of rules, principles of natural justice and copy of the enquiry report was not furnished to the plaintiff.
He further submitted that personal hearing was not granted to him by any of the Authorities before imposing the punishment or otherwise.
The suit was contested by the defendants, who alleged that the plaintiff was placed under suspension, charge-sheet was served upon him, enquiry was held in accordance with rules and there has been no violation of any rules or regulations.
On these facts, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration as prayed for ?
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to received benefits, as prayed for, in the head-note ?
3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
4.
Whether no legal notice has been served on the punishing authority ?
5.
Whether the suit is under-valued for the purposes of court-fee and jurisdiction ?
The burden of issue Nos. 3 to 5 was on the defendants, which all were decided against the defendants.
Issues 1 and 2 were decided in favour of the plaintiff and consequently decreed the suit of the plaintiff and declared the order dated 2571995 as invalided and ineffective.
3.
The main basis given by the learned trial Court was that the entire enquiry was vitiated because subsistence allowance was not paid to the plaintiff and there was violation of principles of natural justice.
Against this judgment and decree dated 20893, an appeal was preferred.
The learned first Appellate Court accepted the appeal set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court vide its judgment dated 11996, which has been assailed in the present appeal.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
There is no dispute to the effect that the copy of the enquiry report was not furnished to the delinquent officer before the order imposing the punishment was passed by the disciplinary Authority, nor any material evidence was produced to that effect by the defendants that such report was furnished to the delinquent officer at any point of time.
Thus both the Courts have rightly proceeded on the basic premises that copy of the report had not been given to the plaintiff.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the trial Court considered it to be violation of the principles of natural justice and the rules and set aside the order while the learned first Appellate Court took a contrary view.
To my mind, this basic issue which has fallen for determination in this case is no more res integra and stands fully and finally concluded by the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of B.
The law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of the Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : A.I.R. 1991 Supreme Court 471 was clarified in the case of B Karunakar and it was held that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case is prospective in its operation and would not affect the rights of the parties in the case pending before the Court where decrees have been passed by the Court concerned.
Certainly, the scope of Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case has been restricted by the Supreme Court in its subsequent view but their Lordships have specifically provided an exemption to such prospective operation.
Where the rules under which the enquiry was being conducted specifically provided for supplying of an enquiry report, the violation of the judgment was held to be effective.
At this stage, it may be proper to refer to Rule 9(4)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1970, which were admittedly in force at the relevant time, reads as under :-  "9(4)(i) - If the punishing authority having regard to its finding on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employees, it shall - (a) furnish to the Government employee a copy of the report of the inquiry held by it and its findings on each article of charge or where the inquiry has been held by an inquiring authority, appointed by it, a copy of the report of such authority and a statement of its findings on each article of charge together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any, with the findings of the inquiring authority; (b) give the Government employee a notice stating the penalty proposed to be imposed on him and calling upon him to submit within fifteen days of receipt of the notice or such further time not exceeding fifteen days, as may be allowed, such representation as he may wish to make on the proposed penalty on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry held under rule 8".
5.
The Supreme Court in the case of B Karunakar (supra) while carving out an exception to the prospective operation of Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) held as under :  "Hence till 20th November, 1990, i.e. the day on which Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) was decided the position of law on the subject was not settled by this Court.
It is for the first time in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) that this Court laid down the law.
The decision made the law laid down there prospective in operation i.e. applicable to the orders of punishment passed after 20th November, 1990.
The law laid down was not applicable to the orders of punishment passed before the date notwithstanding the fact that the proceedings arising out of the same were pending in courts after that date.
The said proceedings has to be decided according to the law prevalent prior to the said date which did not require the authority to supply a copy of the Enquiry Officer's report to the employer.
The only exception to this was where the service rules with regard to the disciplinary proceedings themselves made it obligatory to supply a copy of the report to the employee."
(Emphasis supplied by this Court) The principle of law settled by their Lordships of the Supreme Court thus had made it obligatory upon the authorities concerned to supply the copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent officer if the rules so provided and non- supply of such a report would vitiate the disciplinary enquiry proceedings and consequently the order of punishment.
In the present case, the rules specifically provided and thus the appellant would be entitled to a decree benefit in this regard.
Certainly serious prejudice was caused to the right of the appellant to meet the points against him in the enquiry report and request the disciplinary authority to decide the case and award punishment upon the proper consideration of the defence put forward by the said officer.
The learned counsel for the appellant has also rightly relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Punjab State Electricity Board v. Uggar Sain Goyal, 1994(4) SCT 68(P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 422.
I am inclined to accept the findings of the trial Court in preference to the findings arrived at by the learned first Appellate Court.
6.
Even on the other point that non-payment of subsistence allowance was not of any consequence in the present case, I hold that the findings of the first Appellate Court are note sustainable.
The right to receive subsistence allowance springs from a statutory right available to a delinquent officer.
Once such right is provided in the rules governing the terms and conditions of the service of such employee he cannot be denied such right.
The concept of fair enquiry in its scope and by necessary implication would be deemed to include payment of subsistence allowance.
A person who is facing the departmental enquiry must have means to live and to enable him to participate in the enquiry in a proper frame of mind.
The further object of such payment is obviously that he should be able to incur proper expenses for establishing his defence before the Enquiry Officer.
Should the department deny this basic requirement to a delinquent officer, the inference has to be of denial of fair trial unless shown to the contrary.
In the present case, the plaintiff had specifically pleaded that he was forced to proceed on leave was not paid his salary and other limitation which caused prejudice to him in his defence.
7.
The learned first Appellate Court has erred in holding that the case of Manmohan Dass and others v. State of Orissa and others, 1979(2) Service Law Reporter 150 (DB) was decided on its own facts and does not laid down any principle of law.
8.
Similar view was expressed by the High Court in Ghanshyam Dass Shrivastava v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1973(1) S.L.R.
636.
9.
The violation of both the statutory rules afore-stated has certainly caused serious prejudice to the right of the appellant to defend himself fairly in the enquiry proceedings and even before the disciplinary authority before it passed the impugned order of punishment.
Non-adherence to these statutory rules and in view of the settled principle of law narrated above, the judgment and decree passed by the learned first Appellate Court is hereby set aside and that of the trial Court is affirmed.
The decree be drawn in terms thereof.
This appeal is accordingly allowed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.