NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge whereby the appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted, thus decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order of termination passed by the authorities and affirmed in appeal as well is against law and facts and so, liable to be set aside.
3.
Suit was contested by the defendants stating that the orders impugned are perfectly legal and just.
Other allegations made in the plaint were denied.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties the following issue were framed :-  (1) Whether the order dated 2131988 and orders dated 2071989 and 2571989 vide which the appeal was dismissed are null and void and inoperative qua the rights of the plaintiff ?
OPP (2) Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD.
(3-A) Whether the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to hear and try the present suit ?
OPD.
(3) Relief.
Trial Court after consideration the oral as well as documentary evidence adduced by the parties found no substance and so dismissed the suit.
5.
In appeal the Court again reappraised the evidence and came to the conclusion that order of dismissal is un-sustainable on the short ground that the punishing Authority was biased.
Moreover, the enquiry had not been conducted in strict compliance of Rule 22 of the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation.
Since there has been non-compliance of the Rules and the same amounts to denial of justice.
6.
The appellants have termed the conclusion of the Court below to be wholly un-just and improper.
According to the appellants, the plaintiff had committed a fraud with the Corporation and so his services have been rightly terminated by the Punishing authority in view of the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
Elaborating the counsel argued that it is a matter of record that respondent-workman did not file any reply to the charge-sheet and in the absence of any such reply it can be taken that the charges levelled stand proved.
The lower appellate Court has simply over-looked this salient fact.
Otherwise too the lower appellate Court has mis-read the evidence adduced before the trial Court which too vitiates the impugned Judgment of the lower appellate Court.
7.
The charge against the plaintiff is that Shri Chhaju Ram, Inspector checked the bus No. PUP 2799 of Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Faridkot Depot at Sadiq Chowk, Faridkot on 6.9.1986.
As per report submitted by the Inspector eight persons were found travelling without tickets from Ferozepur to Faridkot and two from Rajowal to Faridkot from whom the plaintiff had charged the bus fare but had not issued the tickets.
This way he defrauded the Corporation to the extent of Rs. 2560.
As per charge levelled, the plaintiff was under the influence of liquor.
An enquiry was held and the plaintiff was removed from service vide order dated 2131988.
The Deputy General Manager while passing an order of dismissal kept in view the past service record of the plaintiff.
In fact, in his order he has highlighted that in view of various acts of omission and commission the plaintiff had been awarded punishments like stoppage of increments, censured on as many as 15 different occasions and so is an in-corrigible type of person and thus does not deserve by leniency.
Such an observation per se disclose a bias.
Plaintiff had not been confronted with his past record.
Otherwise too, evidence before the Inquiry Officer consists of the statement of the Inspector alone.
Concededly, the statement of the passengers had not been recorded.
At best the evidence of the Inspector can be termed to be hear- say.
8.
The precise matter as to how far hear-say evidence needs to be admitted and relied upon was considered by the Full Bench in The State of Haryana and others v. Ram Chander, AIR 1976 Punjab and Haryana 381 and the Court held as under :-  "Where a bus is checked and it is found that tickets have not been issued to several passengers and the passengers stated in the presence of the conductor that they paid the fare, the enquiry officer would be justified in acting upon the evidence of the checkers stating these facts even though the passengers themselves are not examined as witnesses.
A finding on guilt arrived at by him would not be based on pure hearsay.
It would be based on (1) the evidence of the checker that he found passenger travelling without tickets, and (2) the statements made by the passengers to the checkers at the time of checking.
The second item of evidence alone would be hearsay but it would be hearsay of high probative value because of the circumstance that statement were made in the presence of the conductor and on the spot.
In such a case, it cannot be said that the enquiry officer's findings are based on pure hearsay or hearsay of unreliable nature."
9.
In the instant case concededly the statement of passengers had not been recorded and in the absence of the same it is a case of no evidence.
10.
Somewhat similar matter came up for consideration in RSA No. 118 of 1986 (Kuldip Rai v. State of Punjab and others) and the Court relying upon the decision of this Court in the State of Haryana's case (supra) held it to be a case of no evidence and so accepted the appeal of the plaintiff.
11.
Following the aforesaid two decisions of the Court, I am of the view that present too is a case of no evidence and the lower appellate Court rightly decreed the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for.
Thus, finding no merit in the appeal the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.