NK Sodhi, J - This order can conveniently dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions 12923 of 1992 and 447 of 1993 as they are both directed against the award of the Labour Court dated 841992 whereby termination of the services of the workman on the ground of misconduct was held to be justified but he was awarded compensation of Rs. 60,000/- on compassionate and humanitarian grounds.
Civil Writ Petition 12923 of 1992 has been filed by the workman whereas other petition is by the management.
2.
This case has a chequered history.
Ramji Dass for short the workman) was working as a Painter with Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd at Pinjore (hereinafter referred to as the management).
It is alleged that on 21.11.1969 while leaving the premises of the management, the workman was searched and it was found that he was carrying white paint and thinner in his tiffin box.
He is said to have tendered his resignation.
Inspite of the resignation, the management served a charge sheet on the workman on 27.11.1969.
A reply was filed to the charge sheet on 4121969.
The management informed the workman on 2731970 that his resignation had been accepted.
The workman challenged the factum of resignation and alleged that his services had been terminated.
He raised an industrial dispute under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act).
The State Government referred the dispute for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court-respondent.
On receipt of notice from the Labour Court, the parties filed their statements of claim and from their pleadings the following two issues were framed :  "1.
Whether the workman Shri Ramji Dass voluntarily resigned from service?
2.
Whether the termination of services of Shri Ramji Dass was justified and in order, if not, to what relief is he entitled ?"
The Labour Court as per its award dated 1871973 held that the resignation tendered by the workman had been duly accepted by the management and decided issue No. 1 against him.
Issue No. 2 was left undecided.
The workman filed Civil Writ Petition 3788 of 1973 in this Court which was allowed on 15101975 and it was held that his resignation had been withdrawn before it was accepted.
The case was remanded back to the Labour Court for deciding the validity of the termination effected by the management.
After remand, the Labour Court found that no inquiry was conducted by the management before terminating the services of the workman on account of misconduct and, therefore, he was ordered to be reinstated.
Against this order of reinstatement, the management filed Civil Writ Petition 464 of 1977 in this Court which was partly allowed on 1111978.
The management and the workman both filed Letters Patent Appeals 167 and 187 of 1978 respectively in this Court and these were disposed of on 24121981 and the case was again remanded to the Labour Court to allow the management to justify its action in terminating the services of the workman on the ground of misconduct.
On receipt of the case from the High Court, the Labour Court erroneously held that the workman had voluntarily resigned from the job, therefore, the termination was said to be valid.
The workman again came to this Court in Civil Writ Petition 3803 of 1986 which was allowed on 441991 and the case remanded to the Labour Court for allowing the management to justify its action as was directed by the Letters Patent Bench in the earlier appeals.
Now when the case came back to the Labour Court, the management led evidence regarding misconduct of the workman.
On a consideration of the evidence, the Labour Court as per the impugned award dated 841992 (Annexure P-13 with the writ petition filed by the workman held that the termination of the services o fthe workman on the ground of misconduct of theft was justified.
The Labour Court relied on his statement Exhibit M-2 written by him in his own hand and signed by him in which he admitted his guilt.
The Labour Court also observed that the workman hwhose termination on the ground of misconduct of theft had been established could not be awarded with any back wages.
Section 11-A of the Act was not applied as it is not retrospective in its operation.
However, a sum of Rs. 60,000/- was awarded to the workman on compassionate and humanitarian grounds.
It is this order that has been challenged by both the parties.
3.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the workman has raised two points for my consideration.
He urged in the first place that the finding of the Labour Court to the effect that the termination of the workman was justified is perverse and that he is entitled to reinstatement.
The second contention is that since the management had failed to hold an inquiry before terminating the services of the workman and its action was sought to be justified before the Labour Court for the first time in its award dated 841992, the workman was entitled to wages from the date of dismissal until final decision of the Labour Court.
He has placed reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Desh Raj Gupta v. Industrial Tribunal IV UP Lucknow and another, AIR 1990 SC 2174 : 1991(1) SCT 86(SC) and Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896.
4.
Mr. Chhibar on the other hand submitted that the Labour Court having found the workman guilty of theft has not awarded any back wages but surprisingly enough he has been awarded Rs. 60,000/- as compensation on humanitarian grounds for which there is no justification in law.
It was also argued on behalf of the management that the workman was not entitled to wages from the date of his dismissal till the date of the impugned award.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
Dealing with the second contention first, it is not in dispute that the services of the petitioner-workman were terminated on 2731970.
The management is said to have accepted his resignation.
The Courts held that the resignation was not voluntarily tendered and that the services of the workman were terminated with effect from that date.
It is also not in dispute that the management did not hold any inquiry before terminating the services of the workman and that it justified its action for the first time before the Labour Court when it led evidence in regard to the misconduct of the workman.
It was on a consideration of this evidence that the Labour Court as per the impugned award came to the conclusion that the workman was guilty of the charge of theft and upheld his termination.
In this view of the matter, the services of the workman will be deemed to have been terminated on the day when the action of the management was upheld by the Labour Court and the date of dismissal cannot relate back to the date of the illegal order passed by the management.
The workman is, therefore, entitled to his salary from 2731970 till the date of the impugned award, that is, 841992.
The view that I have taken finds support from the decisions of the Supreme Court cited by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate.
6.
As regard the first contention of Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram that the findings of the Labour Court upholding the termination of the workman are perverse has no merit.
He has taken me through the award of the Labour Court and a perusal of the same would show that the Labour Court has discussed in detail the evidence led by the management regarding misconduct and while upholding its action in terminating the services of the workman, the Court has placed reliance on the confessional statement made by the workman.
I find no ground to interfere with the findings of the Labour Court in this regard.
7.
Now coming to the contention of Mr. Chhibar that the Labour Court was not justified in awarding a sum of Rs. 60,000/- to the workman on humanitarian grounds.
There is merit in this submission.
The workman has been found guilty of a serious charge of theft and when no back wages are being awarded to him, the Labour Court was not justified in giving sum of Rs. 60,000/- on humanitarian grounds.
The law does not permit the grant of any amount on such grounds.
The order of the Labour Court in this regard cannot thus be sustained.
8.
In the result, both the writ petitions are partly allowed and the award of the Labour Court modified to the extent that the workman would be entitled to his salary from 2731970 till 841992 but he will not be entitled to the sum of Rs. 60,000/- awarded to him on humanitarian grounds.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.