GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash Annexures P-7 and P-8 by which service of the petitioner has been terminated from the post of Lecturer in Instrumentation.
2.
A few facts which are necessary for the purpose of deciding whether or not the impugned resolution and order suffer from any illegality deserves to be narrated.
3.
In response to advertisement No. 5/95 issued by the respondent University for recruitment to the two posts of Lecturer (Instrumentation), the petitioner made an application.
He was interviewed by a Committee consisting of the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro Vice-Chancellor, the Dean, Faculty of Science, the Chairman, Department of Instrumentation, Prof. SC Pancholi, Physics Department, University of Delhi, and Prof, Kailash Chander, Director, USIC Roorkee University.
He was placed at No. 2 in the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee.
On the recommendation of the Selection Committee, the petitioner was appointed as Lecturer, Department of Instrumentation vide Annexure P-3 dated 2481995.
His appointment was described as temporary with an indication that it was likely to continue and also a rider that the University could terminate his service with a notice of one month or salary in lieu thereof.
In its meeting held on 2921996, the Executive Council of the respondent University passed a resolution for terminating the service of the petitioner by giving him one month's salary and in execution of this resolution, order (Annexure P-8) was conveyed to the petitioner by the Registrar of the respondent-University.
4.
The petitioner has set out few facts to show that the impugned resolution has been passed by the Executive Council on the basis of allegations of misconduct.
He has stated that the candidates placed at serial Nos. 1 and 2 in the merit-list had already joined and even though no third post was available, Shri Sunil Dhingra, who was placed at serial No. 3, was allowed to join duty on 2511996.
Petitioner further says that the impugned resolution for termination of his service has been passed in order to make room for Shri Sunil Dhingra and for this purpose a false complaint was procured from some of the students who had gone with him to Delhi in an educational tour.
According to the petitioner, he had brought to the notice of various authorities the misconduct committed by some of the students during the educational tour but the Head of Department manipulated a complaint against him because he wanted the appointment of Shri Sunil Dhingra.
5.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned resolution and order on the ground of violation of the University's statute and the principles of natural justice by urging that no inquiry was held by the respondent-University before taking the decision to terminate his service on the basis of allegations contained in the complaint.
6.
In reply, the respondent raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the petitioner has failed to avail alternative remedy available to him under Section 10(14) of the Kurukshetra University Act.
The respondent-University has justified the selection of Shri Dhingra by stating that as per the conditions of advertisement, the University could increase/decrease the number of posts.
The respondent-University has further stated that on receipt of the complaint dated 28.11.1995 from the students, comments of the Chairman of the Department of Instrumentation were obtained and the same were placed before the Executive Council along with the complaint and after considering the same, the Executive Council decided to terminate the service of the petitioner in accordnace with the conditions of appointment.
The respondent-University also stated that all the 21 candidates of B Tech.
Courts have made a complaint and have expressed their unwillingness to be taught by the petitioner.
7.
In the first place, we shall dispose of the preliminary objection raised by the respondent-University, namely, that the writ petition should not be entertained because of failure of the petitioner to avail the alternative remedy under Section 10(14) of the Kurukshetra University Act.
Section 10(14) reads as under :-  "10(14).
Any employee of the University who is aggrieved by the decisions of the Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor in respect of any disciplinary action taken against him, may address a memorial to the Chancellor in such manner as may be prescribed by Statutes and the decision of the Chancellor shall be final."
8.
From a plain reading of the provision quoted above, it is clear that an employee can submit memorial to the Chancellor against a decision taken by the Executive Council or the Vice Chancellor in respect of any disciplinary action taken against him.
In the present case, the impugned resolution has not been passed by the Executive Council on the basis of disciplinary action taken against the petitioner and, therefore, in literal sense the petitioner cannot submit any memorial to the Chancellor.
That apart, we are of the opinion that when the action taken against the petitioner has been challenged on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice, there is no justification to relegate the petitioner to the remedy of submitting memorial to the Chancellor.
One of the exceptions to the self-imposed rule of not entertaining the writ under Article 226 of the Constitution is where the impugned action is challenged on the anvil of violation of principles of natural justice.
This views of ours is based on the decision of the Supreme Court in Babu Ram v. Zila Parishad, AIR 1969 SC 556, wherein the Supreme Court held :-  "There are at least two well-recognised exceptions to the doctrine with regard to the exhaustion of statutory remedies.
In the first place, it is well settled that where proceedings are taken before a Tribunal under a provision of law, which is ultra vires it is open to a party aggrieved thereby to move the High Court under Article 226 for issuing appropriate writ for quashing them on the ground that they are incompetent, without his being obliged to wait until those proceedings run their full course.
In the second place, the doctrine has no application in a case where the impugned order has been made in violation of the principles of natural justice."
For the aforementioned reasons, we overrule the preliminary objection raised by the respondent-University.
9.
On merits of the case, we find that the impugned resolution Annexure P-7 has been passed by the Executive Council on the basis of recommendation made by the Director, USIC, on a complaint dated 28.11.1995 submitted by a the students of.
Tech (Instrumentation) course.
The Executive Council opined that the matter was serious and the prestige of the institution/department cannot be sacrificed and, therefore, the service of the petitioner be dispensed with after giving him one month's salary.
From the record with Shri Sibal produced before the Court, it appears that the students of B Tech.
course addressed a representation to the Director, USIC, for taking action against the petitioner for alleged derogatory behaviour and misconduct.
This complaint seems to have been sent to the Establishment Branch the University.
The Vice-Chancellor of the University approved the proposal of the office that comments of the Director USIC, may first be obtained.
Upon this, Shri SN Chaturvedi, Director USIC, recorded the following comments :-  "The matter is serious indeed and the prestige of institution/department cannot be sacrificed.
Students are continuing to miss the classes of Mr. Rana.
Considering all aspects of this representation as well as similar representation in the past (Flag A), I am of the view to relieve Mr. Rana from his services immediately and alternative arrangements may be made for another teacher for the smooth conduct of the classes as their semester Examination is due towards Jan 96 end ."
10.
On these comments, Deputy Registrar (Establishment) suggested the termination of services of the petitioner under Section 11(5) of the Kurukshetra University Act.
However, the Vice-Chancellor directed on 22.12.1995 that the matter be placed before the Executive Council.
Accordingly, the matter was placed before the Executive Council in its meeting held on 1711996 which passed the impugned resolution Annexure P-7.
11.
The other complaint to which a reference has been made in the comments of the Director, USIC, is dated 1561994.
However, it does not appear from, the record that any action was taken on that complaint.
12.
From the above narration of the facts, which are borne out from the record of the writ petition as well as the file produced by the learned counsel for the University, it is clear to us that the termination of service of the petitioner is not termination simpliciter but is founded on the allegation of derogatory behaviour levelled against the petitioner by the students and the adverse comments made by the Director, USIC, who not only relied on the complaint submitted on 2881995 but also on a complaint which is said to have been received in June, 1994, and upon which no action was taken for a period of one year and six months.
13.
It is an admitted position that neither the copies of two complaints were made available to the petitioner nor was he given a notice to explain the allegation levelled by the students and the comments submitted by the Director, USIC.
It is, therefore, evident that the impugned decision of the Executive Council is founded on the allegation of misconduct in respect of which the petitioner had no opportunity to submit his representation.
It must, therefore, be held that the impugned decision has been taken by the Executive Council in violation of the basic principles of natural justice and the petitioner has been condemned unheard.
14.
In State of Bihar v. Shiva Bhikshuk Mishra, AIR 1971 SC 1011, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that "where an order of reversion is challenged on the ground that it is by way of punishment, it has to be seen by the Court whether the misconduct or negligence was a mere motive for an order of reversion or whether it is very foundation of that order and the form of the order is not conclusive of its true nature and it might merely be a cloak and camouflage for an order founded on misconduct.
Their Lordships further held :-  "It may be that an order which is innocuous on the face and does not contain any imputation of misconduct is a circumstance or a piece of evidence for finding whether it was made by way of punishment or administrative routine.
But the entirety of circumstances preceding or attendant on the impugned order must be examined and the overriding test will always be whether the misconduct is a mere motive or is the very foundation of the order."
15.
In Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192, a seven Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered this aspect of the case and held :-  "No abstract proposition can be laid down that where the services of a probationer are terminated without saying anything more in the order of termination than that the services are terminated it can never amount to a punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case.
If a probationer is discharged on the ground of misconduct, or inefficiency or for similar reasons without a proper enquiry and without his getting a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his discharge it may in a given case amount to removal from service within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution."
16.
This principle has been followed in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India, AIR 1984 SC 636; Nepal Singh v. State of MP, AIR 1985 SC 84; Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1986 SC 1790; Hardip Singh v. State of Haryana, 1989(4) (sic) 474(SC) Babu Lal v. State of Haryana, 1991(1) SCT 474 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1311, and other decisions.
17.
Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India (supra) is a case where employee was on probation.
He and others were charged with the allegation of having obstained from training.
All the trainees, including the appellant, had expressed regrets, but the Government of India terminated his service by relying upon the conditions of services applicable to a probationer.
Their Lordships quashed the order of termination and declared the law in the following words;-  "..... Where the form of the order is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal for misconduct it is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality of cloak for an order of punishment, the court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee."
18.
In Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. State of Punjab (supra), service of the appellant had been terminated under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
No enquiry had been made by the competent Authority.
The appellant challenged the impugned order on the ground that it was by way of punishment but no enquiry had been held before terminating her service.
Their Lordships found that the order of discharge was made on the basis of a finding recorded on an investigation that the appellant had spent two nights with a Constable.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondent, it was admitted that the Superintendent of Police, Hoshairpur, got conducted an inquiry regarding the conduct of the appellant and on the basis of overall assessment of the work and conduct of the appellant, the Superintendent of Police came to the conclusion that she was not likely to become an efficient police officer.
Their Lordships referred to various earlier decisions and held :-  "On a consepectus of all these decisions mentioned hereinbefore, the irresistible conclusion follows that the impugned order of discharge though couched in innocuous terms, is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal from service on the ground of misconduct.
This order has been made without serving the appellant any charge-sheet, without asking for any explanation, from her and without giving any opportunity to show cause against the purported order of dismissal from service and without giving any opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses examined, that is, in other words the order has been made in total contravention of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution."
19.
In Babu Lal's case (supra), termination of service of an ad hoc appointee was found to be vitiated because the foundation of the order of termination was an allegation on the basis of which the appellant had been prosecuted but was acquitted by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate.
20.
We may mention that in a majority of the decisions reference has been made to Article 311 of the Constitution because the cases pertain to civil servants.
However, the same very principle has been followed in the cases where the employees were not civil servants but were employed with agencies/instrumentalities of the State.
One of the celebrated Judgments on the subject is UP Warehousing Corpn.
v. Vijay Narayan, AIR 1980 SC 840.
In that case, the Supreme Court applied the rules of natural justice even where statutory provisions had not been framed.
In this judgment, Sarkaria, J observed :-  "The Court would therefore, presume the existence of a duty on the part of the dismissing authority to observe the rules of natural justice, and to act in accordance with the spirit of Regulation 16, which was then on the anvil and came into force shortly after the impugned dismissal.
The rules of natural justice in the circumstances of the case, required that the respondent should be given a reasonable opportunity to deny his guilt, to defend himself and to establish his innocence which means and includes an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses relied upon by the appellant-Corporation and an opportunity to lead evidence in defence of the charge as also a show cause notice for the proposed punishment."
21.
In view of the legal position stated above, there is no escape from the conclusion that the impugned decision of the Executive Council which is founded on the allegation of misconduct levelled against the petitioner in the complaint made by the students and the comments of the Directors, USIC, is liable to be set aside because no enquiry was held by the respondent- University in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the statute framed by it.
22.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition and quash Annexures P-7 and P-8.
Liberty is, however, given to the respondent -University to take a fresh decision in the matter after following the relevant statutory provisions as well as the principles of natural justice.
We also make it clear that it would be open to the University not to give any teaching assignment to the petitioner till the University decides future course of action against the petitioner but direct that such decision should be taken within a period of one months of the receipt of certified copy of this order.
23.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.