RL Anand, J - By this judgment I will dispose of two Regular Second Appeals No. 65 of 1989 State of Haryana v. Brij Mohan Maharishi, and No. 2739 of 1988 Brij Mohan Maharishi v. State of Haryana and others, as both these cross appeals have arisen from one judgment and decree dated 15.9.1988 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Narnaul, who partly allowed the appeal filed by Brij Mohan Maharishi and gave directions to the State of Haryana that the case regarding the grant of selection grade to the plaintiff would be considered and the selection grade would be released to him within the three months from the date of the passing of the judgment, in accordance with the rules.
Besides that Civil Writ Petition No. 3272 of 1989 titled Smt. Vidya Wati v. State of Haryana and others, is being disposed of in terms of the order dated 15.3.1989 passed by the Division Bench of this Court.
2.
Firstly, in the pleadings of the suit for declaration which was filed by Brij Mohan Maharishi, it was pleaded by him that he was appointed as untrained teacher in DB Primary School, Paterewala, District Ferozepur, under the control of the District Board on 1111957 in the Punjab State.
He did matriculation in the year 1953.
The District Board Schools were taken over by the State of Punjab and the teachers were categorised as provincialised cadre.
Such taking over was concluded on 10.10.1957.
The plaintiff claims to have completed his in service courses from Basic Training Institute, Faridkot, on 291959 and 9.9.1959 and in this way he claims himself to have qualified for all the benefits of service and others facilities.
It has been pleaded by him that there was a scheme of Award of Special Certificate, which was discontinued all of a sudden, but since the untrained teachers were hit hard by the such decision of the Education Department, so in order to safeguard the interests of such teachers a scheme of in-service training courses was evolved and a provision was made for the grant of special certificate and such certificate was to be granted to a teacher on his completion of five years of service and according to paragraph 6 of the plaint the plaintiff became entitled to special certificate with effect from 1961-62.
The case of the plaintiff is that no such certificate was granted to him and he moved many applications and made a number of representations for grant of such certificate and consequently for the grant of selection grade, but to no effect.
It is alleged by the plaintiff, the BEO, Bawal, also recommended his case to SDEO, Rewari, vide letter dated 771978 and that letter was further transmitted to the higher authorities, but no such certificate was granted to him.
The plaintiff gave notice under Section 80 CPC on 2791973, but to no effect.
Hence he filed a suit for declaration that withholding of special certificate and consequent selection grade to him was illegal, void, arbitrary, without jurisdiction and against service rules.
3.
The defendants filed written statement and contested the suit.
They took preliminary objection that the suit was not maintainable on account of inordinate delay and laches; that it was bad for non-joinder of necessary parties; that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
On merits it was pleaded that though the plaintiff completed in-service training course from 161959 to 15.7.1959 and 27.7.1960 to 991960, but he did not fulfil the requirements of Article 153 of the Haryana Education Code, and thus he was not entitled to any special certificate.
Relevant part of Article 153 has been reproduced in paragraph 6 of the written statement.
It was further pleaded that the plaintiff never applied for the grant of special certificate before 31.12.1965, which was the last date for the receipt of such representations.
4.
The plaintiff filed a rejoinder to the written statement of the defendants, in which he reiterated his allegations by denying those of the written statement, and from the above pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for special certificate with effect from 1961-62 as alleged in para No. 6 of the plaint ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPP.
2.
In case issue No. 1 is proved in the affirmative, then whether the plaintiff is entitled to selection grade and if so to what effect and from which date ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPD.
4.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction if so, to what effect ?
OPD.
5.
Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case.
On the conclusion of the evidence, the trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 15.10.1986 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
Aggrieved by the judgment the plaintiff filed an appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Narnaul, who vide judgment and decree dated 15.9.1988 partly allowed the appeal in terms as mentioned in the earlier portion of the judgment.
The plaintiff was still not satisfied with the impugned judgment and decree dated 15.9.1988, as he was deprived of the benefit of release of special certificate.
The State of Haryana was also aggrieved with the grant of declaration regarding the grant of selection grade.
Hence the two cross appeals from the judgment and decree passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Narnaul.
5.
Now the pleading of C.W.P.
No. 3272 of 1989 can be summarised in the following manner.
6.
Smt Vidya Wati filed C.W.P.
No. 3272 of 1989 under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of directions in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to issue the Special Certificate to her and consequential benefits to which she was entitled according to Article 153 of the Haryana Education Code and it was pleaded by her that she was appointed as an untrained teacher on 961956 in the District Board School, Manana, on a fixed salary of Rs. 47.80+Rs.
30/- as Dearness Allowance, and is continuing as such till today without any break.
At the time of filing of the writ petition, the petitioner was getting Rs. 878/- (Basic Pay) as monthly pay (fixed) whereas the other trained teachers were getting the running pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040, when both the categories of teachers are performing the same functions.
Later on, the District Board Schools were taken over by the State under provincialized cadre.
Subsequently, after the coming into existence of the Haryana State, he became the employee of the Education Department, Haryana.
The petitioner alleges that throughout her service career of 32 years, her work and conduct was outstanding and no disciplinary proceedings of any kind were initiated against her.
At the time of her appointment, she was middle pass and J.B.T.
fail.
She undertook the vacation course conducted by the Education Department, Haryana from 1561974 to 571974, which she successfully completed.
She also undertook two such vacation courses in the years 1980 and 1983, which were also successfully completed by her and in this manner she has successfully completed three vacation courses conducted by the Education Department.
The case of the petitioner further is that in the year 1965 the State of Punjab sponsored a scheme for awarding Special Certificate to the untrained teachers, so that they could get the benefit of running grade, on the fulfilment of certain conditions which are as follows :-  (a) That the applicant must have passed the Middle Standard School Examination or Matriculation Examination.
(b) He/She must have put in 5 years continuous and approved service upto 3091957 in case of Middle pass candidates.
If such teachers failed in the JBT Examination, they are required to put in 3 years' continuous and approved service in recognised schools upto 3171958 in case the candidate is Middle pass.
(c) He/She must be of good moral character.
(d) He/She must have distinguished herself as a Teacher of the Subject.
7.
The petitioner applied for the grant of Special Certificate but could not be granted the same as she had put in only 2 years and some months of service upto 3171958.
8.
After the reorganisation of the Punjab State, the State of Haryana adopted the Punjab Education Code and the policy of granting the Special Certificate was codified under Article 153 of the Haryana Education Code, 1978, which is as under :-  (1) (a) For teaching all subjects in Primary Department : 1.
The applicant must have passed the Middle Standard School Examination or Matriculation Examination.
2.
He/She must have put in 5 years continuous and approved service upto 3091957 in case of Middle pass candidates after passing Middle Examination and 4 years service upto 31758 in case of Matriculate candidates.
Such teachers, if failed in the JBT/JT/JV Examination, are required to put in 3 years continuous and approved service in recognised schools upto 31758 in case of Middle pass candidates, and 2 years service upto 31758 for Matriculate teachers after failure in the JBT/JT/JV Examination as well as after passing Middle/Matriculate Examination.
3.
He/She must be of good moral character.
4.
He/She must have distinguished himself/ herself as a teacher of the subject.
The petitioner further states in her writ petition that scheme of award of special certificate for teaching all subjects in different departments and for language teachers was discontinued all of a sudden and the untrained teachers were hard hit by this decision of the department.
In order to safeguard the interests of untrained teachers and to keep them in service, a scheme of training course was evolved.
The untrained teachers whose service fell short of service required for the eligibility of special certificates were advised to attend different number of training course, according to their length of service as given below :-  "(a) xx xx xx xx  (b) In case of Matriculate or JBT/JT/JV failed candidates : 1.
Those teachers whose length of service after failure in JBT/JT/JV Examination was between 2-3 years upto 31758 were to attend one vacation course.
2.
Those candidates whose length of service after failure in JBT/JT/JV examination was between 1-2 years upto 31.5.58 were to attend two successive vacation courses.
Note : No arrangement was made for those candidates whose length of service after failure in JBT/JT/JV examination was less than one year upto 31758.
They were to join some regular training institutions for being considered as trained hands.
9.
The case set up by the petitioner further is that according to Article 153 the benefit of the Special Certificate could have been granted to a teacher who was Middle (pass) JBT fail and who had completed one vacation course and who had two years service to his credit on 3171958.
The petitioner fulfils the eligibility qualification and is entitled to the grant of special certificate as she had completed one vacation course in the year 1974 (Annexure P1) and had two years of service to her credit on 3171958.
The petitioner was not granted the certificate as per policy in spite of the representations.
10.
In the year 1982 respondents Nos. 1 and 2 further relaxed the conditions prescribed under Article 153 of the Haryana Education Code so that the benefit of Special Certificate can be extended to those teachers who were not covered by the above mentioned policy and according to the relaxed policy, all those Middle and Matric untrained teachers who had completed 4 or 5 years of continuous service on 30.11.1967 were entitled for the grant of special certificate.
On 2181984 respondent No. 2 wrote a letter to all the District Education Officers in the State of Haryana asking them to send the cases of all those untrained teachers who were possessing the qualifications and experience required under Article 153 of the Haryana Education Code for consideration for the grant of Special Certificate.
A time schedule was fixed as per Annexure P4.
In response to this letter (Annexure P4), the petitioner submitted her particulars on the requisite proforma and the requisite certificates to the Block Education Officer, Panipat, in the month of August, 1984, who in turn sent the same to the office of Sub-Divisional Officer (Education), Panipat, who vide letter dated 15101984 sent the same to the District Education Officer, Karnal, for forwarding the same to the office of respondent No. 2, Along with the case of petitioner, the cases of many other similarly situated teachers were also sent to the Director Public Instruction (Schools), i.e., respondent No. 2.
The similarly situated teachers whose cases were also sent along with the case of the petitioner, have been issued the special certificate on 1851987, but the petitioner has been deprived of this certificate.
She made representations, but to no effect.
Her last representation is Annexure P5.
Finally she approached the office of the District Education Officer for the issuance of the special certificate, but she was informed that her case was not received in that office and for that reason, the special certificate could not be issued to her.
The petitioner had been approaching the office of respondent No. 3 in order to locate her papers but to no effect.
After serving legal notice dated 2971988 (Annexure P6), present petition has been filed with the prayer that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of special certificate and other consequential benefits in the regular grade, which is being granted to the trained teachers.
11.
The State did not file any regular written statement but a short affidavit by way of written statement dated 2071990 was filed and it was stated that on receipt of the notice of motion respondent No. 2 decided to reconsider the case of the petitioner for the award of the special certificate.
Respondent No. 2 directed the District Education Officer, Karnal, vide letter dated 1391989 to send the case of the petitioner along with original certificates of the petitioner, which are essential for deciding her case.
A reminder was also issued.
The District Education Officer, Karnal, directed the Sub- Divisional Officer, Panipat, to supply the said documents on 27111989, but the latter officer informed that the petitioner was not willing to produce her original certificates.
She was again requested to submit her original certificates through registered post, but this letter was received undelivered with the remarks of the postal authorities that the petitioner had refused to accept it.
The petitioner was personally approached but she did not hand over the original certificates.
It may be highlighted here that the respondents nowhere categorically stated that the petitioner did not pass the various courses, as alleged by her in her writ petition or that she was not eligible for the grant of the special certificate.
The only stand of the respondents is that the original certificates are not being produced by the petitioner, so as to process her case for the grant of special certificate, as demanded by her.
12.
I have heard Shri SK Mittal, Advocate, on behalf of Shri Brij Mohan Maharishi in the appeals, and on behalf of Smt. Vidya Wati in the writ petition, and Shri Azad Singh, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana on behalf of the State, and with their assistance have gone through the record of these cases.
13.
First of all I would dispose of the two appeals and thereafter the writ petition, as the arguments or legal aspects of the case are common in all these cases.
14.
Assailing the findings of the Additional District Judge, Narnaul, it was urged by Shri SK Mittal, Advocate, that the relief of issuance of the special certificate could not be defeated on the technicality that his client did not apply to the authorities on or before 31st December, 1965 irrespective of the fact that no such plea was raised in the plaint or in the grounds of appeal, as this cut off date is discriminatory and it has no legs to stand.
In support of the writ petition he submitted that impliedly it has been admitted that the writ petitioner fulfilled all the requisite qualifications and her claim is being defeated only on the ground that she did not submit the original certificates.
To corroborate his argument, learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the rejoinder filed by the petitioner, in which she had categorically stated that original certificates were also sent along with the application.
Even otherwise, a Welfare State should not deny the benefit to its employees on the technical grounds when the entire service record of the employee is in possession of the State, from which all relevant factors and the pre-requisite conditions required for the issuance of special certificate can be verified.
15.
On the contrary, learned Assistant Advocate General has submitted that even the selection grade could not be given to Shri Brij Mohan Maharishi.
In the absence of the original certificates, no relief can be granted to Smt. Vidya Wati writ petitioner, as she had failed to submit the original certificates.
16.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Firstly, I hold that the cut off date, i.e., 31st December, 1965 has no nexus.
It has been incorporated in the instructions so that the employees may apply in time, but even if some employees do not apply in time, still the State has the obligation to see whether the benefit of a particular policy accrues to its employees or not, and if so, such benefit should invariably be given to its employees and their original claim should not be defeated as urged by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Smt Vidya Wati is in the service of the respondents for the last several years and her entire service record is in possession of the respondents, from which it could be well ascertained whether the petitioner fulfils the requisite educational qualifications or not and whether she has passed the various courses prescribed by the Government in order to grant her special certificate.
No serious challenge has been given about the passing of the various courses by plaintiff Shri Brij Mohan Maharishi and Smt. Vidya Wati writ petitioner.
Shri SK Mittal has drawn my attention to a citation reported as Attar Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 107 (P&H) : 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 261, wherein it was held that burden to prove discrimination is being practised by the State or its functionaries amongst the members of one group primarily lies on person, who makes a grievance that he has been denied equality before law.
Once this primary burden is discharged, it becomes obligatory for the respondents to show to the Court that action taken by them does not suffer from any arbitrariness or it is not irrational.
In the present case the respondent State has not been able to show that their guidelines did not suffer from any arbitrariness or that they were not irrational.
Rather irrationality is surrounded when cut-off date has been laid down so as to deprive the legitimate claim of the employee.
The writ petitioner as well as the plaintiff have been able to prove in the present case that action of the respondent State suffers from arbitrariness.
17.
Learned counsel for the writ petitioner as well as the plaintiff has also placed reliance on an authority of this High Court delivered in R.S.A.
No. 3258 of 1986 Krishan Dutt Nirmal v. State of Haryana and others, wherein it was held that when an employee, who was a Primary School teacher, cleared Middle Standard qualification before the prescribed date, such employee was entitled to claim benefit of pay scale in pursuance of the recommendations of the Kothari Commission and the restriction placed by the State for acquiring Middle Standard qualification upto 30th September, 1957 was held arbitrary and violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Incidentally this authority was also under the Haryana Education Code, where Rule 153 was the subject matter of interpretation, like the present one.
Reliance has also been placed upon DS Nakara and others v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130, wherein it was held as under :-  "The principal aim of a socialist State is to eliminate inequality in income and status and standards of life.
The basic framework of socialism is to provide a decent standard of life to the working people and especially provide security from cradle to grave ... ... ... ... Now, thanks to the rising social and political consciousness and the expectations roused as a consequences, and the forward looking posture of this Court, the underprivileged also are clamouring for their rights and are seeking the intervention of the Court with touching faith and confidence in the Court.
The Judges of the Court have a duty to redeem their constitutional oath and do justice no less to the pavement dweller than to the guest of the Five Star Hotel.
With the expanding horizons of socio-economic justice, the Socialist, Republic and Welfare State, which the country endeavours to set up and the fact that the old men who retired when emoluments were comparatively low are exposed to vagaries of continuously rising prices, the falling value of the rupee consequent upon inflationary inputs, by introducing an arbitrary eligibility criteria, "being in service and retireing subsequent to the specified date" for being eligible for the liberalised pension scheme and thereby dividing a homogeneous class, the classification being not based on any discernible rational principles and being wholly unrelated to the objects sought to be achieved by grant of liberalised pension and the eligibility criteria devised being thoroughly arbitrary, the eligibility for liberalised pension scheme of "being in service on the specified date and retiring subsequent to that date" in the memoranda, violates Art. 14 and is unconstitutional and liable to be struck down.
But, as the arbitrary and discriminatory portion in the memoranda can be easily severed, both the memoranda shall be enforced and implemented after severance of the unconstitutional part.
However, arrears of pension prior to the specified date are not required to be paid to those who have retired before the specified date because to that extent the scheme is prospective.
Accordingly, all the pensioners governed by the 1972 Rules and Army Pension Regulations shall be entitled to pension as computed under the liberalised pension scheme from the specified date; irrespective of their date of retirement."
This authority was also referred in Krishan Dutt Nirmal v. State of Haryana and others (supra).
18.
Resultantly, I dismiss R.S.A.
No. 65 of 1989 filed by the State of Haryana.
I further allow R.S.A.
No. 2739 of 1988 filed by Brij Mohan Maharishi and C.W.P.
No. 3272 of 1989 filed by Smt. Vidya Wati as the cases of the plaintiff and the writ petitioner are fully covered by the dictums referred to above.
Finally, a declaration is granted in favour of the plaintiff Brij Mohan Maharishi that he is entitled to the grant of special certificate with effect from 1961-62, as prayed for, and also he is entitled to the benefit of the regular pay scale and the selection grade if any due to him, after the completion of 18 years service, according to rules.
Relief is also granted to the writ petitioner Smt. Vidya Wati and a mandate is issued to the respondents to issue special certificate to her and also grant her the benefit of pay scale and that of selection grade, if any, becomes due to her, as being given to the trained teachers, according to the Rules.
There will be no order as to costs.