VK Bali, J - Satya Pal Siwach, Lecturer in English, through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenges order dated 15th of November, 1995 (Annexure P-5) passed by Director of Secondary Education, Haryana, by which an earlier order of his promotion dated 31st of October, 1995 (Annexure P-1) has been kept in abeyance till the decision of the criminal case pending against him.
He further prays that till such time he is kept under suspension, he be given subsistence allowance regularly and all other benefits to which he is found legally entitled.
The facts on which the relief as mentioned above stems need a brief mention.
2.
Prior in point of time petitioner filed a writ bearing No. 13036 of 1995 on 4th of September, 1995 seeking a direction to the respondents to consider his name for promotion to the post of Lecturer in English (School Cadre, Men Branch) with effect from the date from which his junior was promoted.
Notice of motion was issued by this Court.
However, the Advocate General Haryana who appeared on 6th of November, 1995 stated before the Court that the petitioner had been promoted as prayed for by him.
The writ was, thus, rendered infructuous and accordingly disposed of on the same very date.
The order promoting the petitioner was passed on 31st of October, 1995 and he was ordered to be adjusted at Govt. Senior Secondary School, Dhangar (Hissar).
Pursuant to the order referred to above, the petitioner was relieved on 10th of November, 1995 from the Government High School, Dhanauri and was ordered to resume the charge of his new assignment at Dhangar.
Petitioner presented himself before the Principal, Govt. Senior Secondary School, Dhangar on 10th November, 1995 and gave his joining report.
However, instead of allowing the petitioner to join his duties and assume the charge of new assignment, the Principal declined him to join duties and addressed a letter dated 10th of November, 1995 to District Education Officer, Hissar seeking guidance.
Meanwhile respondent No. 2, the Director of Secondary Education ordered that promotion of the petitioner be kept in abeyance.
It is this order as indicated above that has been challenged in the present writ.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been contested and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 5 it has been averred that an F.I.R. bearing No. 90 dated 351995 under sections 323/506 of the Indian Penal Code is pending against the petitioner and he is facing trial in the Court of CJM, Jind.
It is further the case of the respondents that the petitioner was erroneously promoted to the post of Lecturer on 31st of October, 1995 as he was placed under suspension vide order dated 7th of June, 1995 in view of the said criminal case registered against him.
As per the government instructions the petitioner is not eligible for promotion till the finalisation of the criminal/departmental proceedings which are pending against him.
It is in these circumstances it is averred that orders passed on 31st of October, 1995 were kept in abeyance.
In so far as other facts that have been pleaded by the petitioner in writ and have been noted, there is no dispute between the parties.
4.
Learned Counsel representing the petitioner on the basis of the two decisions of the Apex Court in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317(SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 2010 and New Bank of India v. NP Sehgal, 1991(2) SCT 270(SC) : 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 789 vehemently contends that mere registration of a criminal case or departmental proceedings is not enough to withhold an order of promotion.
Not only that, despite pendency of such proceedings the case of an employee for promotion has to be considered if he comes under the zone of promotion, contends the learned Counsel.
The respondents as is clear from the averments made by them in the written statement have endeavoured to contest the claim of the petitioner on the sole ground that a criminal case is pending against the petitioner and that as per government instructions the employee is not eligible for promotion till the finalisation of criminal/departmental proceedings under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
The instructions relied upon by the respondents have been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1.
5.
After hearing the learned Counsel representing the parties, we are of the view that solitary contention raised by the learned Counsel representing the petitioner has considerable merit and, therefore, the petitioner deserves to succeed in his cause.
The Apex Court in KV Jankiraman's case (supra) held, "It is only when a charge-memo in a disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a criminal prosecution is issued to the employee it can be said that the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is initiated against the employee.
The sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only after the charge-memo/charge sheet is issued.
The plea that when there are serious allegations and it takes time to collect necessary evidence to prepare and issue charge-memo/charge-sheet it would not be in the interest of purity of administration to reward the employee with a promotion, increment etc. would not be tenable."..........
"The promotion etc. cannot be withheld merely because some disciplinary/criminal proceedings are pending against the employee.
To deny the said benefit, they must be at the relevant time pending at the stage when charge-memo/charge-sheet has already been issued to the employee."
It is manifest from the pleadings of the parties in the present case that FIR under sections 323/506 IPC came into being on 351995.
The petitioner was due for promotion to the post of Lecturer in English on 17.5.95 and by the said date i.e. 1751995 neither the department had proceeded against the petitioner nor even a challan in the criminal case had been put in the Court against him.
The Supreme Court in KV Jankiraman's case (supra) has observed that in situations when the allegations are serious department is not without remedy and if actually the charges are serious the authorities have the power to suspend the employee under the relevant rules.
In this case even though we have not been called upon to comment upon the seriousness of the charge nor any arguments have been raised on that account, it is clearly made out from the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that the criminal case against the petitioner is only under sections 323/506 of the Indian Penal Code.
Neither the FIR nor the allegations against the petitioner leading to registration of the case against him have been spelled out in the written statement.
However, the petitioner is under suspension.
6.
The reliance of the learned Counsel representing the State upon instructions Annexure R-1, in our view, is misplaced.
Para (a)(iv) was added to the existing instructions dated 13.2.1962 vide Annexure R-1 dated 18111971.
The same reads as follows :-  "Para (a)(iv)  Where on a preliminary investigation of the complaint a prima facie case has been established against a Government employee and he has been served a charge-sheet and an Enquiry Officer has been appointed to hold a regular departmental enquiry under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 or any comparable rule applicable to the Government employees concerned, then he should not be promoted until the enquiry has been completed and he has been exonerated.
In a case in which a charge-sheet has been served but the explanation in response to the charge- sheet has been received and as a result if an enquiry officer has not been appointed, the case of promotion should be kept pending until decision has been taken as to whether a regular departmental enquiry should or should not be held.
If it is decided that such an enquiry should be held, then the Government employee should not be promoted until he has been exonerated in the enquiry.
If he is ultimately exonerated of all the charges without the imposition of any penalty or is only administered a warning (whether with a copy on the personal file or not) then he should, if otherwise fit for promotion in every respect, be promoted with retrospective effect i.e. from the date on which he was due for promotion and an official junior to him was promoted.
In case no vacancy was available for the period in question a temporary post should be created in consultation with the Finance Department and the juniormost promoted official should be reverted if necessary."
If the instructions quoted above were against the dictum of Supreme Court, this Court would have proceeded further in the matter but mere reading of the instructions clearly manifests that these instructions are not against the dictum of the Supreme Court in KV Jankiraman's case (supra).
In view of the discussion made above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P-5 keeping promotion of the petitioner in abeyance is set aside.
If the petitioner is not being paid subsistence allowance as is his contention, the same be paid to him till such time as he remains under suspension.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.