THB Chalapathi, J.(Oral) - This writ petition is filed for issuing a writ of mandamus directing respondent No. 3 to appoint the petitioner as Naib Tehsildar instead of Kanungo.
2.
The petitioner's father while working as Junior Engineer in the Irrigation Department died on 1151988.
The petitioner applied to be appointed in the Irrigation Department where his father was working at the time of his death, but the Irrigation Department could not appoint the petitioner due to administrative grounds.
Then the petitioner applied to the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) Punjab for being appointed Naib Tehsildar.
The Financial Commissioner in turn directed the Commissioner to appoint the Petitioner as Naib Tehsildar by his letter dated 1621989.
After the receipt of the said letter, the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division considered the case of the petitioner and found him unsuitable for appointment as Naib Tehsildar and accordingly communicated to the Financial Commissioner in his letter dated 351989 vide Annexure P-6.
Thereafter the petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court bearing No. 3051 of 1990.
The said writ petition was allowed on 3081990 with a direction to the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar on priority basis after testing the suitability of the petitioner under the rules and instructions.
This Court also directed that the Commissioner shall pass a speaking order giving reasons about his non-suitability in case the petitioner was not found to be suitable.
After the said order of this Court, the Commissioner tested the suitability of petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar and by his order dated 6.11.1990 the Commissioner found the petitioner not suitable for appointment as Naib Tehsildar, but he found him suitable to the post of Clerk or Kanungo.
Accordingly, the Commissioner offered to the petitioner to accept any one of the posts namely that the Clerk in Deputy Commissioner's office or Kanungo District Ferozepur.
The petitioner accepted the offer to be appointed as Kanungo in District Ferozepur by his letter dated 13111990 under protest.
After joining as Kanungo, the petitioner filed the present writ petition seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him as Naib Tehsildar.
3.
The Government of Punjab issued a circular in the year 1986 for appointment of the widows and dependents of the deceased Government employees on priority list in the State Services.
Under the said circular, the dependents of the deceased employees who died in harness are being provided with employment in the State Services.
The said instructions do not say that a dependent of the family of the deceased employee is entitled to a particular post.
The rules have been framed only to ameliorate the condition of the dependents of the family of the deceased employee and to provide immediate relief to them.
When the petitioner applied for job in the Revenue Department of the State of Punjab on the death of his father who was working in the Irrigation Department, the Commissioner did not find him suitable for his appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
4.
There is no dispute that the Commissioner is the appointing authority for the post of Naib Tehsildar.
The letter of the Financial Commissioner was only recommendatory.
The Financial Commissioner cannot straightway appoint a person as Naib Tehsildar.
Under the circular issued by the Government of Punjab in the year 1986 the Commissioner who is an appointing authority having found the petitioner not suitable for the post of Naib Tehsildar did not appoint him to the same.
Thereupon the petitioner approached this Court.
This Court issued direction the Commissioner to test the suitability of the petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
Further in pursuance of the direction given by this Court in the writ petition referred to above, the Commissioner tested the suitability of the petitioner and found him not suitable for the post of Naib Tehsildar, but offered him to be appointed either as Kunungo or as Clark in the office of the Deputy Commissioner.
Thus the petitioner has been offered an appointment on compassionate grounds as provided in the circular of the Government of Punjab.
In compliance with the said order, the petitioner joined as Kanungo though under protest.
Thereafter the petitioner filed this writ petition.
5.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the petitioner was qualifiedd to be appointed as Naib Tehsildar and the Financial Commissioner also directed the Commissioner to appoint the petitioner as Naib Tehsildar and, therefore, the order of the Commissioner appointing the petitioner as Kunungo is not valid and the petitioner should have been appointed as Naib Tehsildar.
I do find any force in the argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that in the year 1990 this Court specifically directed the Commissioner to test the suitability of the petitioner for the post of Naib Tehsildar.
But after the order passed by this Court in writ petition No. 3051 of 1990 filed by the petitioner, it is not open at this stage to go into the question as to what had transpired prior to the order of this Court in the said writ petition.
It is pertinent to note that while allowing the writ petition referred to above, this Court specifically directed the Commissioner to adjudge the suitability of the petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
Accordingly, the Commissioner conducted the interview and also written test and found him not suitable for the post of Naib Tehsildar, but offered the post of Kanungo.
The Commissioner has passed a detailed order dated 6.11.1990 vide Annexure P-18.
After going through the order of the Commissioner dated 6.11.1990, I am of the opinion that the Commissioner has based his finding on relevant material as per the directions of this Court.
The order is not vitiated by any extraneous reasons.
As already observed, the petitioner cannot claim to be appointed as Naib Tehsildar.
He cannot claim any right to a particular post.
Under the rules, he is only entitled for employment under the State Government.
The petitioner has been offered the post of Kanungo to which he was found suitable.
He cannot claim the post of Naib Tehsildar to which he was not found suitable.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim any higher right than the right to employment under the State Government on compassionate grounds.
The appointment of Kanungo is also under the State Government.
I do not, therefore, find any illegality or infirmity in the order of the Commissioner dated 6.11.1990 (Annexure P-18).
There are no grounds to interfere with the same.
6.
In view of the foregoing discussions, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
However, it appears that the petitioner has put in more than five years of service as Kanungo.
According to the petitioner, he is the senior-most Kanungo in Ferozepur District and is now ripe for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
If it is the case, the Commissioner will consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion as Naib Tehsildar from the post of Kanungo particularly because of the fact that he is already working and discharging the duties of Naib Tehsildar though drawing the salary of Kanungo.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.