THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed to quash the award of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court dated November 23, 1994 (Annexure P-5).
2.
Respondent No. 2 was employed in the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited.
The said company was taken over by the Cement Corporation of India Ltd and respondent No. 2 was re-employed in the Cement Corporation of India Ltd At the time of taking him into service in the Cement Corporation of India Ltd, the date of birth of respondent No. 2 was shown as July 1, 1932, in the service record on re-employment of respondent No. 2, by the Cement Corporation of India Ltd on March 27, 1982.
Basing on the said date of birth, the services of respondent No. 2 were terminated on June 30, 1990.
Respondent No. 2 raised an industrial dispute that his date of birth was wrongly mentioned at the time of his re-employment in the Cement Corporation of India Ltd as July 1, 1932, and that his original date of birth was February 2, 1936, and therefore, the order of termination is illegal and he was entitled to be in service till February 2, 1994.
The said dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Chandigarh, in Case No. ID 68 of 1992.
On the basis of the evidence and other material placed before it, the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court held that the date of birth of respondent No. 2 was February 2, 1936, and he was due to retire on February 1, 1994, and therefore he would be deemed to be in service till February 1, 1994, and he is also entitled to get back-wages because the order of termination is bad under law.
Challenging the said order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court dated November 23, 1994, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
3.
The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court has no jurisdiction to order the correction of date of birth as entered in the service record and, therefore, the order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court is liable to be quashed.
In Union of India v. Kantilal Hematram Pandya, 1995(2) SCT 520(SC) : 1995(2) SLR 54 the Supreme Court observed as follows:-  "Stale claims and belated applications for alteration of the date of birth recorded in the service book at the time of initial entry, made after unexplained and inordinate delay, on the eve of retirement, need to be scrutinized carefully and interference made sparingly and with circumspection.
The approach has to be cautious and not casual."
Thus, it is clear that the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court is not completely debarred from arriving at the correct date of birth.
On the facts of the present case, the Cement Corporation of India Ltd was not able to produce any evidence as to the date of birth recorded at the time of entry of respondent No. 2 into service with the management of Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited.
It is an admitted case that the date of birth came to be recorded as July 1, 1932, on the basis of the medical examination when the services of respondent No. 2 were taken in by the Cement Corporation of India Ltd in the year 1982.
Respondent No. 2 was taken into service as Class-IV employee.
While dealing with the entry of date of birth in the service record by the Cement Corporation of India Ltd when the Cement Corporation of India Ltd took over the management of Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited, the Supreme Court had an occasion to decide this question in Civil Appeals Nos. 3569-71 of 1990 and it passed the following order on January 7, 1991 :-  "Heard counsel for the parties.
It has now been agreed before us by counsel that the dispute relating to date of birth in respect of employees under respondent No. 1 shall be dealt with in the following way :- (1) Wherever there is a date of birth indicated in the appropriate document before they take over, the same shall be taken as binding and final.
(2) In the event of date of birth being supplied by the employees on the basis of the State Insurance Certificate, the same shall be taken into consideration only in such cases where there is no entry in the appropriate document prior to take-over in terms of clause 1 above.
(3) In respect of employees whose date of birth has not been indicated as per items (1) and (2) above, if School Leaving Certificate or S.S.L.C.
Certificate is provided the same would be taken as adequate.
(4) In the cases not covered by any of the above three situations it would be open to the employer-respondent to have regular medical examination as per the approved procedure for determining the age.
It would be open to the employees to point out if there be any mistake and the respondent should be free to look into such claim for rectification but this would not authorise a rectification to the prejudice of the employees if there is already a record of date of birth.
4.
The arrangement now made is final and would not be open to challenge."
4.
This order is binding on the Cement Corporation of India Ltd as it is a party to the said decision of the Apex Court.
It is pertinent to reproduce an order in extenso which is dated July 23, 1990 :-  "We have heard counsel for the parties and the affidavit filed by counsel for the respondent is taken on record.
The appellants in these appeals challenge the decision of the High Court which refused to entertain the plea that the new employer-Public Sector Undertaking had no basis for changing the date of birth as entered in the records of the previous employer in respect of the appellants.
Employee is as miners undoubtedly a class-IV service.
It is not disputed that higher educational qualification is not necessary for such appointment and obviously the entry in the original record must have been made on the basis of declaration by the persons concerned and appointment of the persons by the authorised officer.
To have a review of the date about 20 years after is arbitrary.
Conclusion of the Medical Officer by appearance was wholly unwarranted.
One case referred to in the counter affidavit may be taken note of.
One of the employees had declared his year of birth to be 1928 and subsequently he applied for modification of the year to be 1935.
The request was refused but the year was changed to 1924 on the recommendation of the doctor.
This process according to us is totally arbitrary and unwarranted.
The appeal is allowed and action of respondent No. 1 in changing the date of birth in respect of the appellants is vacated.
The appellants shall be entitled to costs of these appeals which we assess at Rs.
3,000/-."
5.
In the instant case, the date of birth came to be recorded only on the basis of medical examination.
It does not appear that any notice was given to the employee before entering the date of birth in the service record with the Cement Corporation of India Ltd It is, therefore, necessary as indicated by the Supreme Court in Kantilal Hematram Pandya's case (supra) that a close scrutiny with care and caution in regard to the date of birth is necessary.
In this view of the matter, other decisions of the Supreme Court referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioner in Burn Standard Co Ltd and others v. Shri Dinabandhu Majumdar and another, 1995(3) SCT 126(SC) : JT 1995(4) SC 23 and in the National Airport Authority v. Sh. MA Wahab, 1996(1) SCT 350 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 514, I am of the opinion are not applicable because the date of birth in the service register was not entered at the instance of or on the basis of medical examination and that too without giving any notice to respondent No. 2.
I am, therefore, unable to agree with the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court has no power to come to the conclusion as to the correct date of birth of respondent No. 2 and decide the correct date of birth.
6.
The respondent has placed on record the certificate issued by the Additional District Registrar of Births and District Health Officer, Rohtak, showing the date of birth of respondent as February 2, 1936, and has also placed the list of his family members and the certificate of the employer of his younger brother whose date of birth was recorded as September 1, 1943.
He has also placed on record the certificate of service of his eldest brother who served in the army.
This certificate shows that the elder brother of respondent No. 2 was aged about 25 years 2 months and 18 days as on August 2, 1955, when the certificate was filled in.
Thus, it is clear that the eldest brother of respondent No. 2 must have been born in May, 1930.
In between the eldest brother of respondent No. 2 and respondent No. 2 there is another brother, namely, Randhir Singh.
Therefore, it is not possible for the respondent to be born in 1932.
Respondent No. 2 applied to the petitioner Corporation for correction of his date of birth even before the order of termination was passed but the said request of the respondent was not considered though it appears from the record that he had produced the relevant material.
The Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court had considered the entire material on record and came to the conclusion that the date of birth of respondent No. 2 was February 2, 1936, as disclosed by the certificate issued by the District Health Officer, Rohtak.
I do not find any reason to doubt the veracity of the certificate issued by the District Health Officer which is issued under the provisions of Births, Deaths and Marriage Registration Act, 1886.
That certificate was issued on the basis of the registers of births and deaths maintained under the provisions of Births, Deaths and Marriage Registration Act, 1886.
Therefore, the certificate is admissible in evidence.
The Industrial Tribunal rightly placed reliance on the same.
I do not, therefore, find any ground warranting interference with the order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court as there is no illegality or infirmity with the same.
The Writ Petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.