VK Jhanji, J - In this writ petition, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to give appointment to the petitioner as a Social Studies Mistress retrospectively with effect from the year 1981 when the petitioner applied for her appointment as Social Studies Mistress against the reserved post meant for the physically handicapped persons and with effect from the date other persons who were also physically handicapped, applied along with the petitioner, were given appointments as such.
The petitioner has also sought a direction that the respondents be directed to give all consequential benefits to her such as arrears of pay, seniority etc.  2.
Petitioner, who is a physically handicapped person but otherwise fit and qualified for the post of Social Studies Mistress, after obtaining a certificate that she is orthopaedically handicap, from the Medical Board, Amritsar, submitted an application on 861981 before the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, Sector 17, Chandigarh, for her appointment as a Social Studies Mistress against the post meant for the physically handicapped persons on priority basis in view of instructions dated 24111982 whereby the Government had decided to fill up 3 per cent vacancies by direct recruitment in Class III and Class IV of the State Government service from physically handicapped persons.
Respondent No. 2, on 16.7.1981 acknowledged the application of the petitioner but stated that the medical certificate submitted by the petitioner is not in accordance with the instructions issued by the State of Punjab.
The petitioner made a representation against this decision to the Director, Public Instructions but of no use.
Faced with this situation, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petitioner No. 5424 of 1982 in this Court praying that the respondents be directed to give appointment to her as Social Studies Mistress on priority basis in view of the constructions issued by the State of Punjab.
The writ petition was however dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court on 721983.
Against this order, the petitioner preferred S.L.P.
(Civil) No. 9003 of 1983 before the Supreme Court.
vide order dated 1911987, the Supreme Court of India granted the special leave and Civil Appeal No. 100 of 1987 was allowed with costs.
It was held by the Apex Court that there was no justification for not appointing the petitioner to the post of Social Studies Mistress in the vacancy reserved for the physically handicapped persons and a direction was issued to the respondent to consider the claim of the petitioner to the post of Social Studies Mistress on the basis that she is physically handicapped person and directed the respondent to give appointment to the petitioner as Social Studies Mistress if otherwise found qualified.
3.
Pursuant to the order of the Apex Court, the petitioner has been appointed as Social Studies Mistress on regular basis with effect from 10101987 in Government High School, Jiwan Arain, District Ferozepur.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed another writ petition in this Court in which she claimed seniority from the date she was wrongly refused appointment as well as back wages.
The writ petition was dismissed by this Court against which the petitioner preferred S.L.P.
The Apex Court, vide order dated 841991 passed in Civil Appeal No. 1732 of 1991 in S.L.P.
No. 2552 of 1989 has set aside the order of this Court and the matter has been remitted with a direction that the writ petition for the limited purpose of retrospective seniority may be entertained and examined on merits.
This is how, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
4.
Despite notice, respondents have failed to file any written statement.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The petitioner has made a categoric averment that along with her, a number of other candidates on 861981 applied for appointment on priority basis being physically handicapped persons.
Appointment letters were issued to the other candidates similarily situated as the petitioner but it it was denied to the petitioner on the ground that the medical certificate in the case of the petitioner was not on the prescribed proforma.
This decision to deny appointment to the petitioner has been set aside by the Supreme Court and it has been held that the form of certificate could not be a ground for non-consideration.
It has also been averred that one Bharpur Singh was also appointed on priority basis on 5111981 in the Masters' cadre and was posted in Sangrur District.
The said Bharpur Singh is also a handicapped person and the same Civil Surgeon has issued identical certificate to Bharpur Singh and the petitioner.
In the case of petitioner, objection was raised whereas in the case of Bharpur Singh no objection was raised.
This averment, having remained rebutted, I am of the view that the petitioner cannot be made to suffer on account of the fault on the part of the respondents and thus it is ordered that she shall be entitled to the benefit of seniority with effect from the date when persons who applied later to her under the category of physically handicapped persons but was given appointment under this category before the petitioner came to be appointed.
However, petitioner shall not be entitled to back wages as before the Supreme Court, counsel for the petitioner gave a statement that the petitioner will be satisfied if she is given retrospective seniority and would not claim back wages.
6.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
Petition allowed.