GS Singhvi, J - In all these writ petitions, prayer has been made for issue of a mandamus to admit the petitioners in the MBBS course against the payment seats on the basis of the merit secured by them at the Pre-Medical Test conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as 'the University') as per the request made by the State Government.
The petitioners have also prayed for striking down clause 2.1(i) of the Prospectus issued by the University (respondent No. 1).
2.
Brief factual matrix of the case is that in response to the prospectus and the advertisement issued by the University in May, 1995, the petitioners submitted their applications before the last date specified in the advertisement.
They appeared in the examination conducted by the University some time in June, 1995.
Result of the examination was declared in July, 1995 and as per the result card issued to the petitioners, petitioner-Gaurav Walia was shown at merit position No. 7; petitioner-Amit Sethi was shown at position No. 8; petitioner Sumit Ahuja was shown at position No. 22 and petitioner- Anshuman Ahuja was shown at position No. 17, amongst the candidates who were treated eligible for admission against payment seats.
The petitioners have stated that although they were entitled to be admitted against the paid seats in accordance with the decision of the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993(1) SCC 645, the respondents have deprived them of the admission only on the ground that they are not Punjab domiciles.
According to the petitioners, all the candidates admitted against paid seats are Punjab domiciles and this shows that on the basis of wholly extraneous reasons, the respondents have deprived them of their right to be admitted to the MBBS Course.
In substance, the contention of the petitioners is that by prescribing an unconstitutional condition, namely, the domicile of Punjab as a condition to the admission, the respondents have violated their fundamental right of equality as enshrined in Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The respondents have opposed the writ petitions.
Their case is that the admissions have been made strictly in accordance with the scheme formulated by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan's case (supra).
It has been stated that after the admissions against the free seats were made, the candidates were offered paid seats and the admissions have been made strictly according to the comparative merit secured by the candidates.
4.
During the course of arguments, learned Deputy Advocate General produced a statement showing the marks obtained by the candidates who have been admitted against 28 paid seats as well as the marks secured by the petitioners.
She also produced the application forms submitted by the candidates who have been admitted against the paid seats as also the application forms submitted by the petitioners and other candidates who had applied for admission against the paid seats but who could not be admitted on account of they being less meritorious.
5.
The principal contention advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the condition incorporated in para 21(i) of the Prospectus issued by the University offends the constitutional code of equality inasmuch as the candidates who are not domiciles of Punjab are deprived of their right to be admitted against the paid seats on an irrational ground.
Learned counsel argued that reservation which is founded solely on the consideration of residence/domicile is contrary to Article 15 of the Constitution of India and, therefore it logically offends the right of the petitioners under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the admissions have been made strictly according to the merit and, therefore, even if the condition of Punjab Domicile is found to be contrary to the Constitution, the petitioners cannot be given any relief in the form of a mandamus for their admission to the MBBS Course.
Learned counsel for the respondents also raised an objection to the entertainability of the writ petitions on the ground that the candidates who have been admitted against paid seats are not party to the writ petitions and any order for grant of admission to the petitioners would lead to cancellation of the admission of those who have already been admitted.
Learned counsel submitted that this Court should not exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction, which would directly result in violation of the vested rights of the students who are not party to the writ petition.
6.
Perusal of the scheme formulated by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan's case unequivocally shows that admissions are required to be made on the basis of the competitive test to be conducted by an agency to be nominated by the Government.
This scheme also envisages admissions on free seats in the first instance followed by admissions against paid seats.
Therefore, it was imperative for the respondent-University and the Government as well as the College to have first resorted to admissions against free seats and then have called upon the candidates to offer admission to them against paid seats.
No doubt, this procedure has not been followed in strict sense inasmuch as no separate intimation was given to the candidates offering them admission against the paid seats but from the record which has been produced before me, it is more than evident that admissions in the first instance were made against the free seats and then remaining seats were offered for admission to the candidates who could offer themselves for admission against paid seats.
A look at the comparative merit list produced by Mrs. Tuli shows that last candidate admitted against the paid category has secured 20850 marks at the Pre-Medical Test out of a total of 300 marks and the first candidate in the category of the petitioner has secured 19725 marks.
None of the petitioners has secured 20850 marks or more so as to become entitled to admission against paid seats.
This being the factual position, in my opinion, adjudication of the dispute raised by the petitioners regarding the constitutional validity of para 21(i) of the Prospectus is nothing more than academic.
Even if the Court was to hold that the aforementioned paragraph of the Prospectus suffers from constitutional invalidity, no effective relief can possibly be given to the petitioners.
This Court cannot ignore the fact that none of the petitioners stands in the merit as against those who have been admitted against the paid seats.
It is, therefore, not possible for this Court to issue a direction for admission of the petitioners.
6.
There are two additional factors why no such direction deserves to be given in favour of the petitioners.
Learned counsel for the respondents are right in contending that if the petitioners are to be given admission, some of the candidates who have already been admitted will have to lose their seats and it is one of the well recognised principles of law that in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court cannot issue a writ affecting the rights of those who are not before it.
The principle of natural justice that no body should be condemned unheard has to be followed by the courts with as much vigour as with which it is being enforced against the executive authorities as well as quasi-judicial authorities.
7.
Another reason for not giving admission to the petitioners is that all the seats which were notified for admission by the University in Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana (respondent No. 3) have been filed on the basis of the test conducted by the University.
This Court cannot issue a direction for creation of additional seats by the College.
By now, it is well recognised that the seats for admission to medical courses are determined by the College and the University in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Medical Council of India and there is no reason for this Court to interject in that field.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are dismissed.
It is, however, hoped that in future the State Government and the University will adhere to the guidelines given by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan's case (supra) and in subsequent decisions regarding admissions against free seats as well as paid seats in the medical courses.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.