RP Sethi, ACJ.
- The present appeal filed under Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (for short the 'Act') is directed against the order of the learned Single Judge by which the appellant's application under Section 12 of the Act was dismissed on the ground that no contempt had been committed by the respondents.
We are of the opinion that the present appeal is not maintainable in view of the mandate of Section 19 of the Act which provides:  "19.
(1) (a).
Where the order or decision is that of Single Judge, to a Bench of not less than two Judges of the Court; (b) Where the order or decisions that of a Bench, to the Supreme Court; Provided that where the order or decision is that of the Court of Judicial Commissioner in any Union Territory, such appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court........" 2.
A perusal of the Section would show that appeal is maintainable only against such an order or decision by which a person is punished for contempt.
Dismissal of the application and discharge of the Rule does not attract the provisions of Section 19 of the Act.
It does not, however, mean that if a person is acquitted against the provisions of law, the aggrieved party has no remedy.
The aggrieved party in that eventuality may be in a position to have resort to other provisions of the law such as approaching the Hon'ble Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The Supreme Court in DN Taneja v. Shri Bhajan Lal, 1988 CAR (SC) 156, examined the scope of Section 19 of the Act and held that appeal against the order acquitting the contemnor is not maintainable as contempt is a matter between the Court and the alleged contemnor.
There are only two parties in such cases namely the Court and the contemnor.
No right of appeals is to the third party who is just an informer.
Only the contemnor can file the appeal, if punished.
Relying upon its earlier judgment in Paradakanta Misra v. Mr. Justice Gatikrushna Mishra, (1975)1 SCR 524, the Supreme Court held:-  "Right of appeal is a creature of the statute and the question whether there is a right of appeal or not will have to be considered on an interpretation of the provision of the statute and not on the ground of propriety or any other consideration.
In this connection, it may be noticed that there was no right of appeal under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1952.
It is for the first time that under Section 19(1) of the Act, a right of appeal has been provided for.
A contempt is a matter between the court and the alleged contemnor.
Any person who moves the machinery of the Court for contempt only brings to the notice of the court certain facts constituting contempt of Court.
After furnishing such information he may still assist the Court, but it must always be borne in mind that in a contempt proceedings there are only two parties, namely the court and the contemnor.
It may be one of the reasons which weighed with the Legislature in not conferring any right of appeal on the petitioner for contempt.
The aggrieved party under Section 19(1) can only be the contemnor who has been punished for contempt of Court."
4.
This Court in Subhash Chander Sethi v. BR Kakkar, 1990(1) RCR(Crl.)
742 (P&H) : 1990(1) RLR 406, reiterated the position of law and held:-  "It has been further held that the jurisdiction to punish for contempt does not include the jurisdiction to dispose of the case by acquitting him.
When the High Court acquits the contemnor, it does not exercise its jurisdiction for contempt, for such exercise will mean that it should not in a particular manner, i.e. by imposing punishment for contempt.
In the present case, the learned Single Judge was of the view that no case under the Contempt of Courts Act is made out against the respondent.
That being so, the case is fully covered by the said Supreme Court judgment.
Consequently, the appeal under Section 19(1) of the Contempt of Courts Act is liable to be dismissed as not maintainable..." We ae not inclined to have any different view.
5.
There is no merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed in limine.