RP Sethi and RL Anand, JJ.
- This is an L.P.A. filed by the Central Bank of India through its Chief Manager, Zonal Office, Chandigarh (hereinafter called 'the Bank') and it has been directed against the judgment dated 9th March, 1994 passed in C.W.P.
No. 57 of 1981 vide which the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and the order of dismissal of respondent No. 1 from service dated 20th March, 1980 passed by the punishing authority and the order dated 16th December, 1980 passed by the appellate authority were quashed.
It was, however, ordered by the learned Single Judge that the disciplinary authority will be at liberty to take such action against the employee as is warranted under the Regulations and in the light of the observations made in the judgment.
The disciplinary authority will take into consideration while imposing the punishment that respondent No. 1 had suffered the agony for all these years commencing from January 7, 1976.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Shri Balwant Rai Nayyar, respondent No. 1, was an employee of the Central Bank of India.
He was posted as Sub Accountant in the Nizam Road Branch at Ludhiana in the year 1972-73.
A criminal case was registered against him under Sections 408/420, 468/467, Indian Penal Code, in Police Station Division No. 1, Ludhiana, on the basis of a complaint filed by one Nahar Singh, who had a Saving Bank Account in the said branch.
On the above charges, respondent No. 1 was tried by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana, and was convicted for the offence under Section 420, IPC, vide judgment dated 19th January, 1980.
However, the Chief Judicial Magistrate did not sentence respondent No. 1.
Rather he released him on probation under Section 4(1)(c) of the Probation of Offenders Act on his entering upon a bond in the sum of Rs. 7,000/- with one surety of the like amount so as to appear and receive sentence when called upon during the period of one year from the date of the order and respondent No. 1 was also directed to maintain peace and be of good behaviour.
On the basis of the order of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, respondent No. 1 was dismissed from service by the disciplinary authority vide order dated 20th March, 1980.
Respondent No. 1 filed an appeal against the order of his dismissal and the appeal was also dismissed by the appellate authority, i.e., respondent No. 3 vide order dated 16th December, 1980 and it was observed by the appellate authority as follows :-  "The aforesaid appeal is being disposed of by the undersigned as a duly competent Appellate Authority under the Central Bank of India Employees (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
In the said appeal, Shri Nayyar had requested that a personal hearing should be given.
The undersigned acceded to this request and accordingly a hearing was given to him on 27111980 at Chandigarh when he was permitted to appear along with any other Officer employee as his representative.
Shri Nayyar, however, chose to appear personally and also chose to make only written submissions.
I have gone through the papers on record and very carefully considered all the submissions made by Shri Nayyar, those contained in his appeal as well as in the written submissions made by him on 27111980.
After duly examining the same, I have to observe that :-  The judgment indicates that merely because the member is given the benefit under the Probation of Offenders Act, he is not necessarily required to be reinstated.
It should be noted that in arriving at a decision in this case, I have taken into account the entire conduct of the delinquent employee, the gravity of the misconduct committed by him, namely, the charge of cheating has been duly established against him and the impact which his misconduct is likely to have on the administration.
I, therefore, come to the conclusion that considering all the relevant aspects, the punishment of dismissal is appropriate within the competence of the Disciplinary Authority and I, therefore, confirm that Shri BR Nayyar should be dismissed."
Respondent No. 1 challenged the orders of dismissal passed by the punishing authority as well as by the appellate Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 57 of 1981 and it was allowed by the learned Single Judge vide the impugned judgment dated 9th March, 1994 and it was inter alia held by the learned Single Judge as follows :  ".... A proviso has been added to Regulation 11 saying that the Disciplinary Authority will give an opportunity to the delinquent officer employee to make representation against the proposed penalty under Regulation 4.
The proviso contains a salutary provision consistent with the principles of natural justice.
Since the Disciplinary Authority has wide option of imposing any of the penalties mentioned in Regulation 4, it is obligatory for it to give an opportunity of hearing against the proposed punishment to the delinquent officer employee.
Admittedly, in the instant case, no opportunity was afforded by the Disciplinary Authority to the petitioner before inflicting the penalty of dismissal from service.
He was given an opportunity of hearing when he filed an appeal against the order of dismissal from service.
This opportunity of hearing by the Appellate Authority is not a substitute for an opportunity of hearing by the Disciplinary Authority before imposing the penalty of dismissal from service.
The order of dismissal from service cannot be sustained as it was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice and in violation of the first proviso to Regulation 11 of the Regulations."
The appellant-Bank is not satisfied by the judgment of the learned Single Judge and has challenged it in the present appeal, mainly on the plea that the learned Single Judge has relied upon the proviso to Regulation 11 of the Punishment and Disciplinary Rules, which was introduced for the first time in the year 1988 and at the time of the passing of the impugned orders dated 20th March, 1980 and 16th December, 1980 this proviso was not in force.
The Bank also took the stand in the L.P.A. that the Punishing as well as Appellate Authorities were justified in passing the order of dismissal as per Regulation 10, which was in force at the time of the awarding of the punishment and the learned Single Judge erred in holding that the Disciplinary Authority was under duty to issue a show cause notice to respondent No. 1 before passing the impugned order dated 20th March, 1980.
It is also the stand of the Bank that irrespective of the fact that respondent No. 1 has been released on probation by the Chief Judicial Magistrate and that the appeal of the employee has also been dismissed by the Additional Session Judge, Ludhiana, the provisions of Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders' Act do not save the services of the employee and the Bank was justified in passing the orders of dismissal.
3.
The stand of the bank was resisted by the employee in the civil writ petition primarily on the ground that the principles of natural justice have been violated by the Disciplinary Authority when he passed the impugned order dated 20th March, 1980.
No doubt the Appellate Authority gave the opportunity to respondent No. 1 before passing the order dated 16th December, 1980, but this has not been done by the Punishing Authority, as a result of that a prejudice has been caused to respondent No. 1.
The second stand of the employee is that on account of the probation given to him by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, his services could not be terminated on account of the provisions of Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders' Act.
With above rival contentions of the parties, now the point for determination before us is whether the principles of natural justice were required to be complied with by the Bank before passing the impugned order dated 20th March, 1980 and whether respondent No. 1 can take the benefit of Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders' Act in order to save his services.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
Annexure P5 of the writ petition is the order dated 20th March, 1980 passed by Shri S Subramanyam, Assistant General Manager (Disciplinary Authority), which runs as follows :-  "Shri BR Nayyar, Sub Accountant (under suspension) of Nizam Road, Ludhiana Branch, is hereby informed that as he has been convicted vide the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana, order dated 1911980 under Section 420 IPC in case State v. Balwant Rai, FIR No. 475/73 PS Division No. 1, Ludhiana, he is hereby dismissed from services of the Bank with immediate effect in pursuance of the provisions of Section 10 of the Banking Companies Regulations Act, 1949 as also under Regulation No. 11 of the Central Bank of India Officer Employees (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976."
A perusal of the above would show that at no point of time respondent No. 1 was ever called upon by the punishing authority to show cause why the major penalty, like dismissal, be not passed against him.
The perusal of the above would also show that the punishing authority was exercising its power under the provisions of Section 10 of the Banking Companies Regulations Act, 1949, as also under Regulation No. 11 of the Central Bank of India Officer Employees (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
These regulations were having the statutory force.
The relevant extract of Section 10 of the Banking Companies Regulations Act, 1949, is quoted as follows :-  "10(1) No banking company :-  (a) x x x (b) shall employ or continue the employment of any person; (1) who is or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent, or has suspended payment or has been compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has been convicted by a criminal court of an offence involving moral turpitude."
A proviso was added to Regulation No. 11 of the Central Bank of India Officer Employees (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976, in its unamended form in the year 1983, and the same is reproduced as follows :-  "Provided that the officer employee may be given an opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed before any order is made."
At the first instance we may mention that since the proviso had been added much subsequent to the impugned orders dated 20th March, 1980 and 16th December, 1980, it could not be given effect to nor the Disciplinary Authority was obliged to adhere to the provisions of the proviso as commented upon by the learned Single Judge in his judgment.
5.
Now the point for determinations is whether the provisions of natural justice should be made available to the respondent in the present case or not.
In this regard, we have to see the gravity of allegations against the Bank employee.
As we have stated above, the respondent was convicted for an offence under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code, though charged for other offences, such as 408, 468 and 471, Indian Penal Code.
The offence under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code involves the allegations of moral turpitude.
Respondent No. 1 was serving a Banking-institution, which is supposed to carry on business on trust, as these types of institutions are the custodians of the public money.
Once an employee is involved in an offence of moral turpitude, in order to meet such exigency, Regulations 10-A, quoted above, has been incorporated.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the employee submitted that the principles of natural justice have been put at knot by the Punishing Authority and that very solemnity of the principles of natural justice has been flouted and as such, the judgment of learned Single Judge should be upheld.
6.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the appellant drew our attention to the proviso added to Article 311 of the Indian Constitution and submitted that the Legislature has introduced this proviso keeping in view the public policy and therefore, the principles of natural justice would not come into play at the level of the Punishing Authority once the Punishing Authority has taken notice of the fact that by virtue of Article 10, the employee is not entitled to be heard at the time of awarding the sentence.
Even otherwise, the punishment imposed by the Punishing Authority is not disproportionate with the charge proved.
We are in agreement with the submission raised by learned counsel for the appellant.
In Union of India and another v. Tulsiram Patel, 1995(2) Services Law Reporter 576, while dealing with the scope of natural justice in such like cases, as in the instant case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold that a government servant convicted of an offence of moral turpitude is not entitled to any opportunity of being heard, before taking any decision by the Punishing Authority and the objective consideration before passing the punishment was not necessary.
The only requirement on the part of the Punishing Authority is whether the conduct of the employee, which has led to his conviction, was such as warrants imposition of penalty and if so, what that penalty should be.
In order to reach this conclusion all the facts and circumstances of the case and various factors, as set out in Challappan case, should be taken into consideration.
7.
The guidelines of the said case were taken into consideration while passing the order dated March 20, 1980.
The Punishing Authority took into consideration that the bank-employee was convicted for an offence punishable under Section 420, Indian Penal Code, and this order has been passed in conformity with Regulation 10, to which there is no challenge from the side of the respondent.
8.
The next point, which now remains in the present appeal for our determination, is whether any benefit could be given to the respondent- employee for the fact that he was released on probation by the Chief Judicial Magistrate while imposing the sentence of punishment.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the benefit of probation granted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate does not remove the stigma of conviction and Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders' Act does not come to the rescue of respondent No. 1.
Irrespective of the fact that respondent No. 1 was released on probation, the management was competent to proceed for those conducts of respondent No. 1 which led to his conviction and the orders passed by the Punishing Authority as well as by the Appellate Authority were perfectly justified and legal.
For the sake of convenience we would like to reproduce the provisions of Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders' Act, which are as follows :-  "Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a person found guilty of an offence and dealt with under provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall not suffer disqualifications, if any, attaching to a conviction of an offence under any law.
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who, after his release under Section 4, is subsequently sentenced for the original offence."
On the contrary it was submitted by the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 that once a person has been released on probation, such person does not suffer from any disqualification attaching to his conviction of an offence under any law and that the Banking Authorities were not justified in proceeding against respondent No. 1 under the disciplinary rules.
We have given deep thought to this matter also and are of the view that release of the offender on probation does not obliterate the stigma of conviction on such person.
An employee is not entitled to reinstatement in service automatically by getting the benefit of probation of good conduct.
In this regard we are fortified by a judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Union of India and others v. Bakshi Ram, AIR 1990 SC 987, where it was held as under :-  "In criminal trial the conviction is one thing and sentence is another.
The departmental punishment for misconduct is yet a third one.
This Court while invoking the provisions of Section 3 or 4 of the Act does not deal with the conviction; it only deals with the sentence which the offender has to undergo.
Instead of sentencing the offender, the Court releases him on probation of good conduct.
The conviction, however, remains untouched and the stigma of conviction is not obliterated.
In the departmental proceedings the delinquent could be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; Section 12 of the Act does not preclude the department from taking action for misconduct leading to the offence or to his conviction thereon as per law.
The Section was not intended to exonerate the person from Departmental punishment.
Case law discussed."
Conviction in a criminal charge and release of the accused on probation does not exonerate such offender from the stigma leading to his conviction.
No part of Section 12 of the Probation of Offender's Act is intended to exonerate a Government servant of his liability to departmental punishment for misconduct.
The provisions of Section 12 do not afford immunity against the disciplinary proceedings for the original misconduct.
What formed basis of the punishment was the misconduct and not the conviction.
Also it is not necessary that the offence of which the employee was convicted must involve a moral turpitude.
Counsel for respondent No1 placed reliance on Om Prakash v. The Director Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Department) Punjab Circle, Ambala, AIR 1973 Punjab and Haryana 1, a Full Bench decision of this Court.
Incidentally this decision was also considered in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court quoted above, but their Lordships were pleased to hold :-  ".....
Apparently, such a view has no support by the terms of Section 12 and the order of the High Court cannot, therefore, be sustained."
Thus we are not in agreement with the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 that by virtue of the probation granted to his client by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the departmental action was not justified in proceeding against him.
In the light of the above discussions, we have been left with no other option but to accept this appeal, setting aside the judgment dated 9th March, 1994, passed by learned Single judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 57 of 1981.
Consequently this appeal is allowed.
The judgment of learned Single Judge is set aside, as a result of which Civil Writ Petition No. 57 is also hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.