TS Doabia, J - The parameters of industrial activity and of the term industry change with the changing situations.
The term represents a continuous organized activity.
It is a purposeful pursuit.
It is neither any isolated adventure, nor a fleeting engagement motivelessly undertaken.
Contentment or workers and peace in the industry and judicial interpretation has to be carried to the fulfilment of this object and not to its frustration.
2.
The petitioner was employed with the General Manager, District Industries Centre, Bhind., This appointment was given order vide dated 27th of August, 1966.
The petitioner was paid from contingency fund.
However, with effect from 20th May, 1974, the petitioner was absorbed on the regular post of Peon.
This order was revoked on 7th of July, 1975 and the petitioner was again brought on contingency establishment.
His services were terminated on 17th of October, 1978.
He sought a reference under section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
This prayer of the petitioner remained with the appropriate Government (State of Madhya Pradesh) for quite some time.
It was ultimately referred to the Labour Court, Gwalior.
The dispute which was to be adjudicated upon by the Labour Court was elaborated in Annexure P/6.
When the Labour Court took cognizance of this matter, the respondent-State filed a written statement and took a preliminary objection.
This objection was to the effect that the office of the District Industries Centre is not an industry and therefore, the dispute could not be adjudicated upon by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court agreed with objection raised by the respondent-State.
It gave its the award against the petitioner.
This is how the petitioner has approached this Court by way of the present petition.
3.
The question which is thus required to be gone into in the present petition is as to whether District Industries Centre is an industry or not.
The stand taken by the State is that this is merely a department of the Government.
No activity with a view to produce any item is undertaken by this centre and it is accordingly contended that in the absence of such an activity, the centre in question would not fall within the definition of the term industry.
A five Judge Bench in DN Banerji v. PR Mukherjee, AIR 1953 SC 58 considered the scope of the definition of the term "industry".
Chandrashekhara Aiyer, J speaking for the Court stated that :-  "It is, therefore, incumbent on us to ascertain what the statute means by industry and industrial dispute, leaving aside the original meaning attributed to the words in a simpler state of society, when we had only one employer perhaps, doing a particular trade or carrying on a particular business with the help of his own tools, material and skill and employing a few workman in the process of production or manufacture, and when such disputes that occurred did not go behind individual levels into acute fights between rival organisations of workmen and employers, and when large scale strikes and lock-outs throwing society into chaos and confusion were practically unknown.
Legislation had to keep pace with the march of times and to provide for new situations.
Social evolution is a process of constant growth, and the State cannot afford to stand still without taking adequate measures by means of legislation to solve large and momentous problems that arise in the industrial field from day to day almost ..... when our Act came to be passed, Labour disputes had already assumed big proportions, and there were clashes between workmen and employers in several instances.
We can assume therefore that it was to meet such a situation that the Act was enacted, and it is consequently necessary to give the terms employed in the Act referring to such disputes as wide an import as reasonably possible.
Do the definitions of industry, industrial disputes and workman take in the extended significance or exclude it ?
Though the word undertaking in the definition of industry is wedged in between business and trade on the one hand and manufacture on the other, and though therefore, it might only a business or trade undertaking, still it must be remembered that if that were so, there was no need to use the word separately from business to trade.
The wider import is attracted even more clearly when we look at the latter part of the definition which refers to calling, service, employment or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen.
Undertaking in the first part of the definition and industrial occupation or avocation in the second part obviously mean much more than what is ordinarily understood by trade or business.
The definition was separately intended to include within its scope what might not strictly be called a trade or business venture."
The aforementioned judgment was relied on by three Judge Bench in State of Bombay v. Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, AIR 1960 SC 610.
At page 615, the Court observed as under :  "The activities which do not fall within section 2(j) and which are described as Governmental or regal or sovereign have been pithily described by Lord Watson as the primary and inalienable functions of a constitutional Government; and it is only these activities that are outside the scope of section 2(j).
It sounds incongruous and self-contradictory to suggest that activities undertaken by the Government in the interests of socio-economic progress of the country as beneficial measures should be exempted from the operation of the Act which in substance is a very important beneficial measure itself."
This matter was again considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Corporation of the City of Nagpur v. Its Employees, AIR 1960 SC 675.
The following conclusions were arrived at :-  "(i) the definition of industry in the Act is very comprehensive.
It is in two parts.
One part defines it from the standpoint of the employer and the other from the standpoint of the employee.
If an activity falls under either part of the definition it will be an industry within the meaning of the Act.
2.
The history of industrial disputes and the legislation recognises the basic concept that the activity shall be an organised one and not that which pertains to private or personal employment.
3.
The regal functions prescribed as primary and inalienable functions of State though statutorily delegated to a Corporation are necessarily excluded from the purview of the definition.
Such regal functions shall be confined to legislative power, administration of law and judicial power.
4.
If a service rendered by an individual or private person would be an industry, it would equally be an industry in the hands of a Corporation.
5.
If a service rendered by a Corporation is an industry, the employees in the department connected with that service, whether financial, administrative or executive, would be entitled to the benefits of the Act.
6.
If a department of a municipality discharges many functions some pertaining to industry as defined in the Act and the other non-industrial activities, the predominant functions of the department shall be the criterion for the purposes of the Act."
The matter come to be considered again by a seven Judge Bench in the case reported as Bangalore Water Supply v. A Rajappa, AIR 1978 SC 548.
Krishna Iyer, J, while dealing with the concept of Industry, made following observations at page 595 :-  " 'Industry', as defined in Section 2(j) and explained in Banerji (AIR 1953 SC 58) has a wide import :-  (a) Where (i) systematic activity, (ii) organised by co-operation between employer and employee (the direct and substantial element is chimerical), (iii) for the production and/or distribution of the goods and service calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes (not spiritual or religious but inclusive of material things or services geared to celestial bliss i.e. making on large scale prasad or food) prima facie, there is an 'industry' in that enterprise.
(b) Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the venture in the public, joint, private or other sector.
(c) The true focus is functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on the employer-employee relations.
(d) If the organisation is a trade or business it does not cease to be one because of philanthropy animating the undertaking."
After making the above observations, it was observed that profession, clubs, educational institutions, co-operatives, research institutes, charitable projects and other kindered adventures, if they fulfil the triple test indicated above, then they would fall within the definition of the term 'industry.'
4.
Taking note of the observations made in the above judgment, in Desraj v. State, AIR 1988 SC 1182, the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that irrigation department of Government would fall within the definition of the term 'industry'.
It also approved the decisions of Rajasthan High Court in State of Rajasthan v Industrial Tribunal, Rajasthan, 1970 Raj LW.
137 wherein the Survey and Investigation Division of Irrigation Department was held to be an industry.
Chambal Hydel Irrigation Project was held to be an industry in the case reported as Madhya Pradesh Irrigation Karmachari Sangh v. State of MP, (1972) 1 Lab.
L.J 374.
Public Health Engineering Department of the State of Bihar was held to be an industry in Dinesh Sharma v. State of Bihar, 1982 BLJR 207.
As such, merely because a department is being run by the Government would not be sufficient to come to the conclusion that its activity does not fall within the definition of the term 'industry'.
5.
It would, of course, be useful to notice another decision of the Supreme Court reported as The Management of the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry v. Their Workmen, AIR 1972 SC 763.
In this, the management of the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry was held to be covered by section 2(j) of the Industrial disputes Act.
The above Federation was carrying on its systematic activities to assist its members and other businessmen and industrialists and even to non-members as for instance in giving them the right to subscribe to their bulletin taking up their difficulties and solving their difficulties and in obtaining concessions and facilities for them from the Government.
These features were held to be enough to bring the aforementioned Federation within the definition of the term 'Industry'.
The relevant observations made in paras 27 and 29 may be quoted with advantage.
"It appears to us that the tests for determining whether a dispute is an industrial dispute, or not have been enunciated and the principles crystaised as a result of the several decisions of this Court which is what are applicable to this case.
There is therefore no warrant to allow any other element to be added to the criteria laid down for determining what an industry is.
In our view the linch-pin of the definition of industry is to ascertain the systematic activity which the organisation is discharging namely whether it partakes the nature of a business or trade, or is an undertaking or manufacture or calling of employers.
If it is that and there is co-operation of the employer and the employee resulting in the production of material services, it is an industry notwithstanding that its objects are charitable or that it does not make profit or even where profits are made, they are not distributed among the members."
xx xx xx xx "These extracts have been given in some extenso to show that the Federation carries on systematic activities to assist its members and other businessmen and industrialists and even the non-members as for instance in giving them the right to subscribe to their bulletin; in taking up their cases and solving their difficulties and in obtaining concessions and facilities for them from the Government.
These activities are business activities, are material services which are not necessarily confined to the illustrations given by Hidayatullah, C.J in the Gymkhana case, 1968-1 SCR 742 (AIR 1968 SC 554 by way of illustration only, rendered to businessmen, traders and industrialists who are members of the constituents of the Federation.
There can in our view be no doubt that the Federation is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(i) of the Act."
Reference may also to the decision reported as Des Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1182, wherein the irrigation department of the Punjab Government was held to be covered by the term 'industry'.
6.
In the present case, the District Industries Centre is engaged in giving assistance to those who are keen to set-up their industries in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
This function, advisory in nature, ultimately leads to yield material advantages.
Thus, the District Industries Centre would squarely be covered by the tests indicated in Bangalore Water Works case (supra) and more particularly by the ratio of the decision in the case of the Management of the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (supra).
The act of solving difficulties of industrialists was said to be sufficient to bring the Federation within the definition of the term 'industry'.
As such, the decision given the Labour Court that the District Industries Centre is not an industry for the purposes of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 cannot be sustained and it is reversed.
7.
The question as to whether further relief can be granted by this Court or not be also examined.
8.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner has completed more than 240 days of service in a calendar year.
If this be the position, then he would be entitled to benefit of section 25-F of the Act.
If this provision is not complied with then his termination would be bad.
See the followed decisions of the Supreme Court of India :  (i) State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111.
(ii) Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219.
(iii) Mohanlal v. Bharat Electronics Ltd, (1984) 1 SCC 2445.
(iv) Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and others, (1990) 3 SCC 682.
9.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
The respondent District Industries Centre is held to be an industry and the petitioner is held entitled to reinstatement with continuity in service.
The question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to backwages or not is not being gone into in the present petition.
For this limited purpose, the matter would stand remanded to the Labour Court.
The parties to appear before the Labour Court on 24.6.1996.
In case it is found that the petitioner was not gainfully employed elsewhere then all those consequences which are found mentioned in the case as Hindustan Tin Works v. Its Employees, AIR 1979 SC 75, would ensue.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.