Doabia, J - This is petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India has come to be filed under following circumstances :  The respondent No. 1 was employed with the petitioner-concern.
He absented himself in the month of July, 1983.
His name was struck off the rolls of the petitioner-concern on 1st of November, 1983.
The events which happened during this period of absence be also noticed.
The respondent No. 1 is said to have been arrested on 8th July, 1983.
This arrest was with regard to his conduct which was out of the sphere of his employment.
A notice was given to him to join his duties.
This is dated 3rd of October, 1983.
Copy of this is exhibit D/2, on the record of the Labour Court.
Simultaneously, information was sent to the Assistant Commissioner of the Labour Department.
As the respondent No. 1 failed to join, another notice was served.
This is dated 10th of October, 1983.
A notice was also published in a daily newspaper; namely, Swadesh.
This was published on 21st October, 1983.
As the petitioner did not join, his name was struck off the rolls of the petitioner-concern.
2.
The respondent No. 1, however, reported for duty on 3rd of January, 1984.
He was not allowed to join the duty.
This was because his name had already been struck off the rolls.
He, accordingly, approached the Labour Court.
The petition was filed on 7th of February, 1984.
In the meantime, the respondent No. 1, lost four fingers of his right-hand and a damage was also caused to his leg.
This is said to have been caused when the respondent No. 1 was handling some explosive substances.
This accident is again not connected with his duties which he was supposed to perform with his employer.
3.
The Labour Court concluded that the order terminating services of the applicant was bad.
However, on account of intervening factors indicated above and the fact that the applicant had become handicapped, it thought it just and proper to compensate him.
It directed the petitioner-concern to pay some backwages and declined the relief of reinstatement.
The direction given by the Labour Court in para 7 be noticed.
This para when rendered in English read as under :  "The order of termination served on the applicant, looking to the act of misconduct is far excessive and as such the stopping of 50% backwages will amount to sufficient punishment.
In this background, the order of punishment to that extent was illegal and improper and the applicant was entitled to be reinstated in service with 50% back wages."
4.
The petitioner-concern was dissatisfied with the Award given by the Labour Court.
It preferred an appeal before the Industrial Court.
The Industrial Court has made some variations.
Para 8 of the order when rendered in English is as under :-  "The Labour Court found the termination of the service of the respondent illegal and while interfering in the order of punishment as awarded 50% backwages, there does not appear to by any illegality in the said order and the Labour Court has not committed any error and the workmen become entitled to reinstatement, but the Labour Court has held that as disability has incurred in the hand and the leg of the workmen as such instead of reinstatement he has become entitled to compensation which has been quantified as full wages, gratuity, bonus, leave encashment till he attains the age of retirement.
In my view, the said order does not appear to be correct.
The said accident cannot be attributed to the employer and the employer cannot be blamed in any manner for the accident.
The compensation which is being awarded is based only on humanitarian grounds.
As such the applicant is not entitled to full wages till the date of retirement.
In my view, it is sufficient if the applicant is paid 3/4 wages only and other benefits as awarded by the Labour Court.
Because of the deformity, the applicant is not in a position to work in the usual manner.
As such in place of reinstatement the employer is given the alternative as stated above.
It the employer seeks to employ the workman and is ready to give him light work, then the amount of compensation shall be as stated above.
The appeal filed by the employer is partly allowed."
Note : The above translations have been made available by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
5.
It be seen that there were two issues before the Labour Court.
The Labour Court was supposed to decide justly whether the act of the management in striking off the name of the employee-respondent No. 1 herein from the rolls of the petitioner-concern on 1st of November, 1983, without holding an enquiry was good; and the secondly if the services of the respondent No. 1 employee could not be terminated, then, what relief the respondent was entitled to.
6.
So far as the termination of the services of the employee on account of continued absence is concerned, it is settled proposition of law that the employer is not entitled to bring an end to the relationship of master and servant without holding an enquiry.
Such a view was expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in All India Trade Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPJR 129.
The Division Bench concluded that an enquiry is a must even if an employee is absent.
For coming to this conclusion, the Division Bench took note of the following decisions of the Supreme Court of India and Patna High Court :-  (a) Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492; (b) Deokinandan Prasad v. The State of Bihar and others, AIR 1971 SC 1409; (c) SD Gupta v. State of Bihar and another, AIR 1973 Patna 431.
The Division Bench observed :-  "Having given thoughtful consideration to the submission of the parties, we find that the contentions advanced on behalf of the employee deserve to be accepted and his termination is liable to be set aside ....." It was held :-  "....
Admittedly, no retrenchment compensation as required by section 25-F, was paid to the employee, His termination was, therefore ab initio void.
The decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the employee in the case of L Robert Dsouza v. The Executive Engineer Southern Railway and another, AIR 1982 SC 854 and Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer Labour Court Chandigarh & others, (1990) 3 SCC 682."
7.
There can again be no dispute with the proposition that if the termination is found to be bad and there is failure to pay retrenchment compensation, the employee is entitled to reinstatement.
For this proposition, the following decisions be noticed :-  (i) State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111; (ii) Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, Orissa, (1976) 4 SCC 222; (iii) Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, (1980) 3 SCC 340; (iv) Mohanlal v. Bharat Electronics Ltd, (1981) 3 SCC 225; and  (v) Karnataka SRTC v. M Baraiah, (1984) 1 SCC 2445.
8.
The question, however, in this case is that the respondent No. 1-employee has become handicapped and for this, the petitioner-concern is not responsible.
A perusal of the relief clause granted by the Labour Court and the Industrial Court makes it apparent that it is not clear upto which period fifty per cent wages are to be given and for what period seventy five per cent of the wages are required to be given.
It be seen that the Labour Court has observed that compensation shall be paid till the workman attains the age of superannuation.
The Industrial Court, however, observed that the accident which disabled the respondent-workman to perform his duties was not on account of performing his duties with the petitioner-concern, and therefore, it observed that the applicant would not be entitled to full wages till the date of retirement.
It observed that the applicant should be paid 3/4th of the wages only and other benefits as awarded by the Labour Court.
9.
The Industrial Court has further opined that the applicant is not in a position to perform his normal duties.
It may, be seen that the Supreme Court in the case reported as Nerendra Kumar Chandla v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(2) SCT 571 : AIR 1995 SC 519, has observed that every endeavour should be made to adjust an employee against a job qua which he can discharge his duties.
In the above case, one arm of the employee was amputated on account of malady of cancer.
This was not attributable to the lapse on the part of the employer.
Nevertheless, the Suprme Court was of the view that an endeavour must be made to adjust such an employee on some other suitable post.
10.
In this view of the matter, it would be apt to remand back the case to the Industrial Court which would determine;  (i) Whether the workman has been disabled to an extent that he cannot render any useful work; (ii) As to upto which date the workman would be entitled to some compensation; and  (iii) Whether the respondent would at least be entitled to some wages upto the date the Labour Court had decided the matter.
11.
As the Labour Court has given its decision on 14th of June, 1993, as an interim measure, the petitioner-concern would deposit fifty per cent of the wages to which the respondent No. 1 would have become entitled to on account of the order passed by the Labour Court.
12.
As indicated above, the Industrial Court would determine as to whether the respondent No. 1 - employee can render some useful work or not.
If he can, then, the petitioner-management would assign him such duties; otherwise the Industrial Court would decide as how the respondent No. 1 is to be compensated.
The learned counsel for the petitioner-concern has placed reliance on a number of decisions indicating the criteria on the basis of which compensation is to be determined.
This argument, he would be within his rights to raise before the Industrial Court.
The parties to appear through their respective counsel before the Industrial Court on 3rd of July, 1996.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.