Swatanter Kumar, J - Different parties have preferred four different Letters Patent Appeals from one and the same judgment passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 2491 of 1990.
These are No. 769 of 1992, 957 of 1992, 1219 of 1992 and 611 of 1993.
Thus it will be proper to dispose of these four appeals by this common judgment.
2.
While assailing the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 2521992, the appellants before us have mainly contended :-  (i) The judgment of the learned Single Judge in setting aside the process of selection is contrary to the principle of law settled by the Supreme Court in the case of Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar and others, 1994(1) SCT 483(SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 168; (ii) The selection made by the Punjab Public Service Commission is in conformity with the rules and the procedure adopted and is neither discriminatory nor arbitrary.
3.
The learned counsel for the respondents while supporting the judgment of the learned Single Judge has argued that the contention of the respondents (petitioners in the writ petition) with regard to the validity of the constitution of the Commission as well as delegation of power to the alleged committees by its Chairman being contrary to the rules, ought to have been accepted by the learned Single Judge.
Before we proceed to discuss the contentions raised by the respective counsel before us, we consider it appropriate to state in brief the relevant facts.
4.
The appellants before us had issued an advertisement annexed to the petition as Annexure P/2 inviting applications for the posts of 120 Head Masters and 80 Head Mistresses in Punjab Education Services (Gazetted Class- II) School Cadre.
The applications were required to be submitted by 23.9.1988 as per this advertisement.
The respondents (petitioners in the writ petition) claim to have long experience as teachers/masters in various subjects as all of them were qualified to apply for the said posts.
The department had held a screening test by holding a written examination.
This was a paper of three hours of the subjects like General Knowledge, General English, General Science and Psychology etc. On the basis of the screening test, 595 candidates were selected in order of merit.
These candidates were interviewed by different committees which were constituted by the Public Service Commission for the State of Punjab on different dates.
There were 100 marks for the screening test paper.
Other 100 marks were kept for the purposes of academic qualifications and interview in the ratio of 60% and 40% respectively.
All the respondents are admittedly the persons who cleared the screening test and were part of 595 candidates called for interview.
After giving marks to each candidate for the academic qualifications and the marks obtained by the candidates in the interview, the final merit list was prepared out of these 100 marks and the successful candidates in order of merit were appointed.
The respondents had approached the Court filling Civil Writ Petition No. 2492 of 1990 praying that the selection was vitiated and specially on the ground that the 40% marks which were reserved for interview, introduced the element of arbitrariness in the process of selection.
They further contended that the candidates who were not successful even in the screening test were appointed.
5.
The appellants before us have not disputed the basic facts but have seriously denied allegations of arbitrariness and malafides.
They have justified awarding 40 marks for the interview and have stressed that the allocation of these marks for the interview purposes cannot vitiate the selection being arbitrary or otherwise.
6.
Now we proceed to deal with the first contention raised on behalf of the appellants.
It is true that 40 marks have been allocated for the interview and 60 marks have been allocated for academic qualifications.
The final merit list has been prepared only on the basis of these 100 marks.
The marks obtained by the candidates in the screening test have not been added and considered while preparing the final merit list.
7.
It is settled principle of law that the bodies like the Public Service Commission are specialised bodies and may be permitted to formulate the process of selection which according to their wisdom is most suitable keeping in view the posts for which the recruitment is being made.
Of course, such a process or method of selection should not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness, discrimination, malafides and a process which would entirely frustrate the common principles of selection on merits.
8.
The appellants' contention that the screening test was held only with the purpose of short-listing as there were more than 8000 candidates for 180 posts, deserves consideration and cannot be rejected at the outset.
The appellants will have to adopt certain fair method for short-listing candidates and it will have to be part of the process of elimination.
The short-listing process if not made part of the final merit list would not vitiate the selection.
Thus the present selection cannot be set aside merely on the ground that the respondents were under obligation to take into consideration the marks obtained by the candidate in the screening test.
Holding of the screening test for the purposes of short-listing is one part of the entire selection process which need not be necessarily added into the other part of the selection, i.e. final selection of the candidate on merits based upon the performance of the candidate at the interview and his academic qualifications.
9.
The second part of the submission that allocation of 40 marks ipso facto introduces the element of arbitrariness in the process of selection is also not well founded.
If the Commission had decided that final selection would be on the basis of academic qualifications out of the candidates who had cleared the screening test in order of merit, the allocation of 40 marks for the interview cannot vitiate the selection .
A reasonable and appropriate method of recruitment has to be prescribed by the Commission.
There cannot be a uniform method of selection for all posts of all kinds.
These niceties are hardly open to judicial review in the absence of patent arbitrariness.
The arbitrariness or discrimination on the part of the selection body has to be apparent and not imaginary.
This has to be supported by averring basic facts which are essential to constitute arbitrariness to vitiate the selection.
10.
The learned Single Judge while relying upon the cases of Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(Suppl) 1 SCR 657 and Vikram Singh v. The Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, JT 1990(4) SC 528 held that allocation of 40 marks was unfair and unreasonable and as such has set aside the entire selection.
But the subsequent decisions of the hon'ble Supreme Court of India have categorically held that allocation of even 50 marks for the purposes of interview cannot be said to be unfair and just.
In Anzar Ahmad's case (supra) which was more or less similar to the facts of the present case, the Supreme Court after discussing the entire case law including Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) and Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, JT 1990(4) SC 704, held as under :-  "In the instant case, we find that the State Government in its letter dated September 20, 1990 has clearly stated that selection should be made on the basis of interview.
On the basis of this letter the Commission could have made the selection wholly on the basis of marks obtained at the interview.
But in accordance with the past practice, the Commission has made the selection on the basis of interview while keeping in view the academic performance and with that end in view the Commission has allocated 50% marks for academic performance and 50% marks for interview.
It cannot be held that the said procedure adopted by the Commission suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
By giving equal weight to academic performance the Commission has rather reduced the possibility of arbitrariness."
In a very recent case titled as Subhash Chandra Verma and others v. State of Bihar and others etc., 1995(2) SCT 389(SC) : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 904, the petitioners, in somewhat similar circumstances where a screening test was held were selected on the basis of an interview and had challenged the selection on various grounds.
The High Court had set aside the selection but the Supreme Court in appeal, amongst others, formulated the following question and answered the same as under :-  "5.
50 marks had been allocated for the interview.
Therefore, the entire process of selection was vitiated : This point is concluded by the recent decision of this Court in Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar, 1994(1) SCT 483(SC) : (1994) 1 SCC 150 : 1993 AIR 3777.
The hadenote reads : "The decision of the Supreme Court with regard to fixation of marks for interview in a selection broadly fall in two categories : (i) selection for admission to educational institutions; and (ii) selection for employment in service.
The personality traits of students seeking admission to educational institutions are not fully developed and therefore, greater importance has to be given to written examination than to viva voce but in case of appointment to public service, recruitment has to be made from persons of mature personality.
The observations in Lila Dhar case indicate that question of weightage of marks to be attached to interview vis-a-vis marks for written examination can arise only when written examination as well as viva voce test are both accepted as essential features of selection.
There also no hard and fast rule regarding the precise weightage to given to viva voce test as against written examination, can be laid down.
The weightage must vary according to the requirements of service.
The question of weightage to be attached to viva voce would not arise where the selection is to be made on the basis of interview only.
Decision in Ashok alias Somanna Gowda case cannot be construed to mean that the principles which govern the allocation of marks for interview in a selection based on written and viva voce test would also apply to a selection where no written test is held but the selection is based on interview only."
After holding the above, the Supreme Court accepted the appeals and upheld the selection made by the Commission.
From the above two recent judgments of the Supreme Court it is clear that merely because the marks in excess of 20% or 30% have been provided for interview alone in a given process of selection, would by itself not vitiate the entire selection unless there are certain other compelling attendant circumstances.
11.
The interview or viva voce is a duly accepted and recognised method of selection.
What weight should be attached to such process primarily falls within the domain of the specialised bodies who are concerned with the process of selection.
There cannot be any rigid or jacket formula, but the Courts would be inclined to interfere in such process if found arbitrary or unsustainable on valid grounds.
It is only if the petitioner before a Court is able to show that allocation of marks for interview alone introduce element of arbitrariness and unfairness to the extent that it amounted to interference with the merits and defeated the concept of fair selection would set aside such selections.
In the present case there are no attendant circumstances which would justify the interference by this Court.
The screening test primarily being conducted for elimination or short-listing of candidates cannot be equated with a written test for the purposes of selection.
The respondents have not done any wrong by not adding the marks obtained in the screening test for final merit.
All candidates who cleared the screening test have been treated equally, fairly and adjudged by the same yardstick.
If the Commission in its wisdom decided to have the final selection on the basis of merit based upon academic qualifications and interview, this by itself cannot vitiate the selection process.
12.
The petitioners in the writ petition have made two allegations as noted above to establish the unfairness and arbitrariness in this process of selection.
According to them some candidates who had not cleared the screening test were appointed.
Their roll numbers have been mentioned in the writ petition.
These allegations have not only been disputed by the appellant-State in the written replies but they have clarified the position that because of some error on the part of the Newspaper, some of the candidates who had cleared the written test, their roll numbers were not printed therein.
For this a corrigendum was issued and published in the newspapers.
Thus the candidates who have been appointed and have been impleaded as private respondents in the writ petition, had actually cleared the screening test and were selected by the committee for appointment on the basis of final merit.
13.
The counsel for the petitioners in the writ petition has relied upon a judgment of Division Bench of this court in the case of Amarjeet Singh and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(3) SCT 4 (P&H) : 1995(2) SLR 228.
This case is distinguishable on facts because in that case the Division Bench had found, as a matter of fact, that there was arbitrariness and certain candidates who were low in merit, were given advantage being relations of some of the highly placed officers and politicians and this affected the merit adversely in the process of selection.
It may also be mentioned that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Subhash Chandra Verma's case (supra) is subsequent to the judgment of Division Bench of this Court.
As a result of our discussion above, we answer the two questions formulated in favour of the appellants and against the respondents.
14.
Learned counsel for the respondents before us (petitioners in the writ petition) as noted above, had also raised two contentions.
While we are in respectful agreement with the reasoning given by the learned Single Judge for rejecting both the contentions of these respondents before us, we would like to add certain more reasons for the same.
Under the Rules of procedure of Punjab Public Service Commission as amended upto 27.7.1987, which were also in force in the year 1989, the relevant time in the present case, the quorum of the Commission as provided under Rule 3 is two Members when total strength is five.
Further Rule 10 of the said Rules provides that the proceedings of the Commission shall not be vitiated merely by reason of any vacancy caused in the Commission.
Rule 10 reads as under :-  "The proceedings of the Commission shall not be invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman or Members."
Rule 15 of the same Rules further empowers the Commission to constitute committees to deal with the affairs of the Commission and it also empowers the Commission to adopt such methods including appointment of the Expert(s) under Rule 17(b) (ii).
The Commission and even the Chairman is empowered to issue guidelines for the purposes of examination, interview and selection.
Thus, the contention of the learned counsel that under Regulation 3 of the Punjab State Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1958, the Commission has to constitute of a Chairman and four Members, and if there is no such strength, the Commission cannot function and all its proceedings and selections shall stand vitiated, is without any basis and merit.
These regulations in any case have no bearing because specific rules as afore- stated have been framed by the Commission and when there existed special rules to deal with the procedure of the Commission and its business, the service rules cannot have any bearing on the matters covered specifically by these special rules.
There is also no force in the argument that the Commission or Chairman could not have constituted the Committee and delegated the process of selection in the manner as has been done in the present case.
15.
We may point out that the screening test held in the present case was challenged before this Court in the case of Balbir Singh and other v. Punjab Public Service Commission through its Chairman, Patiala, 1989(2) Recent Services Judgments 713.
The contention raised including the plea of arbitrariness and discrimination was rejected by the Court.
Said judgment has also become final between the parties.
Consequently, we allow these appeals, set aside the judgment of learned Single Judge to the extent afore-stated and dismiss the writ petition No. 2941 of 1990.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
There shall be no orders as to costs.