NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner seeks issuance of a writ of mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari or any other appropriate writ, direction or order to consider him for the post of Additional Director, Public Relations, against the post of Press Secretary to Chief Minister w.e.f.
22.1.1988 when respondent No. 4 junior to the petitioner was promoted as Joint Director by downgrading the post w.e.f.
28.3.83 as Additional Director, Public Relations, and w.e.f.
441979 as Joint Director when respondent No. 2 another junior officer has been promoted in these capacities in an illegal manner.
2.
Originally, civil writ petition was filed on 9121988.
In pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, written statement was filed by respondent No. 1 stating therein that the petition is pre-mature as the alleged representation filed by the petitioner is under consideration.
Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated 23.1.1989 directed respondent No. 1 to dispose of the said representation by passing a speaking order within one month from the date of hearing and to place a copy of that order on the record by the next date of hearing i.e. 27.3.1989.
The petitioner was also directed to place on record the appointment order as Joint Director (Press) by the next date of hearing.
The official respondent considered the representation which was pending and disposed of vide Annexure P-1 dated 2221989 rejecting the various contentions raised by the petitioner in his representation by passing a speaking order.
With a view to assail the order Annexure P-1 and the consequential changes to be incorporated in the writ petition, amendment in the writ petition was sought which was granted and so amended writ petition was filed.
3.
The precise grievance of the petitioner is that he has not been fairly treated in the matter of promotion as Deputy Director and Joint Director and has also been denied the promotion as Additional Director, Public Relations.
This injustice to the petitioner has been further aggravated by withdrawing the duties earlier assigned to him as Joint Director (Press) .
By such a recourse, various rules, regulations and policy instructions issued from time to time and given in detail in para No. 6 of the writ petition have been violated thereby causing injustice to the petitioner.
It is the case of the petitioner that with a view to seek redressal of his grievance, he made three representations, Annexures P-6, P-7 and P-8 dated 731983, August, 1988 and 3011989 respectively.
Despite direction given by the Court to consider all his representations, the respondent simply glossed over without effectively dealing with any one of these representations.
This way the order Annexure P-1 is also unsustainable.
Assailing the promotion of Sh. PS Bhopal, respondent No. 2, to the post of Deputy Director in the Directorate of Health and Family Welfare vide Annexure P-9 dated 1921975, it has been stated that this being a solitary post could not be given to respondent No. 2 treating it to be a reserve post.
Even otherwise, Mr. PS Bhopal's A.C.R.
had adverse entry and so such a post could not be reserved for him for subsequent utilisation on his clearance in respect of his alleged adverse annual confidential report.
Similarly, his promotion as Additional Director, Public Relations, vide order dated 2581983 initially for a period of six months and thereafter regularised is also inherently infirm and illegal as (i) the post of Additional Director Public Relations being a solitary post could not be filled by reservation in promotion; (ii) that this promotion was subject to the result of civil writ petition No. 7729 of 1982; (iii) Mr. PS Bhopal did not fulfil the minimum condition of experience of three years as was being observed at that time; (iv) the promotion was not made by selection as per statutory condition; and (v) that the petitioner along with others was not considered while promoting Mr. PS Bhopal.
4.
The petitioner also assailed the promotion of Sh. Shiv Ram Mann, respondent No. 4, as Joint Director vide order dated 19/2111988, Annexure P-13, on the grounds (i) that there was no vacancy of Joint Director when the order was passed; (ii) Mr. Shiv Ram Mann was promoted by reservation.
Since the cadre strength was five, Mr. Mann could not be promoted as the total vacancies were less than 7.
His promotion accordingly is in flagrant violation of Punjab Government instructions and High Court/Supreme Court rulings, Annexure P-3; and (iii) that there was no administrative necessity or any legal justification to down-grade the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister which is equivalent to that of Additional Director, Public Relations, so as to promote, Mr. Shiv Ram Mann, respondent No. 4, as Joint Director, thereby depriving the petitioner from his due promotion as Additional Director even against the post of Press Secretary to Chief Minister.
In fact, this was done with a view to penalise the petitioner who had challenged these promotions by filing the present writ petition.
The sole purpose was to deprive the petitioner of his legitimate claim to be promoted as Additional Director and to the post of Press Secretary which was equivalent to that.
With these broad averments, the petitioner seeks quashing of promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal as Deputy Director w.e.f.
19.2.75, as Joint Director w.e.f.
4479 and an Additional Director as well as for setting aside the promotion of Mr. Shiv Ram Mann, respondent No. 4, as Deputy Director w.e.f.
3582 and his appointment as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister vide order dated 2111988 having been promoted as Joint Director and praying for his promotion to the rank of Joint Director w.e.f.
4479 and as Additional Director w.e.f.
28.3.1983 and quashing of the order of the government vide which the post of Press Secretary to Chief Minister has been down-graded.
5.
Two separate written statements have been filed, one by respondent No. 1 and the other by respondent Nos. 2 and 4.
Respondent No. 1 in its written statement has taken a preliminary objection to the effect that the writ petition is highly belated and so deserves to be dismissed on this ground alone.
According to the respondent, vide this written statement, promotion of respondent as Deputy Director, Joint Director and Additional Director w.e.f.
2721975, 441979 and 2581983 respectively have been challenged whereas the writ petition was filed on 9121988.
In the written statement, respondent No. 1 while declining each para of the writ petition has specifically denied/controverted the various material averments made and has tried to justify the various acts of the government promoting one or the other respondent to the various posts.
Dealing specifically with the merit of the case of the petitioner, reference was made to the order passed by the Financial Commissioner Home, Information and Public Relations dated 2221989 rejecting the petitioner's representation.
Dealing with the record of the petitioner, the same was stated to be between average and outstanding.
According to the respondent, as per record, the petitioner joined the Public Relations Department in the year 1955 and became Public Relations Officer on 8101964.
He was promoted to the post of Deputy Director on 8376 and Joint Director on 28482.
Dealing with the representations of the petitioner dated 381988, 27101988 and 3011989, it has been stated that these were duly considered and rejected by passing a speaking order.
Justifying the promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal to the post of Deputy Director in February, 1975, it was stated that there were five posts of Deputy Directors in the Department at the time of promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal and that Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted against a vacant post in the department and his services were subsequently placed at the disposal of Department of Health and Family Welfare.
According to the respondent Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted to the post of Deputy Director against the reserve post No. 1 of the roster maintained in the department and the same is in accordance with the reservation policy and instructions of the government.
Though Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted in February, 1975, reliance by the petitioner upon instructions dated 1821983 is thus wholly misplaced.
Even otherwise, the instructions do not advance the case of the petitioner in any manner.
This way promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal, being a member of the Scheduled Castes, as Joint Director is according to rules.
Dealing with the adverse entry in one of his annual confidential reports which was subsequently expunged vide order dated 3.1.81, Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted w.e.f.
441979 the date from which general category persons were promoted as such and adjusted against carried forward reserve point No. 1 of the roster which was kept vacant.
Justifying the promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal to the post Additional Director, it has been stated that the same is on merit-cum- seniority basis.
In this case he had been selected out of panel of three senior most Joint Directors.
As per rules, a Selection Committee had to select one out of three senior-most Joint Directors but somehow this Selection Committee became non-functional on account of frequent transfers of Director Social Welfare who was one of the three members of the Committee and so on account of administrative exigencies it was thought appropriate to fill up the post by usual method by considering a panel of three senior-most Joint Directors.
Since no grievance was made by the other two who were within the zone of consideration, this plea of the petitioner that the promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal as Additional Director is faulty has no merit.
Justifying the promotion of Mr. Shiv Ram Mann as Joint Director against the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister, it has been stated that it has been decided on 491986 that the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister be equated to that of Joint Director.
Accordingly, Mr. Shiv Ram Mann was promoted as Joint Director against the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister vide order dated 2111988.
Otherwise too, the petitioner cannot make any grievance of the promotion of Mr. Shiv Ram Mann as the petitioner as Deputy Director is senior to Mr. Shiv Ram Mann.
Similarly, there is no merit in the plea of the petitioner for not equating the post of Press Secretary to that of the Additional Director.
It is during the framing of Class I Service Rules that it was decided that the post of Press Secretary is to be equated to that of Joint Director which was decided way back on 491986.
Thus, there is no ground to impute mala fide in this act of the government.
Accordingly, it was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
6.
Respondents No. 2 and 4 in their written statement took up the following preliminary objections : (i) that the amended writ petition is wholly unsustainable in law as the Court merely granted permission to the petitioner to amend the original writ petition to the extent of impugning the order passed on the representation of the petitioner (Annexure P-1).
However, the petitioner without seeking any permission from the Court has set up absolutely a new case on substantially different factual and legal basis; (ii) the petition is highly belated; and (iii) no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed as respondent No. 2 was promoted to the post of Deputy Director and Joint Director on the basis of reservation.
Since the petitioner belongs to the general category he does not have any grouse in this regard.
Similarly, the petitioner cannot challenge the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Additional Director.
Otherwise also, respondent No. 2 had been promoted to the post of Deputy Director prior to the petitioner and so had become senior to him.
Similarly, promotion of respondent No. 4 has no nexus with the claim of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4, in fact, was promoted as Joint Director on 22.1.1988 subsequent to the promotion of the petitioner and so the grievance of the petitioner qua respondent No. 4 is also misplaced.
Replying on merit, respondents No. 2 and 4 have controverted the various material averments made in the petition and have justified their promotion qua different posts.
Reply of respondents No. 2 and 4 on merit is almost similar to the one filed by respondent No. 1.
Thus, there is no need to give in detail specific reply to the averments given in the petition.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner read in extenso the various grounds urged by him in support of his plea challenging the promotion of respondents No. 2 and 4 as well as dismissal of his representation by the authority.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the rules governing the service has been given a go-bye thereby causing irreparable injury to the petitioner who despite having meritorious record has designedly been bye-passed impelling him to knock the door of the Court.
A Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 23.1.1989 directed respondent No. 1 to dispose of petitioner's representation by passing a speaking order.
It is in pursuance to the direction of the Court that petitioner's representations were decided by respondent No. 1 vide order dated 2221989.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, passing of the order Annexure P-1 is, in fact, a formality as no attempt has been made by the respondent to meet any of the points raised in the representation or to examine on the basis of rules governing the service.
The first submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Mr. PS Bhopal has been wrongly promoted as Deputy Director on 2721975 and his subsequent promotion as Joint Director vide order dated 311981 w.e.f.
441979.
The promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal was neither according to rules nor as per policy of the goverment.
Similarly, his promotion as Joint Director was also faulted as there was adverse entry in his annual confidential report and according to rules, in view of adverse entry in the annual confidential report, such a vacancy could not be carried forward.
It was thus incumbent upon the respondent to fill up the vacancy as and when occurred and not to keep it vacant till the expunction of adverse remarks against Mr. PS Bhopal.
Similarly, Mr. PS Bhopal could not be promoted to the post of Additional Director, it being solitary post of Additional Director.
The authorities by promoting Mr. PS Bhopal as Additional Director have, in fact, made 100% reservation.
Even otherwise, as admitted by respondent also, the promotion was made from a panel of three senior-most Joint Directors on merit-cum-seniority by a Selection Committee.
Admittedly selection of Mr. PS Bhopal is not by any Selection Committee and so such an appointment is per se against the mandate and deserves to be quashed on this ground alone.
The justification given by the respondent in the written statement does not meet the requirement - that the selection committee will select one out of a panel of three senior-most Joint Directors.
It has been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner had meritorious record and was proficient as a Public Relations Officer and so had been chosen to perform the duties of Press Secretary in addition to his duties in the department.
The post of Press Secretary had been made equivalent to that of Additional Director and so the petitioner ought to have been promoted as Additional Director and granted emoluments of that post.
In fact, during all these years, the post of Press Secretary which was ex cadre post was equated with the post of Additional Director and so in equity and law the petitioner ought to have been granted emoluments of the pay scale permissible to an Additional Director.
The subsequent down-grading of the post and equating it to the post of Joint Director was simply to deny the petitioner his legitimate claim as per his pending representations.
Lastly, the counsel urged that since there in no dispute that the petitioner performed the job of a Press Secretary and in addition to his job as Joint Director, he is entitled to higher employment.
The authorities have not considered the case of the petitioner from this angle as well.
8.
Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, urged that the promotions given to respondents No. 2 and 4 were according to rules.
In fact, various objections raised by the petitioner in his representations were examined and disposed of vide Annexure P-1.
The present petition is highly belated as the promotions made in year 1975-76 and 1983 have been made the basis whereas no such objection was raised in respect of these promotions at the relevant time.
Even on merit, none of the objections has any substance.
The main emphasis of the petitioner has been that since he worked as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister and the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister is equated to that of Additional Director, he was entitled to be appointed as Additional Director and paid accordingly.
Whereas, in fact, at no stage the petitioner had been appointed as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister nor he worked as Press Secretary to any of the Chief Ministers of Punjab.
Since the post of Joint Director was equivalent to that of the Press Secretary, the petitioner, in fact, had been performing the job of Joint Director only and even if it be taken that at same time he had been performing the job connected with the duties of a Press Secretary, that would not make him entitled to any extra pay or allowances.
As a matter of fact, the petitioner on attaining the age of superannuation has retired as Joint Director, Information and Public Relations, on 31.1.1990.
In any case, the pay scale of Joint Director as well as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister is identical i.e. Rs. 1775-75- 2000/100-2100.
Justifying the appointment of Mr. PS Bhopal to the post of Additional Director, it was urged that earlier to this as well, this post had been filled up in a like manner i.e. by promotion out of Joint Directors.
In all the cases, one out of three senior officers were considered on merit-cum- seniority.
This continued till the year 1982 i.e. Mr. JS Sidhu was promoted as Additional Director in the year 1973; Mr. RS Gill in the year 1975; Mr. Raghbir Singh in the year 1980 and Mr. Gulzar Singh Sodhi in the year 1982.
It is thereafter that Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted.
It so happened that the Selection Committee which consisted of Secretary Public Relations, Director Public Relations and Director Social Welfare could not meet, as Director Social Welfare happened to be transferred and so in view of the urgency of the matter, the government adopted the previous course of selecting suitable person out of a panel of three senior-most Joint Directors and since Mr. PS Bhopal was more meritorious as per criteria, he was promoted as Additional Director.
In any case, the petitioner was not within the zone of consideration and so cannot make any grievance of the promotion of respondent No. 2.
The promotion of Mr. PS Bhopal as Additional Director was later on approved by the elected government.
As regards the claim of the petitioner to the post of Press Secretary, the same had been declined vide order dated 6101989.
9.
Learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 4 supporting the argument advanced by the Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, further made some elaborations.
According to the counsel, at no time the petitioner worked as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister and so his averment that he performed the job of a Press Secretary is nothing but a bundle of lies.
As a matter of fact, during all this period, the State of Punjab was under the Governor Rule and so the petitioner had no occasion to perform the job of a Press Secretary to the Chief Minister.
It is precisely for this reason that the Court had directed him to place on record the appointment order that the petitioner had joined as Joint Director (Press) vide order dated 23.1.1989.
The petitioner had not placed on record any such document.
Even otherwise, the pay scale of Joint Director and that of Press Secretary are identical.
The grievance of the petitioner relates back to the year 1975 when respondent No. 2 was promoted as Deputy Director in the reserve quota.
Since the petitioner is from a general category, he possibly cannot challenge the promotion of respondent No. 2 and that too after such a long lapse.
Similarly, respondent No. 2 was promoted as Joint Director vide order dated 311981 w.e.f.
441979 whereas the present petition has been filed in the year 1989.
Otherwise also, the petitioner was not eligible for promotion as Joint Director in the year 1975.
In fact, the petitioner perhaps intended to assail the appointment of respondent No. 2 to the post of Additional Director and since he could not possibly challenge on any conceivable ground, has taken objection to the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Deputy Director in the year 1975 and his promotion as Joint Director vide order dated 311981 w.e.f.
441979.
Thus for these reasons, the writ petition is wholly devoid of any merit and deserves to be dismissed with costs.
10.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the various orders passed by the authorities with the assistance of the counsel.
The grievance of the petitioner has been stated in the opening part of the judgment which can be briefly stated (i) that promotions of respondent No. 2 as Deputy Director, Joint Director and Additional Director are against rules and so deserves to be quashed; (ii) that the petitioner deserves to be considered to the post of Additional Director, Public Relations, against the post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister which was equivalent to that of the Additional Director which the petitioner has been holding during these years; and (iii) that the post of Press Secretary has been purposely down- graded so as to ward off the representation of the petitioner to be promoted as Additional Director having held an equivalent post of Press Secretary.
The petitioner joined service sometimes in the year 1955 and was appointed as a Public Relations Officer sometime in April, 1964 and was promoted as Deputy Director in the month of March, 1976.
It is thereafter that the petitioner feels aggrieved by various promotion orders of respondents No. 2 and 4.
Mr. PS Bhopal, respondent No. 2, had also been working as a Public Relations Officer along with the petitioner and was promoted as Deputy Director on 2721975 - earlier to the promotion of the petitioner in March, 1976.
Mr. Bhopal belongs to Scheduled Caste/Backward Class and so under the instructions of the government on reservation of posts in several services he was promoted.
Vide Annexure P-1, this specific objection of the petitioner has been examined.
The respondent has justified the appointment of Mr. PS Bhopal on the ground that there were five posts of Deputy Directors in the department in the year 1974-75 and that he was promoted as Deputy Director against reservation point No. 1 in the roster.
As per record, he was senior-most Deputy Director amongst the Scheduled Castes category.
Similarly, justifying his promotion as Joint Director vide order dated 311981, it has been explained that earlier his name was not considered on account of some adverse entry in his annual confidential report and it is only subsequently when this remark was expunged (after considering representation) that he was promoted w.e.f.
441979.
At this particular time, the petitioner was not found eligible to the post of Joint Director.
The petitioner's counsel has not specifically adverted to this aspect of the matter and so it can safely be taken that petitioner was not eligible when Mr. PS Bhopal was promoted as Joint Director.
Even otherwise, the petitioner could not be aggrieved by the promotion of respondent No. 2 firstly because he was already senior to him as Deputy Director and secondly this promotion was in the reservation quota.
11.
Similarly, I find no merit in the plea of the petitioner that he ought to have been preferred to the post of Additional Director vis-a-vis Mr. PS Bhopal.
The petitioner was not one of the three senior-most Joint Directors.
As per earlier practice, one out of the three senior-most Joint Directors were considered and appointed on merit-cum-seniority basis.
No doubt, there is some merit in the plea of the petitioner that since the selection of respondent No. 2 has not been made by the Selection Committee, the same is not according to rules.
Yet I find no good ground to quash the same especially when no such grievance has been made by any of the effected party.
Petitioner was not within the zone of consideration.
In any case, selection made from a panel of three persons considering them on seniority-cum-merit cannot be faulted in view of the circumstances explained by the respondents in the written statement that the Selection Committee could not meet as one on the members happened to have been transferred and no account of urgency of the matter, the senior-most person amongst the panel of Joint Directors was chosen to the post of Additional Director which has been subsequently approved by the government.
12.
The petitioner's grievance to the promotion of Mr. Shiv Ram Mann to the post of Deputy Director and his holding the post of Press Secretary is also wholly misplaced.
Mr. Shiv Ram Mann has been promoted long after the petitioner and so is junior to him.
As regards his holding the post of Press Secretary, this is being equated to that of Joint Director and is being paid emoluments of Joint Director.
In fact, Mr. Shiv Ram Mann has been promoted as Deputy Director and posted as Press Secretary to the Chief Minister vide order dated 19.1.1988.
Vide this order, it has been specifically stated that the post is ex cadre and so Mr. Shiv Ram Mann will not have any claim on this post of Press Secretary to the Chief Minister.
This order also gives an indication that persons working in the Department of Information and Public Relations cannot claim this post as of right.
Thus the plea of the petitioner that since at some given time he had been asked to perform the job of Press Secretary (contested by the respondent and not clearly proved on record) which was then equated to that of the Additional Director and now has been down-graded with the sole aim to deprive the petitioner of his legitimate claim is without any firm foundation.
I find no merit in this as well.
13.
Whether the petitioner is entitled to be compensated having worked as Joint Director as well as performed the additional duty of a Press Secretary again hinges firstly on the point whether the petitioner, in fact, worked as Press Secretary and secondly whether the Press Secretary was entitled to emoluments equivalent to that of the Additional Director.
There is no clear proof on record that the petitioner, in fact, worked as a Press Secretary to a Chief Minister.
This being a disputed fact can appropriately be examined by civil court alone.
14.
Resultantly, finding no merit in the writ petition, I dismiss the same.
The parties will, however, bear their own costs.