NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge accepting the appeal thus decreeing the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant and also for pay, increment and allowances from the date of promotion and that the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Ambala dated 13.11.1979 is illegal, void, unconstitutional and so does not bind the plaintiff.
2.
It is the case of the plaintiff that he had been serving as a Clerk in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Ambala for the last many years.
His annual confidential report for the year 1978-79 was recorded as below average and his honesty was recorded as doubtful.
This report was conveyed to him in the year 1980 and according to the plaintiff he submitted a suitable reply.
It is the case of the plaintiff that impugned order was passed without giving him a personal hearing and without following any procedure.
His representation against the adverse entry made to the Commissioner through Deputy Commissioner has not been decided till date and so he sought its quashing.
3.
Claim was resisted by the defendant on the ground of non-joinder of necessary parties, plaint does not disclose any canse of action, suit being barred by time and on merit the overall performance of the plaintiff was less than the standard prescribed.
4.
Suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court.
5.
The matter was once again examined by the lower appellate Court.
Before the lower appellate Court the main argument was advanced in respect of issue No. 1 which reads as :-  "Whether the order dated 13.11.1979 passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Ambala, is void, inoperative, not binding upon the plaintiff and he is entitled to the promotion on the grounds mentioned in the plaint ?
OPP."
In support of this issue counsel for the appellant once again argued that the plaintiff's representation against the adverse remark for the year 1978-79 is still pending although almost a period of seven years elapsed and so such an adverse entry could not be taken into consideration while considering his case for promotion.
To support his submissions reliance was placed upon the decision of Madhya Pradesh High Court in Dalip Kumar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1984(1) SLR 59 and Madan Kumar Gautam, Ujjain v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1986(3) SLR 505.
The lower appellate Court examined this aspect of the matter, found substance in the pleas advanced by the appellant and so accepted the same, thus decreeing his suit.
6.
Before me, the learned counsel for the appellant has once again pressed almost identical pleas which did not find favour with the Court below.
All the same counsel insisted that in view of adverse report for the year 1978-79 the plaintiff's claim for promotion was rightly declined.
According to the counsel in a case where a person has been adjudged as integrity doubtful such an entry debars him from any further promotion unless the same has been set aside or varied by a higher authority.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand argued that the alleged adverse entry pertains to the year 1978-79 against which the respondent submitted a written representation which till today has not been decided by the concerned authorities i.e. for the last almost 16 years.
Relying upon the decisions of the Madhya Pradesh, reference to which has been made by the lower appellate Court, counsel further took support from the decision of the apex Court in Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1979 SC 1622.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties, as well as perused the judgments of the Courts below.
The bone of contention is the adverse report for the year 1978-79 wherein the respondent has been adjudged to be below average and of doubtful integrity and precisely for the reason his claim for promotion was declined by the concerned authorities.
Feeling aggrieved by the annual confidential report for the year 1978-79 the respondent submitted a representation sometime in the year 1980.
Concededly, the representation has not been decided by the authorities till today.
Counsel for the appellant has not been able to bring to my notice any instructions of the Government or any Rule justifying the pendency of the representation for such a long time.
In Madan Kumar Gautam's case (supra) the Court thought the three months' period to be sufficient to decide the representation.
In the present case, in fact no explanation is forthcoming for this long silence and so I have no hesitation in holding that the Court below rightly chose to ignore the same and hence declare the order dated 13.11.1979 to be illegal and void.
The apex Court in Gurdial Singh Fijji's case (supra) held as under :-  "The principle is well-settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for one reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to support the non- issuance of the integrity certificate to the appellant.
The chain of reaction began with the adverse report and the infirmity in the link of causation is that no one has yet decided whether that report was justified.
We cannot speculate, in the absence of a proper pleading, whether the appellant was not found suitable otherwise, that is to say, for reasons other than those connected with the non-issuance of an integrity certificate to him."
Following the decision of the apex Court the Division Bench in Amrik Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 617 (P&H) : 1995(2) SLR 769 has further held that as per the Government instructions it enjoins upon the officer making adverse remarks regarding integrity to give reasons as to why he suspects the integrity of the reportee to be doubtful.
In the present case, no reason has been assigned whatsoever.
Thus, finding no merit in the appeal the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.