T.S.Doabia, J - It is not in dispute that the petitioner has completed his course of study in the course of certificate of physical education.
The duration of this course was two years.
The result of this is sought to be cancelled on the ground that the petitioner is not a resident in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
It is on this ground alone the candidature of the petitioner is being cancelled and his result is not being declared.
2.
This matter is directly covered by a decision of this Court in writ petition No. 624 of 1993.
While dealing with similar matter, the following observations were made :  "As against the petitioner, there is no allegation that he acted unfairly or had filed the forged certificate.
The petitioner had submitted the certificate as granted to him by the Tahsildar, Ratlam.
He had not suppressed any information.
The petitioner was verified to be the resident of Madhya Pradesh since 1988 and the respondent No. 2 had admitted him in the institution.
The petitioner is not alleged to have played any fraud or committed any forgery."
With above oberservation writ petition referred to above was allowed.
3.
Apart from the aforementioned decision of this Court, there are number of decisions of the Supreme Court of India wherein, it has been laid down that if a candidate completes his study and even if there is some lacuna is the basic qualifications which enabled him to join the course then the extreme step of cancelling examination should not be resorted to.
In Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karanataka University and another, AIR 1986 SC 1448, admission was sought on the basis of qualifications which qualifications were not sufficient for grant of admission.
This lapse was condoned after making the following observations :  "The fault lies with the Engineering Colleges which admitted the appellants because the Principals of these Engineering Colleges must have known that the appellants were not eligible for admission and yet for the sake of capitation fee in some of the cases they granted admission to the appellants.
We do not see why the appellants should suffer for the sins of the managements of these Engineering Colleges."
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a decision given in Kumari Madhuri Patil and v. Addi.
Commissioner, Tribal Development, 1995(1) SCT 261(SC) : 1994(6) Supreme Court Cases 241.
In this case, a scheduled tribe certificate was obtained fraudulently.
The candidate however completed her study.
The petitioner was not deprived of the certificate which the petitioner was to get on account of her having undergone course of study .
Benifit which has already accrued, was not taken away.
The lapse was condoned.
The relevant observations made by the Supreme Court are as under :-  "The delay in the process is inevitable but that factor should neither be considered to be relevant nor be an aid to complete the course of study.
But for the fact that she has completed the entire course except to appear for the final examination, we would have directed to debar her from prosecuting the studies and appearing in the examination.
In this factual situation on useful purpose would be served to debar her from appearing for the examination of final year MBBS.
Therefore, we uphold the cancellation of the social status as Mahadeo Koli fraudulently obtained by Km.
Suchita Laxman Patil, but she be allowed to appear for the final year examination of MBBS course.
She will not, however, be entitled in future for any benefits on the basis of the fraudulent social status as Mahadeo Koli.
However, this direction should not be treated and used as a precedent in future cases to give any similar directions since the same defeats constitutional goals.
5.
Similar opinion has been expressed by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Principal Cambridge School v. Payal Gupta (Ms.) and 1995(4) SCT 594(SC) : 1995 Supreme Court Cases 512.
6.
Again in Director of Tribal Welfares, Government of AP v. Laveti Giri and and another, 1995(3) SCT 118 (SC) : (1995) 4 Supreme Court Cases 32, the candidate had undergone course of study.
Benefits were not taken away.
Again the benefit which the candidate had acquired by undergoing the course of study was not taken away.
In the case of Director of Tribal Welfare.
v. Laveti Giriand and another 1995(3) SCT 118(SC) : (1995)4 SCC 32, in para 9 it was observed as under :-  "By orders of the High Court the respondent had already completed his engineering course, though he played fraud on the Constitution depriving the real tribal of the benefits of the education as an engineer.
He was minor at the relevant time.
So nothing can be done except declaring that he is not a tribal and that he is not entitled to any employment or any other advantage on the basis of his false status as Scheduled Tribe, namely, Kondakapu."
7.
The position in the present case is similar.
Following the ratio of the decision in writ petition No. 624 of 1993 and the aforementioned decisions of the Supreme Court of India, this petition is allowed.
The petitioner has completed his course of study.
No useful purpose would be served by depriving of the certificate or the degree which the petitioner would get on the declaration of result.
A direction is given to the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner forthwith and to issue the requisite certificate in case, the petitioner has passed the examination.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.