Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, Major Mohan Singh Rayta, who was posted to 795 ACS Bn.
(Air Maintenance Unit) had refused to accept 2000 kgs.
of onions for the reason that the offered onions did not conform to the laid down ASC specification No. 141.
Thereafter, the Head Quarter 'N' Area convened a Court of Inquiry vide convening order No. 3001/28/Q dated June 23, 1990.
However, the Court of Inquiry was superseded being without jurisdiction and another one was ordered by Headquarter, 21 Sub Area, Pathankot, vide convening order No. 5017/45/Q (Supply) dated 971990.
The new Court of Inquiry assembled on 16.7.1990 in pursuance of order dated 971990 and the investigation commenced w.e.f.
17.7.1990.
After the conclusion of Court of Inquiry, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief Northern Command (hereafter referred to 'GOC-in-C') issued a notice on 2341991 to the petitioner calling upon him to show cause as to why 'Severe Displeasure (Recordable), (hereinafter referred to as 'Censure') be not awarded to him, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted reply to the show cause notice, copy Ann.
P-2 to the writ petition.
Finding the reply unsatisfactory, the GOC-in-C awarded Censure to the petitioner vide order dated September 2, 1991, copy of which is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The said Censure was awarded to the petitioner for certain lapses committed by him and was operative for a period of three years and the same was to be taken into consideration while considering him for promotion.
The petitioner has filed the present petition seeking quashing the order of Censure dated September 2, 1991, copy Annexure P-3 to the writ petition, on four counts :  (i) that the alleged incident had occurred at Chandigarh and as such the Court of Inquiry should have been initiated at Chandigarh and not by the GOC-in-C, Northern Command;  (ii) That the petitioner had submitted a representation, which was not accepted by the President of Court of Inquiry.
As such, principle of natural justice was violated; (iii) That the Censure (recordable) is not a punishment and as such the petitioner has a right for promotion to the post of Lt. Col.; and  (iv) That the order of Censure should have been passed by a speaking order.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that the petitioner has filed a statutory complaint dated 18121991, copy of which is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition but the same was rejected in a mechanical manner by passing a stereo type order.
Learned counsel has also urged that during a period of three years, in which the Censure was to remain on record, the petitioner's batch (1975 batch) came up for consideration for promotion to the rank of Acting Lt. Col. by selection.
The selection board met from 381993 to 1381993 but after perusing the service record of the petitioner, particularly the Censure and adverse remarks in the ACR for the year 1990, the Board found him to be not in acceptable grade for promotion.
In this manner, a great injustice has been caused to the petitioner.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued, respondents have put in appearance and filed detailed written statement controverting the pleas of the petitioner.
4.
We have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
5.
After having considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties, we hardly find any merit in the submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner.
6.
Now reverting to the facts, it is admitted case of the parties that the petitioner was posted with 795 ASC Battalion (AIR Maintenance Unit) located at Chandigarh, from 2421989 to 2661991.
The Unit was under the technical and operational control of Headquarter of Northern Command.
The mere location of Unit at Chandigarh would not confer any jurisdiction on the Western Command to take cognizance of any lapses on the part of any official/individual of the Northern Command located at Chandigarh.
The task of Air Maintenance Unit was to check, inspect and collect items of fresh rations from 342 Company Army Service Corps located at Chandigarh and to deliver the same to the forward troops located in high altitude area through the Indian Air Force by dropping.
Though the Unit was located at Chandigarh, the disciplinary authority of the petitioner remained the same, i.e. Northern Command.
The Court of Inquiry proceedings were ordered by HQ 21 Sub Area (Pathankot) and the Court of Inquiry assembled at Pathankot for investigation.
The HQ 21 Sub Area (Pathankot) is under Northern Command which is the disciplinary authority of the petitioner.
It was on the conclusion of Court of Inquiry that GOC-in-C Northern Command issued a notice on 2341991 to the petitioner calling upon him to show cause as to why Severe Displeasure (Recordable) of the GOC-in-C be not awarded to him, to which the petitioner had also submitted reply which was not found satisfactory.
As such, the order was passed within the territorial jurisdiction of GOC-in-C.  7.
The next plea of the petitioner that the Court of Inquiry had violated the principle of natural justice by not accepting the representation of the petitioner is also without any substance.
8.
From the communication of the Presiding Officer, Annexure P-9 to the writ petition, it is apparent that the representation submitted by the petitioner was returned to him with the observation that the same can be submitted at the time of making statement.
According to Army Rule 180, the delinquent person is entitled to make a statement or to give any evidence before the Court and according to Army Rule 179(iv), the Court can put any question to such persons for testing the truth or accuracy of the evidence.
The petitioner was not able to make statement.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that he was not afforded any opportunity to file objection.
As such, there is no violation of principle of natural justice.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued with vehemence that the Censure is not a punishment and the petitioner cannot be ignored for promotion.
10.
The Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Brig.
JS Sivla, CA No. 1321 of 1995, has held that the Army authorities have the jurisdiction to award Censure either in the form of displeasure or severe displeasure.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. KS Grewal, who himself is a retired Colonel, while meeting out the submissions of Mr. Pipat, has fairly conceded that as per Army Rule Custom Censure (Recordable) is punishment.
12.
The case of the petitioner for promotion was reviewed at three stages.
In first and second, he could not make grade and the result of third has not been declared.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show any rule or regulation by which it was incumbent upon the respondents to have passed speaking order on the complaint filed by the petitioner.
For the reasons stated above, writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
However, it is directed that the result of the third review of the petitioner be declared, if not declared earlier.