Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases are aggrieved by the order dated July 8, 1994 by which respondent No. 2 was promoted as a Senior Manager.
They pray that this order be quashed and a writ of mandamus be issued to the first respondent to consider their claim for promotion to the post of Area Manager/Senior Manager.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners and respondent No. 2 were working as Managers in the Respondent-Bank.
Admittedly, the petitioners were at Sr. Nos. 11 and 12 in the seniority list while respondent No. 2 was at No. 13.
In the year 1986, the bank took a decision to create 8 posts of Area/Senior Managers.
It decided that all the posts shall be filledup by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The criteria for promotion was also laid down.
It was provided that the promotion shall be ordered on the basis of the performance, length of service, educational qualifications and interview.
On January 1, 1987, the Bank interviewed 24 candidates including the two petitioners and the second respondent.
All the three were rejected.
The second respondent filed Civil Writ Petition No. 6004 of 1989.
This writ petition came up for hearing alongwith a bunch of other petitions including Civil Writ Petition No. 3459 of 1988.
The learned Judge while following the view taken by the Karnataka, Kerala and Calcutta High Courts, held that the criterion adopted by the Respondent-Bank in making selection was not valid.
According to the learned Judge, the fitness of each candidate had to be individually considered and the inter se merit had not to be compared.
This was so on account of the fact that the promotion had to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and not merit-cum-seniority.
As a result, all the writ petitions including Civil Writ Petition No. 6004 of 1989 filed by respondent No. 2 were allowed.
The Bank was directed to consider the claims of the petitioners "with effect from the date their juniors were promoted".
In pursuance to this direction, respondent No. 1 passed the order dated July 8, 1994 by which respondent No. 2 was promoted.
This was, however, subject to the final decision in the Letters Patent Appeal that had been filed by the Bank.
3.
The sole grievance made by the petitioners is that the action of the Bank in ignoring them for promotion is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
A written statement has been filed only by respondent No. 1.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner has concealed material facts inasmuch as he has not disclosed the orders of punishment/warning etc. that had been duly conveyed to him.
It has also been pleaded that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
According to the respondent, the petitioner cannot claim promotion with effect from the year 1987 by filing a petition in the year 1994.
The respondent maintains that on these grounds alone, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
On merits of the controversy, detailed facts to justify the criterion adopted by the Bank have been given.
However, it has not been suggested even remotely that the petitioner's claim was considered before the respondent passed the order dated July 8, 1994.
In view of the pleas raised in the written statement, the respondent prays that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 11166 of 1994, a detailed replication had been filed.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner has not concealed any material facts.
As for the objection of delay, it has been pointed out that respondent No. 2 having been promoted vide order dated July 8, 1994, and other junior persons having been promoted even thereafter, the petitioner's claim could not be defeated on the ground of delay.
The petitioner also avers that he had a right to be considered for promotion before any one junior to him could be promoted.
6.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
The solitary contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that the action of the respondents in not considering the claim of the petitioners at the time of the promotion of respondent No. 2 is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Consequently, the order dated July 8, 1994 is illegal and deserves to be quashed.
This claim has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondent, on the ground that the petition suffers from delay and laches.
8.
The two questions arise for consideration are :  (i) Is the action of the respondents violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
(ii) Is the petition liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay alone ?
Reg :(i)  9.
Mr. SS Nijjar, learned counsel for the Respondent-Bank has very fairly conceded that the claim of the petitioners was not considered when the Bank promoted respondent No. 2 vide order dated July 8, 1994.
He, however, submits that the Bank was only considering that claim of respondent No. 2 in pursuance to the directions issued by this Court.
It was not required to consider the claim of any one else.
10.
Article 14 guarantees equality of opportunity.
Article 16 entitles all citizens to an equality of opportunity in the matter of employment under the State.
These provisions contain a mandate to the State and its instrumentalities.
It is the duty of the State to ensure that each citizen is treated equally in the matter of appointment to various posts.
It is undoubtedly correct that respondent No. 2 had approached this Court with a grievance that the Bank had wrongly ignored him for promotion by adopting a criteria which was not legally tenable.
This claim was sustained.
The criterion adopted by the Bank was held to be illegal.
A direction for consideration of the petitioner's claim was issued to the Bank.
However, it did not mean that while considering the claim of the second respondent in pursuance to the directions of this Court, the claims of other eligible persons who were senior to the said respondent had not to be considered.
The consideration had to be in accordance with law.
Every person senior to the second respondent had a right to be considered.
It was never said by this Court that the claims of the seniors shall not be considered.
Equally, it was the duty of the Bank to ensure that there was no denial of equality of opportunity.
The mandate of Articles 14 and 16 being clear, it could not be deviated from on the pretext that the Bank was merely carrying out the directions of this Court.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondent-Bank having admitted that the claim of the petitioners was not considered in spite of the fact that they were senior to the second respondent and were otherwise eligible, it has to be held that there was violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
12.
The first question is, consequently, answered in the affirmative and it is held that order dated July 8, 1994 is violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Reg : (ii)  13.
It is the admitted position that one Mr. RB Kanodia, who was placed at No. 17 in the seniority list, was promoted as an Area Manager in the year 1987.
The second respondent had challenged his promotion by filing an appeal before the Board of Directors.
This appeal having been rejected in December 1988, he had approached this Court through CWP No. 6004 of 1989.
It was in pursuance to the directions of this Court that the Bank had passed the order dated July 8, 1994 and ordered the promotion of the second respondent with effect from the year 1987.
On these facts, learned counsel for the respondents contend that the petition is highly belated and deserves to be dismissed.
14.
On behalf of the petitioners, it is submitted that the cause of action had accrued only on July 8, 1994 when a person junior to them was promoted.
Furthermore, it has been pointed but that even earlier, representations had been filed by the petitioners in the year 1988 against the promotion of a junior person.
No decision on that representations had been conveyed.
15.
Whatever be the position regarding the promotion of Mr. Kanodia, the grievance as made out in the present petition is only against the order dated July 8, 1994 by which respondent No. 2 had been promoted.
Admittedly, the first petition against this order had been filed on July 25, 1994.
This was within less than a month.
Even the second petition had been filed on August 17, 1994.
Even if it is assumed, as alleged by the respondent-Bank, that the petitioners had not filed any representation in the year 1988, it cannot be said that there is any delay whatsoever in so far as the present petitions are concerned.
The sole grievance made by the petitioners in these two cases is against the order dated July 8, 1994.
The writ petitions have been filed without any avoidable delay.
The cause of action so far as the present petitions are concerned, had accrued only on July 8, 1994.
Whenever a junior person is promoted without the consideration of the claim of a senior, a fresh cause of action arises.
Merely because the petitioners had not challenged the order of promotion of Mr. Kanodia, cannot mean that they are estopped from challenging even the subsequent orders by which their juniors may be promoted.
16.
Learned counsel for the respondent have referred to the decisions of the Full Bench of this Court in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Sehgal, AIR 1990 P&H 117 and of the Supreme Court in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53.
17.
In Sadasivaswamy's case, their Lordships were pleased to hold that an order of promotion should be challenged within a period of six months.
The petitioners have complied with the rule as enunciated in this case.
They have approached this Court within less than two months of the passing of the order.
Consequently, the learned counsel can derive no advantage from these decisions.
18.
Accordingly, the second question is answered in the negative and it is held that petitions are not liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay.
19.
In view of the above, both the petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claims of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Senior Manager/Area Manager w.e.f.
the date respondent No. 2 was promoted.
The petitioners shall be entitled to the consequential reliefs that may ensue from their promotion.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
As a result, Civil Misc.
Application filed by respondent No. 2 for vacation of the interim stay order which had been passed on September 22, 1995 has become infructuous and is accordingly, disposed of.
Order accordingly.