JK Mathur, J - The petitioner applied for the post of an Extra-departmental Branch Post-master at Radhaballavpur in the District of Hooghly and asserts that he was the best qualified candidate but was not appointed.
Instead one Ashok Kumar Sinha, the added Respondent, was appointed.
He asked for a writ or direction in the nature of mandamus requiring the Respondents to appoint him.
2.
The petition was contested by Union of India and its offices, against whom the petition was filed and by the added respondent, who have filed affidavits-in-opposition.
3.
The Hon'ble Judge before whom the petition came up on 18.1.95 noticed that prima facie this Court had no jurisdiction in the matter and vacated the interim order.
The parties were, therefore, heard about the matter.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner firstly urged that no objection had been raised by the respondents and so this question need not be gone into.
It was also urged that in similar matter the Court has been entertaining petitions and so this Court may not refuse one.
5.
If a Court lacks inherent jurisdiction, merely not objecting to the jurisdiction will confer the jurisdiction, and validate the proceedings and consequential order.
Every Court has jurisdiction to determine whether it has jurisdiction in a matter.
In view of these the question of jurisdiction may not be left undetermined only because it has not been explicitly raised by the respondents in affidavits-in-opposition.
This Court has also to ensure that it acts within the ordained parameters and does not transgress its jurisdiction and pass orders which are still-born and ineffective because of this Court lacking jurisdiction to pass them.
Therefore mere non-raising of the plea cannot bar consideration of this question.
6.
Section 14 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, inter alia, provides that jurisdiction shall be exercised by the Central Administrative Tribunal in matters relating to recruitment to any Civil Post under the Union.
7.
Section 28 goes on to place an embargo on exercise of jurisdiction in this regard by any Court other than the Supreme Court and the Court constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act or any of corresponding law.
8.
These provisions would show that this Court cannot exercise jurisdiction in matters of recruitment to a civil post under the Union.
9.
In the present case the disputed recruitment was for a Civil Post not being one connected with defence or in the defence service.
10.
The post is under the Department of Posts and Telegraphs, a department of the Union Government.
11.
It is therefore a matter expressly barred from the jurisdiction of this Court.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner however urged that jurisdiction has been exercised by the Court in matters relating to certain forces.
Section 2 of the aforesaid Act excepts Armed Forces of the Union from its application.
These matters were thus not covered by this Act and therefore not barred.
13.
Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in Shri Shankar Bannerjee v. National Institute of Homeopathy, 1994(2) Calcutta Law Journal 414, to urge that such matters can be decided by this Court.
14.
In this case the petitioner was an employee of the Union, in Geological Survey of India, but was sent on deputation to National Institute of Homeopathy, an autonomous body.
In this case the only relief pressed was to require the said Institute to inform his parent department about the questioning of departmental proceedings.
This question related to the service of the petitioner with the Institute and not with the Union and so the bar placed by the Administrative Tribunals Act was no attracted.
15.
In the present case the reliefs are sought against the Union and its officers only.
The aforesaid case is therefore clearly distinguishable and does not help the petitioner.
Considering these submissions, I find that the present petition deals with recruitment to a Civil Post under the Union, in respect of which the jurisdiction of this Court is barred.
16.
The petition therefore is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed on this score alone.
17.
The petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.