Jayasimha Babu, J - The petitioner, who was an employee of the second respondent Pallavan Transport Corporation, has filed the writ petition in December, 1991, challenging the order of the second respondent dated 17101986, by which he was informed that he was retired from service on 3061987, as also a letter from the second respondent dated 2881990 by which his request for reinstating him in service on the ground that his age has been wrongly noted in the Service Register was rejected by the second respondent.
2.
The principal contention of the petitioner is that the service record contains an entry in the column 'date of birth' as 561937, which has been scored off and below which the date 1.7.1929 is entered and, therefore, this amounts to alteration of the date of birth by the employer to the prejudice of the employee, and that such alteration has been effected without notice to the employee, thereby rendering the alteration illegal.
3.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner had joined the service under the Deputy Director of Transport on 22.8.1956 and on the formation of the second respondent Corporation, he became an employee of the second respondent with effect from 151975.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioner had been promoted as Foreman in the year 1983.
He was holding that post at the time he was retired from service with effect from 3061987.
The petitioner also does not dispute the fact that the pay slip, which has been issued to him, contained his date of birth as 1.7.1929.
It is also not in dispute that the date of birth of the petitioner as entered in the seniority list is 1.7.1929.
The petitioner was served with this memo on 17101986 and immediately after its receipt, he addressed a letter to the employer on 24101986 in which he requested that his service book may be furnished to him to enable him to verify the date of birth entered in the service Register, and in the letter no mention was made to the alleged error in the date of birth as recorded by the employer.
He did not, in that letter, dispute the date which was notified to him as the date of his retirement.
4.
The petitioner started making representations regarding the alleged error in the date of birth noted in the register only on his letter dated 8121986 and for the first time, it is claimed therein that his date of birth is 561937.
He made further representations all of which were rejected by the employer.
The petitioner waited till December, 1991 to file this petition.
The explanation given is that he had made numerous representations, the last of which was rejected by the employer on 2881990.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made a submission which on the face of it is plausible, but which, after considering the factual background and after looking into the original records placed before the Court by the employer, cannot be accepted.
Learned counsel is right in his submission that the date of birth of the employee once entered in the service register should not be altered to the prejudice of the employee, without notice to the affected employee.
Learned counsel relied on decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269, and in Sarjoo Prasad v. General Manager, AIR 1981 SC 1481, in support of his submission.
Learned counsel also referred to a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in support of the same proposition, in The General Manager (Personal Branch) Southern Railway, Madras v. SM Muhammed Yukub, AIR 1959 Madras 88, as also a decision of the Division Bench of the Orissa High Court in K. Venkataramana v. Union of India, etc., 1974 All India Service Law Journal 299.
6.
Learned counsel rightly did not dispute the proposition that an employee at the fag end of the service cannot seek alteration of the date of birth unless the rules governing the service permit such application being made, what was forcefully pleaded before the Court was that correction in the service register should be effected only after an enquiry is held after due notice to the affected employee, if the correction in the service register relates to the date of birth and the corrected date is one which is anterior to the date originally entered.
While the submission so made may be accepted as a general proposition, nevertheless, the same has been applied with reference to the facts and circumstances of a given case and cannot be applied in vacuum.
7.
The decisions relied on by the learned counsel in support of the submissions were all cases where there was no dispute that the correction had been made several years after the original entry was made and it was also not in dispute in those cases that before a new entry was substituted in the place of the original entry, the affected employee had not been served due notice.
8.
The present case however is not one of that nature.
The respondents have placed before the Court the original service book which was maintained by the Government Transport Department, which shows that the petitioner had entered the services in the year 1956.
In that service book, the date of birth of the petitioner at page 1 is entered as 1.7.1929.
Above that entry, the figures 561937 had been written and has been scored off and initialled.
On the next page in Column No. 6 which is captioned as 'date of birth' by Christian Era, the entry is 1.7.1929 and that date is also written in words in brackets below the figures and has been initialled.
In column 13 of the next page, the petitioner had signed his name in full in English.
In the service Registers maintained by the second respondent Corporation after the year 1975 which have been marked by it as Volumes 2 and 3, the same date of birth 1.7.29 has been entered throughout.
In the seniority list maintained by the Corporation which was also placed before the Court, the same date of birth is entered in respect of the petitioner.
The petitioner has, in his affidavit, himself admitted the fact that in the seniority list as also in the pay slips issued to him, the date of birth was entered.
A specimen of the pay slip was also placed before the Court which shows that the date of birth of the employee as also the date of joining the service are entered in the pay slip.
9.
The materials so placed before the Court below indicate that the petitioner was aware of the entry in the service book regarding his date of birth as 1.7.1929 and that entry was made at the time of this recruitment.
The figures 561937 once written on page 1 had been scored out and the date 1.7.1929 was written at or about the time of the petitioner joining the service of the State Transport Authority.
At page 2 of book, it contains only the date 1.7.1929 and there is no mention of any other date, as date of birth of the petitioner.
10.
The fact that the petitioner had knowledge of the date of birth having been entered in the employer's record is evident from the fact that this entry which was periodically made known to the employee in the pay slip and he was also aware of it on account of the entry of that date having been entered in the seniority list as well.
11.
It is therefore difficult to accept the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was illiterate, was not academically qualified and, therefore, could not apprehend what was set out in the pay slip or other documents and had no occasion to see the corrections of the alleged erroneous entry.
12.
It was suggested by the learned counsel that an enquiry is essential to find out whether the correction at page 1 of the service book was made contemporaneously or at a subsequent point of time.
This submission would have had some force if there was any independent material which would prima facie establish that the petitioner's date of birth is in fact that date that was scored out into record.
No such material is placed before court.
The assertion of the petitioner that the date birth of his elder brother is later in point of time cannot by itself constitute a basis to doubt the correctness in the entry in the service Register.
So also the fact that the petitioner obtained passport in the year 1978 in which a different date is same as his date of birth, long after the joining the service of the respondents and was fully aware of the date of birth entered in the record as 1.7.1929 also cannot constitute any basis for doubting the correctness of the entry in the service Register.
13.
Learned counsel for the respondents rightly referred to the Standing Orders of the Second respondent.
Standing Order 32 which requires the employees of the second respondent who are already in service, to apply within a period of six months from the date of coming into force of the Standing Order viz, 27th June, 1978 to see correction in the date of birth if there was any error in that entry.
The petitioner admittedly did not make any such application within the time so provided and in fact he did not apply till after the date on which he was to retire was notified.
Even after such intimation, his immediate response was not that he was not due for retirement but only that the retirement benefits have to be settled earlier.
In fact, the petitioner has received all his retirement benefits on 3061987 as is evident from the second respondent's letter dated 3121987, a copy which has been produced by the petitioner.
14.
The importance of applying in time for having any erroneous entry regarding the date of birth in the employer's records rectified has been stressed by the Supreme Court in more than one decision.
Learned counsel for the respondent referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Harnam Singh, (1993) 82 FJR 301 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
120, wherein the Supreme Court ruled out that any application by employee for correction of date of birth must be made without unreasonable delay even if no period of limitation is prescribed.
The Supreme Court further pointed out that application made just before superannuation did not merit consideration.
The same principle was reiterated by the Supreme Court in State of Tamil Nadu v. TV Venugoplan, 1994(4) SCT 375 (SC) : 1994(6) SCC 302.
Also to the same effect, is the decision in State of Orissa v. Brahamarbar Senapathi, 1994(2) MLJ 735 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
651.
15.
The petitioner was clearly aware that his date of birth as entered in the employer's record was 1.7.1929 and the fact that he had such knowledge is evident from the entry in the service book and it is also admitted fact that the date of birth was shown in the pay slips and the seniority list.
No protest was made by the petitioner till after the intimation of the date of retirement and even then, not immediately, but much later.
If the petitioner really was right in his claim, he had an opportunity to establish such a claim when the standing orders were notified in the year 1978 and all workmen were permitted to seek correction of their date of birth as entered in the employer's record provided, such an application was made within a period of six months.
Admittedly, no such application was made.
As laid down by the Supreme Court, applications for corrections of the date of birth or protest regarding the date entered in the employer's record at the fag end of the service do not carry much credibility and ought not to be entertained.
The petitioner appears to have based his case in the present petition solely on the fact that in page 1 of the service book, the date that had been entered has been scored out and below which the date 1.7.1929 is entered.
But that should be read along with what is entered in the very following page and the periodical information given to the petitioner regarding the date.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that at page 2 the instructions are that the entries in the page should be periodically attested and such attestation has not been done.
In view of that instruction, he states that the entry made in Column 6 which has not been attested at the interval of five years cannot be relied upon.
The purpose for which such instructions have been set out, is not at all clear as none of the entries therein by themselves require periodical reviewing.
The entry made is regarding the name, place of birth, parents name, date of birth and identification marks.
None of these are things which will change, only the residence may change from time to time.
The mere fact that this entry was not attested at five years intervals does not affect the genuineness of the entries already made.
16.
Learned counsel for the respondents further submitted that the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches as the petition was filed four years after the employee's retirement and five years after intimation about the date with effect from which he would retire.
There is substance in the submission.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in this context relied on a judgment of this Court in Shawallace & Co Ltd v. State of Tamil Nadu rep. by the Commissioner and Secretary, Labour Department and others, 1987(1) LLJ 177 wherein this court held in para 38 of that judgment that repeated representations made to the authority for reconsidering the matter would not constitute sufficient reason for delay in approaching this Court.
This petition clearly suffers from laches.
This petition is therefore liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches as well as on merits.
17.
The petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to any relief in the petition and the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.