CM Nayar, J -- The present Appeal arises out of the judgment dated 20th October, 1984 of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Delhi.
The learned Judge allowed the appeal of the respondent and set aside the judgment and decree dated 3rd October, 1983, passed by Sub Judge 1st Class, Delhi.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that the appellant was appointed to the post of Superintendent of the respondent Corporation vide order dated 4th May, 1978.
He was put on probation and it was specified in the letter of appointment that the services of the appellant will be governed by Central Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Regulations, as in force from time to time.
The relevant provisions of regulations, which are necessary for the purpose of decision of the appeal are Regulations 7 and 10.
Regulation deals with probation and Regulation 10 deals with termination of service and the same may be reproduced as follows :  "7.
PROBATION (i) Every employee shall, on appointment to any post, be on probation in that post for a period of one year commencing from the date of appointment : Provided that such period may be further extended for a period not exceeding one year in all at the discretion of the appointing authority : Provided further that any continuous service rendered by an employee immediately before being placed on probation in a post may be counted towards the probationary period.
(ii) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to the post of Managing Director or persons employed on deputation from the Central Government or any State Government or an Institution.
10.
TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY THE CORPORATION (1) The Corporation may, at any time and without assigning any reasons, terminate the services of any temporary employee after giving one month's notice or one month's pay in lieu thereof.
(2) The Corporation may terminate the services of any regular employee after giving three months notice or three months pay in lieu thereof.
(3) The Corporation may terminate the services of an employee other than the Managing Director by giving notice for a period less than that specified in sub-regulations (1) and (2) : Provided that the Corporation shall give to an employee whose services are so terminated, pay for the period by which the notice actually given falls short of the specified period.
(4) The power to terminate the services of employees under sub- regulation (1) or sub-regulation (2) shall be exercised by the respective appointing authorities.
(5) Nothing contained in this regulation shall effect the right of the Appointing Authority to retire, remove or dismiss an employee without giving notice or pay in lieu of notice in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V" 3.
The appellant, as stated, was appointed on probation on 4th May, 1978.
He was to work on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment which was extendable for a period for a period not exceeding one year, as provided in Regulation 7.
The appellant was put on probation for a period in one year w.e.f.
June 24, 1978, when he joined the service.
It was averred in the plaint that there was a theft in the warehouse at Dasna.
It was further alleged that the appellant himself lodged the necessary F.I.R. under intimation to the Department.
The case was closed for lack of evidence.
It was reported by the Regional Manager that the appellant was involved in this theft of 47 bags of wheat and the Superintendent of Police also stated in his report that the appellant was responsible for this loss.
The respondent extended the period of probation by order dated 15th March, 1980.
This order is reproduced as under.
"CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION (A GOVT. OF INDIA UNDERTAKING) 'DEEPALI' 92, Nehru Place, New Delhi-110019 No.CWC/1-4874/Estt.
Dated March 5, 1980 MEMORANDUM The undersigned is directed to inform Shri Mahendra Singh, Superintendent, Central Warehouse, Dasna as his performance has not been found satisfactory, his probation period is extended by one year ie upto 23680.
He is advised to show improvement in his work and conduct.
Sd/- (DN Sagar) Deputy Manager (Personnel) To Shri Mahendra Singh, Superintendent, Central Warehouse, Dasna.
Copy to : The Regional Managers CWC, RO, Lucknow."
The appellant on the same date was also communicated adverse remarks in the special confidential report for the period ending June 23, 1979.
The impugned order of termination was passed on 19th June, 1980 and the same reads as follows : "No. CWC/1-4874/Estt.
dated 19th June, 1980 ORDER The services of Shri Mahendra Singh, Supdt.
Central Warehouse, Dasna are hereby terminated under Regulation 10(1) of the Central  Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Regulations 196 with immediate effect.
2.
He is being paid one month's pay in lieu of one month's notice.
Sd/- (AN Laller) For Managing Director 19.6.1980."
4.
The appellant felt aggrieved by the impugned order of termination and filed a suit in the court of Senior Sub Judge, Delhi for declaration that the order of termination dated 19th June, 1980 is illegal and ultra vires and prayed for relief of re-instatement with consequential benefits of salary etc.
The suit was contested by the respondents and written statement was filed.
It may be relevant to refer to the plea of the respondents, as contained in paragraphs 6, 9 and 11 of the written statement and the same read as follows :  "6.
Allegations of para 6 of the plaint, as stated there, are denied.
It is submitted that during the extended period of probation, it was reported by the Regional Manager that the Plaintiff was involved in one theft case of 47 bags at Dasna and the Superintendent of Police had also stated in his report that Shri Mahendra Singh was responsible for the theft of 47 bags of wheat.
But due to insufficient evidence, the case could not be filed against him in the Court.
He further recommended that the department may take necessary action against him.
All the allegations of this para being false and distortions of facts are emphatically denied.
9.
The allegations in paragraph 9 of the plaint are denied.
It is, however, not denied that the plaintiff's services were terminated by an order dated 19.6.1980.
It is submitted that the plaintiff being on probation, having been not found satisfactory for a highly responsible job, his services were terminated.
The termination order is perfectly legal and valid.
The plaintiff is unnecessarily, unjustifiably treating it as a wrongful dismissal just for the purpose of creating a cause of action.
11.
The contentions raised para 11 of the plaint are denied.
The order of termination of his services being without any stigma, is perfectly legal and valid.
By no stretch of imagination order of termination of his services can be called as an order of dismissal.
The plaintiff is himself unnecessary and unjustifiable giving a colour to an order of termination simpliciter by falsely describing it as an order of dismissal just for the purpose of making a case against the Corporation.
It is denied that the plaintiff had completed successfully the period of probation and that the plaintiff was the regular employee."
The suit was tried by the Court of Sub Judge 1st Class, Delhi and on pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the plaintiff was regular employee of the Defendants ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPP 2.
Whether the impugned order tantamounts to order of dismissal from service or it is termination of service simpliciter ?
Parties 3.
Whether the impugned order is null, illegal and ultra vires ?
OPP 4.
To what relief, the plaintiff is entitled ?
OPP.
5.
The Trial Judge disposed of issues 1 and 2 and held that the appellant was a regular employee of the respondents and the impugned order of termination tantamounts to the order of dismissal from service.
He has further held that there was nothing on record to suggest that the appellant was in any way responsible for the theft and his removal from service on this basis, without affording an opportunity of being heard, casts stigma and is against the principles of natural justice and is bad in law.
The suit was decreed and the impugned order of termination dated 19th June, 1980 was set aside and the respondents were directed to reinstate the appellant to the post of Superintendent with all consequential benefits.
The respondents felt aggrieved by this order and filed an appeal which was disposed of by the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Delhi by order dated 20101984.
The learned Judge set aside the order of the Trial Courtand dismissal the suit of the appellant.
He has reversed the findings of the Trial Court and held that the appellant cannot be said to be a regular employee of the respondents and he was merely an employee on probation.
The impugned order of termination does not cast any stigma on the appellant and it was not an order of dismissal but was an order of termination simpliciter.
The provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India were, accordingly, not attracted.
It is further held "that there is no evidence on the record to prove that the termination was based on the report of the police and the appellant himself has deposed that the termination came while the investigation of the police was still pending.
He has not deposed or produced any document to show that the police had returned a finding against him before the order of termination was passed."
The Court considered the law on the subject and rererred to the judgments of the Supreme Court in The State of Bihar v. Gopi Kishore Prasad, AIR 1960 SC 689; Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 2192; and Oil and Natural Gas Commission and others v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 1242.
6.
The appeal of the respondents was, accordingly, allowed and the judgment of the Trial Court was set aside.
The appellant felt aggrieved by the judgment of the Appellate Court and has filed the present second appeal in this Court for restoration of the order passed by the Trial Court on 3.10.1983.
The appeal was admitted by order dated 19.2.1985 and the following substantial questions of law were framed :  "1.
Whether under the relevant regulations the appellant would be deemed to have become a regular employee on the expiry of the probation period of one year from the date of his joining service ?
2.
Whether the right to extend the probation period can be exercised several months after the expiry of the original probation period ?
3.
Whether the termination of service of the appellant was by way of punishment and against principles of natural justice and was liable to be quashed ?
4.
Whether on the evidence on the record the appellant would be deemed to have been dismissed from service by the Managing Director ?
If not, its effect."
7.
The learned Counsel for the appellant has contended that the impugned order of the termination dated 19th June, 1980 was based on one incident of theft of which the appellant was accused.
The period of probation was subsequently extended by order dated 5th March, 1980 before the impugned order of termination was passed.
The adverse remarks were communicated to the appellant for the first time on 5th March, 1980 and then in July, 1980 when the services of the appellant had already been terminated.
In view of the background as stated, the learned counsel has contended that the order of termination is stigmatic in nature and the same cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
He has further referred me to paragraph 6 of the written statement which has already been cited in the earlier part of the judgment wherein it is conceded by the respondents that the termination was as a result of the charge of theft which was levelled against the appellant and the same was based on a police report.
He has argued that the police subsequently cleared the name of the appellant and, in any case, the termination of the appellant is punitive in character and the order could not be passed without affording an opportunity to the appellant to show cause.
The counsel has strongly relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court as reported in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 2192, Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 636 and Jarnail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1626 to reiterate the proposition that since the impugned order of termination, which has been inflicted on the appellant was on the basis of the charge of theft against him, the same is bad in law as no reasonable opportunity has been given to the appellant to defend and the order of discharge is violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
8.
The learned Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, has contended that the services of the appellant were not terminated on the basis that the appellant was involved in theft case and as that case could not proceed due to insufficient evidence he was proceeded against departmentally.
He has argued that the foundation of the impugned order of termination was the performance of the appellant, which was consistently bad.
In this situation it was open for the respondents to discharge the appellant from service and this does not, in any manner, cast stigma nor the action is punitive.
He has relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court as reported in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and others v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali, (supra); The Union of India and others v. PS Bhatt, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 957; Unit Trust of India and others v. T Bijaya Kumar and another, 1993(2) SCT 63(SC) : JT 1992(6) SC 82 and M Venugopal v. The Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnam, Andhra Pradesh, and another, JT 1994(1) SC 281 : 1994(1) SCT.
858.
These cases have been cited to reiterate and canvass the proposition that the termination simpliciter of probationer for unsatisfactory performance is not an order of punishment which will attract Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
There was no question of giving a hearing before the termination of service in this situation.
The services of the probationer can be terminated after making an overall assessment of his performance during the period of probation and no notice is required to be given before termination of such service.
9.
I may now deal with the first question as to whether the appellant can be treated as a regular employee of the respondents.
The statutory Regulations of the Corporation have been produced before me.
Regulation 7 deals with probation and it is stated in the proviso to Sub Section (1) that the probation period may be further extended for a period not exceeding one year in all at the discretion of the Appointing Authority.
The appellant was placed on probation in the first instance on June 24, 1978 when he joined his duty.
The subsequent extension was made on March 5, 1980, for a further period of one year.
The learned Additional Senior Sub Judge is quite correct to hold that the amendment which was made on November 20, 1974, giving powers to the Appointing Authority to extend period of probation was inadvertently not noticed by the Trial Judge and he only perused the incomplete regulation which did not provide for such extension.
The probation of the appellant was rightly held to be extendable by a further period of one year.
The appellant, therefore, could not be said to have been confirmed unless a specific order was passed to this effect.
In this connection reference may be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation, Raipur v. Ashok Kumar Misra, 1991(2) SCT 452(SC) : (1991) 3 Supreme Court Cases 325, which has clearly held that there cannot be any deemed confirmation after the expiry of the initial period of one year.
The Court was considering the provisions of Rule 8 of the MP Government Servants General Conditions of Service Rules, 1961, and the relevant portion of this Rule may be reproduced as under :  "8.
Probation--(1) A person appointed to a service or post by direct recruitment shall ordinarily be placed on probation for such period as may be prescribed.
(2) The Appointing Authority may, for sufficient reasons, extend the period of probation by a further period not exceeding one year.
Note :- A probationer whose period of probation is not extended under this sub-rule, but who has neither been confirmed nor discharged from service at the end of the period of probation shall be deemed to have been continued in service, subject to the condition of his service being terminable on the expiry of a notice of one calendar month given in writing by either side."
The findings of the Court are contained in paragraph 6 of the judgment.
The relevant portion can be reproduced as follows :  "Exercise of the power to extend the probation is hedged with the existence of the rule in that regard followed by positive act of either confirmation of the probation or discharge from service or reversion to the substantive post within a reasonable time after the expiry of the period of probation.
If the rules do not empower the Appointing Authority to extend the probation beyond the prescribed period, or where the rules are absent about confirmation or passing of the prescribed test for confirmation of probation then inaction for a very long time may lead to an indication of the satisfactory completion of probation.
But in this case Rule 8 expressly postulates otherwise.
The period of probation is subject to extension by order in writing for another period of one year.
Passing the prescribed examinations and successful completion of probation and to make an order of the confirmation are condition precedent.
Mere expiry of the initial period of probation does not automatically have the effect of deemed confirmation and the status of a deemed confirmation of the probation.
An express order in that regard only confers the status of an approved probationer.
We are of the view that note to sub-rule (2) read with sub-rule (6) of Rule 8 manifests the legislative intent that confirmation of the probation of the respondent would be made only on successful completion of the probation and the passing of the prescribed examinations.
It is not the respondent's case that he passed all the examinations.
He shall be deemed to be continued on probation.
Before confirmation the Appointing Authority is empowered to terminate the service of the probationer by issuing one calendar month's notice in writing and on expiry thereof the service stands terminated without any further notice......" The same proposition of law has been stated in the Judgments of the Supreme Court in Partap Singh v. Union of Territory of Chandigarh and another, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 57 and Dhanibhai Ramjibhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 603.
10.
There is, therefore, no infirmity in the findings of the Appellate Court that the appellant cannot be said to be regular employee of the respondent Corporation and he was an employee merely on probation.
The finding of the Trial Court in this regard was correctly reversed.
11.
The next question, which arises is as to whether the termination of the appellant was stigmatic in nature and was not an order of termination simpliciter.
I have carefully perused the judgments, which have been cited by learned Counsel for the parties.
12.
In Shamasher Singh v. State of Punjab and another (supra) the facts indicated that the Inquiry Officer was nominated by the Director of Vigilance and he recorded the statement of witnesses behind the back of the appellant, a member of the subordinate judicial service.
The enquiry was to ascertain the truth of allegations of misconduct.
Neither the report nor the statements recorded by the Enquiry Officer reached the appellant.
The High Court accepted the report of the Enquiry Officer and wrote to the Government that in the light of the report the appellant was not a fit person to be retained in service.
The order of termination on these facts was held to be clearly by way of punishment as the services of the appellant were terminated on the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer with which he was never confronted with.
The order of termination was held to be violative of Article 311 and was, accordingly, set aside.
13.
The Supreme Court in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another (supra) also laid down the proposition that the order of discharge may be non-committal, the cause for the order cannot be ignored.
In that case there was some incident and the appellant was considered to be one of the ring leaders and it was held that the discharge was based on the said incident.
In that context, the order of discharge was held to be punitive in character and the court reached the conclusion that the alleged act of misconduct was the cause of the order and that but for the incident it would not have been passed then it was inevitable that the order of discharge will fall to the ground as the appellant had not been afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend himself, as provided in Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The law as laid down in Jarnail Singh and others (supra) reiterates the same proposition.
14.
I may now advert to the facts of the present case.
The appellant was put on probation for a period of one year on June 24, 1978.
The said period expired on June 23, 1979.
The record has been produced before me and there is no doubt that one of the Regional Mangers had recommended that his probation be closed.
There was no report from the concerned officer of the Corporation for the period beginning from June 26, 1978 to March 31, 1979 as the appellant had worked under the said Regional Manager.
The said report was called for on August 28, 1979 and was submitted on December 6, 1979.
On consideration of the report the period of probation of the appellant was extended for a further period of one year by order dated March 5, 1980.
The appellant has also communicated certain adverse remarks on the same date.
The extended period of probation was to expire on June 23, 1980 and another report was called for to assess the appellant.
The respondents did not find any improvement in the performance of the appellant and, accordingly, his services were terminated vide clause 10(1) of the Regulations on June 19, 1980.
The record does not indicate that the impugned order of termination was passed by way of punishment.
There was an incident of theft in which the appellant has initially implicated and it is now stated that subsequently he was cleared.
The respondents have, however, stated that the said incident was not the foundation of the order of termination.
The respondents have contended in the written statement that the appellant was on probation and having been not found satisfactory for a highly responsible job, his services were terminated.
The finding that there was no evidence on the record to prove that the termination was based on report of the police does not suffer from any illegality which calls for interference in second appeal.
15.
The Unit Trust of India and others v. T Bijaya Kumar and another (supra) the Supreme Court held that where the facts are simple, namely, during the probation period the performance of the employee was watched and was not found to be satisfactory, despite he having been given an opportunity to show improvement and the Management was constrained to put an end to his service there was no occasion for the Court to interfere as the Authorities had acted within the framework of the rules and law.
In the subsequent judgment M Venugopal v. Divisional Manager (supra) the Court also reiterated the same proposition.
Paragraph 15 of this judgment reads as follows :  "Even under general law, the service of a probationer can be terminated after making overall assessment of his performance during the period of probation and no notice is required to be given before termination of such service.
This aspects has been examined by this Court in the case of The Governing Council of Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology, Bangalore v. Dr. Pandurang Gadwalkar, AIR 1993 SC 392, where it has been pointed out that if the performance of the employee concerned during the period of probation is not found to be satisfactory on overall assessment, then it is open to the competent authority to terminate his service."
16.
The Appellate Court has strongly relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court as reported in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and others v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali (supra).
In that case, the probationer was appointed in a temporary post and his short history of service showed that his work had never been satisfactory and he has not been found suitable for being retained in service.
The Authorities even started an enquiry against him which was subsequently dropped.
The order of termination was not held to be punitive in nature.
17.
In Union of India and others v. PS Bhatt (supra) the facts indicated that even if the conduct of the employee in indulging in loose talks and filthy and abusive language may be considered to be the motive or the inducing factor which influenced the authorities to pass the impugned order, that order cannot be said to be by way of punishment.
The proposition that the services of the probationer can be terminated in accordance with the rules as the very purpose of placing a person on probation it to try him during probation period and assess him suitably to a job in question has been reiterated in the above mentioned cases.
18.
The present second appeal has been filed to impugn the judgment of the Appellate Court.
The learned Judge has given his clear findings that the probation period was extended for want of satisfaction of the work of the appellant.
There are letters on the record showing that even in the confidential reports, the report about his work was not satisfactory.
I have also summoned the file of the respondents and perused the relevant documents including the confidential rolls.
There is no doubt that there was a police case relating to theft in which the appellant on re-appraisal was ultimately held to be not involved but an overall assessment as made by the respondent leaves no manner of doubt that the work of the appellant was found not satisfactory.
It will also not be open for this Court to re-assess the finding of fact and come to a contrary conclusion by re-apprasing the assessment made by the respondents in respect of the work and performance of the appellant.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the police case was the foundation of the order of termination.
The appeal as a consequence is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.