SN Sahay, J - This is a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution for issuing a writ of habeas corpus for the release of the petitioner as well as for a writ of certiorari to quash the orders contained in Annexures 2, 7 and 8.
2.
The petitioner was commissioned as a commissioned officer on December 11, 1962 in Food Inspection Organisation of Indian Amy.
He was promoted to the rank of Lt. Col. (Selection Grade) and was holding the appointment of Commanding Officer, CFL Lucknow Cantt.
The petitioner was born on April 1, 1939 and was due to retire on attaining the age of 55 years in the afternoon of March 31, 1994 in terms of Rule 16-A of the Army Rules, 1954.
He was also served with a letter dated April 16, 1993 (Annexure-1) issued by the Army headquarters informing him about the said fact.
The petitioner was moved to Jammu and kashmir area on temporary duty on January 13, 1994.
While the petitioner was away on duty in the said area, a staff court of enquiry was convened by the Army Headquarters, Bareilly by order dated Feb 9, 1994 (Annexure 2).
The terms of reference are as follows :  (a) to investigate the circumstances under which CFL ASC Lucknow accepted sub-specification meat canned curried (chunks/keema) ex M/s. Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh packed in cans which were not lacquered internally contrary to ASC specification No. 115-B3.
(b) to investigate the circumstances under which CFL ASC Lucknow failed to declare 750 MT of refined mustard oil said to have been tendered by M/s. UP Co-operative Federation Ltd, New Delhi as actually untendered or merely paper tendered prima facie attempting to condone financial penalties liable to be imposed on the firm as per the contract.
3.
It was stated in the convening order dated Feb 9, 1994 that the Court will give its findings, opinion and recommendations and pinpoint the responsibility for lapses and that 10 copies of court of enquiry proceedings (including the manuscript) duly competed in all respects will be submitted to this Head quarter by March, 5, 1994.
It was also stated in the said order that Army Rule 180 will be complied with, if required.
4.
The Court of enquiry assembled on March 8, 1994 and proceeded with its work.
On March 30, 1994 an order was issued from headquarters of Central Command, Lucknow that the petitioner is attached to Central Command, SIG REGT with immediate effect.
The petitioner will remain attached with new unit till the finalisation of the preliminary case pending against him.
During the attachment the petitioner will continue to hold on the STR in his parent unit.
5.
The petitioner was served with a tentative charge-sheet dated March, 31, 1994 (Annexure 7) issued by the Commanding Officer.
It is stated in the charge-sheet that accused IC-138687 Lt. Col. Najmul Islam of Composite Food Laboratory, Army Supply Corps.
Lucknow, attached to Central Command, Signal Regiment vide attachment order No. 190115/322 U/AI dated March 30, 1994, an officer holding a permanent commission in the regular Army is charged under Section 63, Army Act, 1950 for an omission prejudicial to good order and military discipline.
The charges are as follows :  (i) in that he at Lucknow between April, 1993 to March, 1994 when performing the duties of Commanding Officer Composite Food Laboratory ASC Lucknow omitted to exercise proper supervision which resulted in acceptance of stocks of meat canned curried (Chunks/Keema) in cans which were not lacquered internally, contrary to ASC specification No. 115-B as revised from the time to time;  (ii) in that he at Lucknow between Sept 1993 to March, 1994 when performing the duties of Commanding Officer of Composite Food Laboratory ASC Lucknow omitted to exercise proper supervision resulting in non reporting of paper tendering/non-tendering of 750 metric tons of refined mustard oil said to have been tendered by M/s. UP Co-operative Federation Ltd, New Delhi, thus resulting in non imposition of financial liabilities at the appropriate time on the ibid firm which could rightly have been imposed on the said firm as per the terms of the contract.
6.
On March 31, 1994 the Commanding Officer passed another order (Annexure-8) stating as follows :  "1.
Reference convening order No. 251802/QIB(PC-37) dated 09 Feb 1994 issued by Head quarters Uttar Pradesh Area, Bareilly.
2.
As you are to retire on 31 March, 1994 (AN), I hereby invoke Army Act Section 123 in your respect till finalisation of Court of Inquiry and discipline case pending against you."
7.
The Court of Enquiry completed its proceedings on June 20, 1994 and the Army Commander has issued an order dated July 12, 1994 (Annexure SC 1) for initiating disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner.
Meanwhile, the Government of India in exercise of powers conferred under Rule 27(3)(ii) of the Army Rules, 1994 has accorded sanction for the continued detention of the petitioner in military custody beyond a period of three months with effect from June 29, 1994 or till he is brought to trial which is earlier, to facilitate finalisation of disciplinary case against him.
8.
Before filing the present writ petition, the petitioner had filed Writ Petition No. 118 of 1994 on April 4, 1994 for habeas corpus.
By an order dated April 22, 1994, passed by a Division Bench of this Court, the petitioner was permitted to withdraw the earlier writ petition and hence the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
In view of this, a preliminary objection was raised by the respondents that the present writ petition is not maintainable.
The preliminary objection was overruled by a Bench consisting of Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.C Bhargava and Hon'ble Mr. Justice RK Agrawal on May 6, 1994.
It was held that the second writ petition is maintainable.
After that counter affidavits and rejoinder affidavits were filed by the parties and the matter has been heard on merits.
9.
The petitioner has urged that the condition precedent for invoking Section 123 of the Army Act against him has not been fulfilled and hence the impugned order dated March 31, 1994 directing the petitioner to be kept in military custody is arbitrary, illegal and without jurisdiction.
In this connection the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner has not committed any offence, that he has not ceased to be subject to the said Act and that the trial has not yet commenced.
The petitioner has also submitted that he is kept in military custody for a period longer than that permitted by law without fulfilling the legal requirements in that behalf.
10.
Section 123(1) of the Army Act provides that where an offence under this Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act and he has ceased to be so subject he may be taken into and kept in military custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject.
The petitioner is right in his submission that a person may be taken into and kept in military custody if it is shown that two conditions are satisfied, namely, that an offence under the Act has been committed by him while subject to the Act and that he has ceased to be so subject.
These conditions are in the nature of conditions precedent and if they are not satisfied then no action can be taken against the person concerned under Section 123(1) the Act.
It may be mentioned at this stage that the expression 'person subject to the Act' and the expression 'military custody' has been defined under the Act itself.
Thus, Section 2(1) enumerates the person who shall be subject to the Act and Section 2(2) says that every person subject to the Act under clauses (a) to (g) of subsection (1) shall remain to be subject until duly retired, discharged, released, removed, dismissed or cashiered from service.
Similarly, military custody according to Section 3(xiv) means the arrest or confinement of a person according to usages of the service and includes Naval or Air Force custody.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon the respondents to prove that the conditions precedent for taking action under Section 123(1) of the Act against the petitioner had been fulfilled.
11.
In order to show that the petitioner had committed an offence under the Army Act while he was subject to the Act, the respondents have relied upon the tentative charge-sheet dated March 31, 1994 (Annexure 7).
This charge sheet was issued under the signatures of Col. OP Beniwal, Commanding Officer and it indicates that the petitioner committed an offence under Section 63, Army Act between April, 1993 to March, 1994.
The petitioner was admittedly in Army service between the said period and was subject to the Army Act.
The petitioned has, however, assailed the validity of the tentative charge sheet.
In the first, place, he has contended that there is no provision in the Army Act or the Army Rules for issuing a tentative charge-sheet.
Secondly, he has submitted that it will be evident from the sequence of events leading up to the issuance of the tentative charge sheet that it is arbitrary and mala fide and has no legal authority.
In GS Sodhi v. Union of India, (1991) 2 SCC 382 : AIR 1991 SC 1617, it was pointed out that there is no statutory provision in the Army Act or the Rules for issuing a charge-sheet, but no opinion was expressed on its effect.
It has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents in the present writ petition that the tentative charge- sheet is issued in pursuance of Army instructions.
The tentative charge-sheet is by its very nature a provisional charge sheet and is liable to be replaced by the final charge sheet which may be issued to the accused in accordance with the provisions of the Army Act and the Rules after complying with necessary legal procedure and formalities.
It has not been show that Army instructions with regard to the issuance of a tentative charge sheet contravene in any manner any provision of the Army Act or the Rules.
Therefore, we shall proceeds on the assumption that he tentative charge-sheet issued against the petitioner cannot be struck down on account of the absence of any provision in the Army or the Rules for issuing the same.
12.
The petitioner has urged that on Feb 9, 1994 a staff court of enquiry was convened by the Army Headquarters, Bareilly to investigate the circumstances on the basis of which the tentative charge sheet has been issued.
The said court of enquiry was asked to give its findings, opinion and recommendations and also fix the responsibility for lapses.
The staff court of enquiry had not submitted its report till March 31, 1994 when the tentative charge-sheet was issued against the petitioner.
It is not easy to understand as to how the Commanding Officer issued the tentative charge sheet without waiting for the report of the staff court of enquiry.
The petitioner has further submitted that on March 31, 1994 he was attached to the unit of Signal Regiment commanded by Col OP Beniwal, respondent No. 7.
On the same date at 1115 am the tentative charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner and at 1120. a.m. the provision of Section 123, Army Act were invoked against the petitioner.
The circumstances relied upon by the petitioner are weighty and substantial and it is possible to infer that tentative charge-sheet was issued for the purpose of taking action against the petitioner under Section 123 of the said Act for keeping him in military custody.
The petitioner has made a prayer in the writ petition to quash the tentative charge-sheet.
The respondents have a duty to the court to place all materials in their possession for the purposes of establishing that tentative charge-sheet was issued bona fide on the basis of the relevant materials and not for extraneous purpose.
We are, however, not inclined to take the view that on account of the failure of the respondents to place all such material before the court and to raise all relevant pleas in that behalf in the counter affidavit, would justify any interference by the court with the tentative charge-sheet.
It is on the basis of the same set of facts that the staff court of enquiry was convened and the tentative charge-sheet was issued.
The enquiry by staff court of enquiry is an enquiry by court of enquiry constituted under Rule 177 of the Army Rules.
The purpose of this enquiry is merely to collect evidence and, if so required, to report with regard to any matter which may be referred to it.
This is merely in the nature of preliminary investigation and cannot be equated with a trial (See Maj. Suresh Chandra Mehta v. Defence Secretary, Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 129(SC) : (1991) 2 SCC 198 : AIR 1991 SC 483.
The proceedings of the court of enquiry and the evidence recorded by it are not admissible in evidence in subsequent proceedings.
Therefore, the respondents may have considered it prudent to issue a tentative charge-sheet against the petitionr without waiting for the report of the staff court of enquiry so as to avoid further complications of loss of time.
Be that as it may, the tentative charge-sheet (Annexure 7) shows that the petitioner has committed an offence under Section 63, Army Act while he was subject to the Act.
At this stage, it may be pointed out that petitioner has denied the charges levelled against him and has given an explanation of the facts on the basis of which charges have been lebelled and has also asserted that he has not committed any offence.
The respondents have controverted the averments made by the petitioner and have tried to show that the petitioner has, in fact committed an offence under Section 63 of the Army Act.
We can only observe that disputed question of fact cannot be decided in the present case and the writ petition is to be dealt with on the basis that at the time of invoking Section 123 it was shown that the petitioner has committed an offence under Section 63 while being subject to the Act.
13.
The petitioner has also contended that he has not ceased to be subject of the Act and hence the impugned order regarding military custody is illegal.
In support to this argument the petitioner has relied upon the attachment order (Annexure-5) and para 2 of the Army Instruction No. 30/86.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was Commanding Officer of CFL, ASC, Lucknow and was by order dated March 30, 1994 was attached to the Signal Regiment of the Central Command, Lucknow.
Para 2 of the aforesaid Army Instructions provides that during the attachment period the officers will continue to be held against the appointment held by them immediately before the attachment and no replacement shall be made until the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings.
The petitioner has submitted on the basis of this provision that he still holds the appointment of Commanding Officer, CFL and no replacement can be made until conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings initiated against him.
In paras 23 and 24 of the counter affidavit it is stated that the provisions of Army Instruction No. 30/86 are not applicable to the case of the petitioner, as he was retired from service on March 31, 1994 in the afternoon and he is no more Commanding Officer.
In Chief of Army Staff v. Maj. EP Chaddha, 1991(2) SCT 32 (SC) : (1991) 2 SCC 288 : AIR 1991 SC 460 it has been laid down that the only purpose of attachment of an army officer to a different unit is that the disciplinary proceeding against him could be speedily and satisfactorily completed without any interference by him.
Army Instructions are non statutory in character and cannot override the express provision contained in the Army Act and the Army Rules.
In Union of India v. JS Brar, (1993) 1 SCC 176 : 1993 All LJ 807 : 1993(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 463 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
15 the provisions of Para 472 of the Regulations for the Army were considered and it was held that Para 472 is not statutory in character and is to be read in harmony with the Act and the Rules.
The status of Army Instructions is not even that of Army Regulations.
Para 2 of the Army Instructions relied upon by the petitioner cannot overrides the provisions of Rule 16-A of the Army Rules under which the petitioner was retired with effect from the afternoon of March 31, 1994.
The petitioner ceased to be subject to the Act on account of retirement in terms of Section 2(2) of the Army Act.
The provision of Sections 123 of Army Act could be invoked against the petitioner after his retirement.
It is for the limited purpose of taking into and kept in military custody that the petitioner will be deemed to be subject to the Act even after retirement by virtue of the legal fiction created by Section 123(1) for the purpose.
The petitioner has made an averment that he was arrested by respondent No. 7 on March 31, 1994 at 1100 am and Section 123 was invoked against him by respondent No. 7 on the same date at 1120 a.m.
The respondents have not specifically denied these averments and have not given any counter version of the timing of the petitioner being taken into the kept in military custody.
Petitioner's averments with regard to timing of the said events may be taken to be correct.
On the basis of such averments there can be no escape from the conclusion that the petitioner was subject to the Act and Section 123 could not be invoked him against on the said date at 1120 a.m. and the act of keeping the petitioner in military custody between 1120 a.m. and 1200 noon was illegal.
The retirement of the petitioner was to take place in the afternoon of March 31, 1994 and he was to cease to be subject to the Act after 1200 noon.
It is evident that Section 123 could be legitimately invoked against the petitioner only after 1200 noon.
However, the illegal military custody of the petitioner between 1120 a.m. and 1200 noon on March 31, 1994 will not be material for the purposes of this case because illegal custody can be converted into legal custody subsequently.
In Surjeet Singh v. State of UP, 1984 All Cri C 69 : 1984 All LJ 375, the Full Bench has held that the Court is competent to remand the accused to custody even if he is in illegal imprisonment and it can rectify its mistake and transform his illegal imprisonment into legal imprisonment.
The same principle will apply to the detention by other authorities also.
It is held that the petitioner does not continue to be subject to the Act by virtue of the attachment order (Annexure-5) and his detention in military custody under Section 123 of the Army Act is not illegal on that account with effect from the afternoon of March 31, 1994.
14.
The contention of the petitioner that Section 123 of the said Act cannot be invoked against him because the trial has not commenced is equally untenable.
Section 123(1) does not in terms refer to the stage at which its provisions may be invoked.
It simply says that the concerned person may be taken into and kept in military custody.
The words "and tried and punished for such offence" relate to separate and distinct matter and may easily be disassociated from the provision relating to military custody.
The object of the enactment is to secure presence of the person concerned during the proceedings relating to the offence which is alleged to have been committed by him while subject to the Act and to ensure that the does not interfere with such proceedings.
An expression in a statute is controlled by its context, by the scheme of the statute and the object which the enactment seeks to achieve (See Brijendra Singh v. State of UP, AIR 1981 SC 636 : 1980 All LJ 1105.
It is true that according to Rule 177 of the Army Rules a Court of enquiry is convened to collect evidence and if so required, to report with regard to any matter which may be referred to it.
The proceedings of a Court of enquiry are not admissible in evidence against the person subject to the Act but even then the presence before the Court of enquiry of the person who is alleged to have committed an offence may be necessary.
In this particular case, the statement of the petitioner has already been recorded by the Staff Court of Enquiry.
It may be that the Court of enquiry is only a fact finding body entrusted with the responsibility of holding a preliminary enquiry into the facts.
But that does not affect the amplitude of the power which has been conferred by Section 123(1) in taking into and keeping in military custody any person against whom there is an allegation of having committed an offence while subject to the Act.
The exercise of the power under Section 123 to keep a person in military custody cannot on a reasonable consideration of the provisions thereof be restricted to the stage when the trial has commenced.
Section 123(1) may be legitimately invoked at the stage when a Court of enquiry has been convened.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also contended that to the best of knowledge of the petitioner no order has been passed under Section 101 and the procedure contemplated under Sections 102 and 103 of the Army Act and Rules 23 and 27 of the Army Rules have not been complied with and hence the petitioner's custody is illegal and he deserves to be set at liberty.
Section 101(1) provides that any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may be taken into military custody.
The military custody may be ordered by any superior officer under sub-section (2) and the order may be passed in respect of an officer of a higher rank also under subsection (3) of Section 101.
The duty of a Commanding Officer in regard to detention is prescribed under Section 102 and the provisions relating to interval between committal and Court Martial are to be found in Section 103.
It shall be the duty of every Commanding Officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for more than 48 hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him without the charge being investigated unless the investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable having regard to the public service.
The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of 48 hours and the reason thereof shall be reported by his Commanding Officer to the General or other officer to whom an application shall be made to convene a general or District Court martial.
Section 102(4) empowers the Central Government to make rules providing for th manner in which and the period for which any person subject to the Act may be taken into and detained in military custody pending trial.
In every case where any such person, as is mentioned in Section 101, is not on active service remains in custody for a longer period than 8 days without a Court Martial or his trial being ordered to assemble, a special report giving reasons for the delay shall be made by the Commanding Officer and a similar report shall be forwarded at intervals of every 8 days until Court Martial is assembled or such person is released from custody.
Rule 22 of the Army Rules provides that every charge against an accused person subject to the Act other than an officer shall be heard in the presence of the accused.
The accused shall have full opportunity to cross- examine any witness against him and to call any witness and make any statement in his defence.
The Commanding Officer may dismiss a charge brought before him or may dispose of the case summarily under Section 18 or refer the case to the proper superior military authority or adjourn the case for the purposes of having the evidence reduced to writing or if the accused is below the rank of Warrant Officer to order his trial by summary Court martial.
Rule 23 lays down the procedure for taking down summary of evidence.
Where the case is adjourned for the purposes of having the evidence reduced to writing, the evidence of the witnesses shall be taken down in writing in the presence and hearing of the accused before the Commanding Officer or such officer, as he directs.
Statement of the accused is recorded after the examination of witnesses and thereafter evidence of witnesses called by the accused is recorded.
The evidence and statements taken down in writing in pursuance of Rule 23 is called summary of evidence.
It is considered by the Commanding Officer, who shall thereupon either remand the accused for trial by Court Martial or refer the case to the proper superior military authority or dismiss a charge or dispose of it summarily or rehear the case under Rule 24.
Rule 25 prescribes the procedure on charge against on officer.
Where an officer is charged with an offence under the Act, the investigation shall be held and the evidence shall be taken, if so required, in his presence in writing in the same manner as nearly as the circumstances admit, as is required by Rules 22 and 23.
Rule 27 is about the delay of reports.
In every case where a person who is not on active service is in military custody for a period longer than 8 days without Court Martial for his trial having been ordered to assemble or without a punishment having been awarded to him under Section 80, the Commanding Officer shall make a report in the specified form to the officer empowered to convene a general or District Court Martial for the trial of such person.
Such report shall be made to the authority concerned at intervals of every 8 days until a Court Martial is ordered to assemble or punishment is awarded under Section 80 or such person is released from custody.
Detention in military custody beyond two months of a person subject to the Act who is not on active service and in whose case a Court martial for trial has not been ordered to assemble shall require the sanction of the Chief of Army Staff or any officer authorised by him in this behalf with the approval of the Central Government.
Any detention beyond a period of three months shall require the approval of the Central Government.
15A.
In Gian Chand v. Union of India, 1983 Cr LJ 1059 it has been held by Delhi High Court that he word "charge" occurring in Rule 22(1), means nothing more than an accusation against a person.
Rule 22(1) provides for the holding of, what can be called, a preliminary enquiry.
Though witnesses are examined, Rule22(1) does not require the statement of the witnesses being recorded in writing.
The hearing at this stage is only to help the Commanding Officer to decide as to what future course of action he should adopt.
If after the hearing the Commanding Officer feels that there is no evidence that an accused has committed an offence then, under sub-rule (2), he can dismiss the charge.
It is only under sub-rule (3) of Rule 22 that the Commanding Officer, if he is of the opinion that the charge ought to be proceeded with, takes further action postulated by clauses (a), (b), (c) or (d) of the said sub-rule.
One of the orders which can be passed by the Commanding Officer under rule 82(3)(c) is to adjourn the case for the purposes of evidence being reduced in writing.
This obviously means that prior to the passing of the said order the evidence which is heard by the Commanding Officer under rule 22(1) is not recorded in writing.
It is only when the Commanding Officer decides that the charge should be proceeded with and orders recording of the evidence that procedure for taking down the summary of evidence, as provided by Rule 23, is followed.
An accused is remanded for trial by Court Martial only after the summary of evidence is considered by the Commanding Officer.
It is thereupon that a formal charge-sheet is prepared containing the charge against the accused.
This is prepared under Rule 28.
It is not-doubt true that under sub-rule (2) of Rule 28 it is stated that a charge means an accusation in the charge-sheet, but it must be borne in mind that the charge sheet is prepared only when the accused is required to be tried by a Court Martial.
This stage arises after the summary of evidence has been recorded under Rule 23.
The accused, therefore, cannot contend that even.
At the stage of hearing of the charge under Rule 22(1) there should be a written charge which should be handed over to the accused.
At the stage of Rule 22(1) the accused is only required to be informed about the charge or the accusation against him and opportunity has to be given to him to cross-examine any witness or to call any witnesses and make statements in his defence.
The word "charge" occurring in rule 22 does not mean charge as contained in the charge-sheet.
16.
It will be clear from a perusal of the aforesaid provisions that a charge sheet is served on the accused when he is remanded for trial by Court Martial and before a charge-sheet is served under Rule 28, the proceedings in respect of the offence alleged to have been committed by him may be held either by a Court of enquiry or by the Commanding Officer.
In the proceedings held by the Commanding Officer the summary of evidence, that is to say, evidence of the witnesses in support of the charges as well as the defence and the statement of the accused is recorded.
The accused may be detained in military custody before commencement of trial and that is why it has been provided that the duration of military custody should be minimum.
Due provision has been made to ensure that delay reports are sent to the superior military authorities and in any case the detention in military custody for more than three months is not made without the sanction of the Central Government.
Section 101 enacts a provision of general nature so as to enable a person to be taken into military custody without specifying the stage at which he may be taken into custody.
Thus, a person subject to the Act who is charged with an offence may be taken into military custody either during the trial by a Court Martial or at any time before the trial in connection with the proceedings relating to the charge under the Act.
The same powers may be exercised under Section 123(1) also in respect of a person who is ceased to be subject to the Act because by virtue of the legal fiction created by Section 123 he shall be deemed to be a person subject to the Act for purposes of being taken into and kept in military custody and tried and punished for the offence alleged to have been committed by him while he was actually subject to the Act.
The authorities have to ensure that the detention of a person in military custody under Section 123 either for the purposes of the proceedings held by a Court of enquiry or the preparation of summary of evidence by the Commanding Officer or the trial by a Court Martial is for the minimum possible period and in any case the detention is not for more than three months without the sanction of the Central Government.
In the present case, it has been shown that the Central Government has sanctioned the detention of petitioner in military custody for a period beyond three months.
therefore, the contention of the petitioner that his detention under Section 123 is in violation of Sections 101, 102 and 103 or Rules 23 and 27 has no force.
17.
After carefully considering the facts and circumstances of the case, we have come to the conclusion that there is absolutely no force in this writ petition.
Thus detention of the petitioner in military custody in pursuance of the impugned order (Annexure-7) cannot be said to be illegal.
No case has been made for issuing a writ of habeas corpus nor for quashing the orders contained in Annexures 2, 7 and 8 to the writ petition.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.