Gitesh Ranjan Bhattacharjee, J - This is an application under Article 226 for quashing the decision to wind up the National Council for Safety in Mines, Dhanbad with effect from 15th May, 1991 and also for setting aside the notice issued under Section 25F (read with Section 25 FFF) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 dated the 3rd April, 1991 communicating to the petitioners the decision to close down the National Council for Safety in Mines and consequent retrenchment of the petitioners from their services in the said Council and also for certain other reliefs including arrears salaries and allowances, etc.
The petitioners joined services under the National Council for Safety in Mines (NCSM, for short).
During he pendency of the writ petition certain other employees were also allowed by the Court to join as parties to the writ petition.
2.
The Committee on Mines Safety Education and propaganda which was set up in pursuance of a recommendation of the Conference on Safety in Mines held in 1959, recommended for setting up a National Mines Safety Council, comprising of representatives of Mine owners, workers, Mine Managers and supervisory staff for promoting safety education and propaganda in Mines.
Thereafter the National Council for Safety in Mines was set up by a Government of India resolution 1963 as a body corporate registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
In the said resolution it was also recorded that the Council would be assisted by the necessary administrative and technical staff as may be appointed under the rules and regulations of the Council and that the salary and allowances of the staff and other expenditure of the Council would be borne by the Council from its funds derived from the Welfare Funds set up under the Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946 and the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947 for financing measures and activities for promoting the welfare of labour employed in the Mica Mining and Coal Mining Industries.
The objective of the Council was to promote safety education and propaganda in Mines, and in keeping with its objective the functions of the Council were spelt out under as many as 12 heads mentioned in the said resolution which is Annexure-A to the writ petition.
The Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947 was subsequently repealed and collection of fund under the said Act had been abolished.
It is the case of the respondents that NCSM (National Council for Safety in Mines) mainly derived its fund from CML WF (Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund) and contributions from NMLWF (Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund) were very meagre and that since 1979-80 funding from CMLWF also dried up and the Council started facing financial problem.
3.
In his letter dated 27.7.81 addressed to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Shri BM Bhat, the Chairman, National Council for Safety in Mines, Annexure-Q inter alia, noted that the working group set up by the Ministry to review the organisation of the NCSM in its meeting held in the Ministry of Labour on 15th November, 1986 reached a consensus that the NCSM had an important role to play in promoting safety in mines and it should be reorganised to provide for effective participation in the management by the minig companies and that sharing of expenses of the NCSM by the mining companies in terms of the membership scheme recommended by the working group is a prerequisite to greater participation of mining companies in the management of the NCSM.
It was, however, noted in the said letter that the subscription of the mining companies to the Membership scheme recommended for NCSM had not yet materialised by the public sector mining companies.
In paragraph 5 of that letter it was stated that the Council at that time had no fund even for payment of its running expenditure, such as, salary and allowances of its staff due to non-receipt of grant-in-aid for the year 1981- 82 and if arrangement for fund to the council was not made within a month there would be a complete state of chaos for want of fund.
The Ministry was accordingly requested to think seriously over the matter and arrange for immediate release of fund (obviously as grant-in-aid).
It was, further stated in the said letter that the problem of funds had become more acute after transfer of Coal Mines Welfare Organisation to the Department of Coal, Ministry of Energy and that the NCSM had not grown mostly because of paucity of regular and adequate flow of funds and once the funds position became sound there would be no constraints in the organisational development of NCSM.
This letter clearly indicates that the NCSM was facing tremendous financial constraints as a result of which its growth and development had been rather arrested and stalled.
4.
In the background of the difficulty concerning funds a question was raised regarding the very need for the Council itself and in course of time the matter was taken up by the Ministry of Labour with the Committee of Secretaries and the Committee of Secretaries considered the matter on the 9th April, 1985 and recommended constitution of an expert group.
Accordingly, an expert group was constituted with the Joint Secretary in charge of NCSM in the Ministry of Labour as Chairman.
The terms of reference were (a) whether there was any justification for the continuance of the NCSM ?
and (b) if it were to continue, what should be its structure, role and function, source of finances, etc.
In due course the expert group submitted its report.
The summary of the expert group's recommendation as recorded in paragraph 71 of its report is reproduced below :-  'Considering that safety education and propaganda etc. have lost none of their relevance in arousing and maintaining safety consciousness amongst work persons, there is need for an independent national body having direct access to all national and international expertise and information on the subject, to supplement the efforts of mines managements and trade-unions in the field of safety education through propaganda, etc. and having initially done some useful work inthe past and having developed enough expertise, the National Council for Safety in Mines was the right agency to act as the nodal agency to stimulate and foster safety drives as well as to render necessary assistance, support and consultancy in such programmes and related activities, even on overall economic consideration, the Expert Group is of opinion that continuance of the National Council for Safety in Mines is fully justified.'
In Paragraph 76 of the report the expert group inter alia, recommended that at least 75 per cent of the establishment expenditure should be funded by the Government of India, directly through Labour Ministry's budget.
As regards the remaining 25 per cent of the expenditure and the entire expenditure on running its activities and creation of needed infrastructural facilities within NCSM, tapping of additional resources of finance was recommended in the following manner :-  (i) All mining companies and mines may be required, through administrative order of respective administrative departments, to make their contributions to NCSM fund regularly.
(ii) Sale of propaganda material and conduct of various activities may be made self-financing as far as practicable.
In fixing rates for propaganda material or activities, due margin (30%) may be kept towards stock and development/overhead expenses.
The expert group also recommended in the said paragraph 76 that the plan scheme augmentation of NCSM under the Ministry of Labour might be implemented in Seventh five year plan under the said scheme and present rate of contribution through annual corporate membership fees from various mining companies might be examined in the background of the recommendation regarding re-orientation of the activities of NCSM made in the report by the expert group.
In paragraph 28 of the said report of the expert group it is also mentioned, inter alia, that (earlier) a committee set up by the Department of Coal had recommended that NCSM be abolished and the job of safety propaganda be entrusted to the mining industries and that the Man Mohan Singh Committee on the working of the Coal Mines Welfare Organisation had also mentioned that the programmes of the council and the benefits that the workers derive from them needed to be evaluated.
5.
The Government, however, did not agree to the proposal for continuance and revamping of the NCSM and in the letter dated the 13th November, 1987, Annexure - 'AA' to the writ petition, the Ministry of Labour informed the Chairman NCSM that the Government did not agree to the proposal for continuance and revamping of the NCSM and concluded that the NCSM should be wound up.
It was further mentioned in that letter that the following points were taken into account by the Government while arriving at such conclusion :-  (i) Safety should be a management function and there may be no need for an external agency.
(ii) In the Coal sector a substantial programme of mines safety has been built up over the years especially after nationalisation.
Under the Mines Act, committees were constituted to look into the safety aspects on which DGMS was a member.
(iii) In public sector companies also, internal safety organisations have been established and these companies were expected to look into the all aspects of safety involved in mining operations.
Only in unorganised sector, the safety aspects would need to be looked into.
(iv) In case NCSM was wound up, then there would be no repercussions in the unorganised sector as, at present, the NCSM was in effect not doing much for want of funds.
In that letter it was further noted while concluding that the NCSM might be wound up, the Government have suggested that in the organised sector, the managements themselves should be made responsible for the safety aspect in mines and for unorganised sector, the DGMS (Director General of Mines Safety) should be given the responsibility and that for this purpose the DGMS organisation should be further strengthened so that it could take up the training and other aspects relating no mine safety which were presently to the charter of NCSM and it was communicated that a proposal from the Director General of Mines Safety in this regard was under consideration of the Government.
By the said letter the recommendation of the Government was brought to the notice of the Chairman of NCSM for appropriate action.
The said letter of the Ministry of Labour, Government of India was considered in the 41st Special General Council and Governing Body Meeting of NCSM held on 93 1988 and it was recorded in the minutes of the meeting, inter alia, that the council could have been consulted before taking up a decision on winding up of the council but in view of the recommendation of the Government of India the Council resolved under Section 13 of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 that the NCSM would stand dissolved on and from the day the Central Government in the Ministry of Labour so appointed.
It was also resolved in the said meeting that before dissolving the council the Central Government might take necessary steps for the rehabilitation of the existing employees of the council.
Thereafter the Ministry of Labour by its letter dated the 21st February, 1991, Annexure 'NN' to the writ petition, informed the Chairman of the NCSM that it has been decided to wind up NCSM with effect from 15th May, 1991 and the Chairman was requested to take necessary action regarding winding up of the council under intimation to the Ministry and was also requested to work out the terminal benefits of the employees payable to them on 1551991 and furnish the complete details in this regard to the Ministry for further necessary action.
6.
Subsequently, the Director General of Mines Safety and ex-officio Chairman of NCSM under memo dated the 3rd April, 1991, Annexure 'OO' to the writ petition, informed the petitioners individually in the form of notice under Section 25F (read with Section 25 FFF) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 that it had been decided to close down the NCSM, Dhanbad with effect from 15th May, 1991 for reasons explained in the Annexure, and to retrench their service from the said date.
The petitioners were also requested to collect their full and final payment as admissible under the rules including retrenchment compensation payable under Section 25F(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The reasons stated in the statement of reasons annexed to such notices of retrenchment are quoted below :-  "Statement of reasons - The National Council for Safety in Mines (NCSM) was registered as a society in 1963 under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
The aim of the council related mainly to development of safety consciousness in mining activities and operations.
The activities of the council have been reviewed in recent years and the following was noted :-  (i) In mining the major activity related to the Coal Sector.
Following the nationalisation of Coal Mines, a substantial programme of mines safety has been built in the system.
In most public sector mines, internal safety organisations have been established and these are required to look into all aspects of safety involved in mining operations.
(ii) As regards the unorganised sector of mining with its spread and diversity, it has not been possible for the NCSM to do much work.
Its usefulness to the unorganised sector, therefore, has been limited.
(iii) In the recent years the NCSM has not been able to generate enough resources to sustian its activities.
It could not even sustainfunds to pay the salary to tis staff regularly.
(iv) The Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) is already entrusted with the responsibility of enforcement of the provisions of the Mines Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder regarding safety, health and welfare of persons employed in mines.
These responsibilities include, inter alia, inspection of mines, investigation of accidents, safety information dissemination, etc.
This organisation can, in a large measure fulfil better the task intended to be handled by NCSM'.
7.
Being aggrieved by the decision to wind up NCSM and by the notices of retrenchment the petitioners moved this writ application, inter alia, for a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to act in accordance with law.
The petitioners also prayed for a writ to rescind, cancel and/or set aside the decision to wind up the NCSM with effect from 15591 with an alternative prayer that in the event the Court upholds the validity, legality and property of the decision to wind up a direction may be issued commanding the State respondents to absorb the petitioners and the affected employees in one or the other public sector mines and/or undertaking.
The respondents contested the writ petition raising, inter alia, the plea of absence of territorial jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the writ petition as well as absence of subject jurisdiction on the ground that the matter falls within the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal and as such this Court has no jurisdiction.
On merits also it is contended on behalf of the respondents that the decision to wind up NCSM is not subject to judicial review.
It is the contention of the respondents that certain other employees of the NCSM receiving similar retrenchment notice moved writ petition before the Supreme Court under Article 32 for similar relief and the Supreme Court by order dated 14th May, 1991 vide, Annexure 'B' to the supplementary affidavit affirmed on behalf of the respondents 2 and 3 directed for transfer of the writ petition to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi as an application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 for disposal in accordance with law.
Although, initially the learned Advocate for the petitioners in this case tried to argue that in respect of any of the prayers in the present writ petition the Central Administrative Tribunal has no jurisdiction yet ultimately in view of the aforesaid direction of the Supreme Court to transfer similar matter to the Central Administrative Tribunal for adjudication and in view of the relevant provisions in the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 he tried to make a distinction between the scope of the present writ petition and that of the writ petition filed by certain other employees in the Supree Court.
Section 14 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 provides for adjudication on service matter by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Sub-section (2) of Section 14 authorities the Central Government to apply the relevant provisions of local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations or societies owned or controlled by the Government, not being a local or other authority or corporation or society controlled or owned by a State Government.
Subsequently, by a notification dated the 2nd may, 1986, vide Annexure at page 19 of the affidavit-in- opposition affirmed on behalf of the respondent No. 1, NCSM has been specifically brought within the ambit of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
That being so service matters of the employees of NCSM are to be adjudicated upon by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
It is also quite understandable that because of that the Supreme Court directed a similar matter to be transferred to and adjudicated upon by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Consequently, the present writ petition also has to be treated in that light because the matter involved here is outside the writ jurisdiction of this Court in view of the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
As a last resort however the learned Advocates for the petitioners contended that although the matter in the writ petition filed before the Supreme Court by certain other employees and the matter involved in the present writ petition are substantially identical yet there is some difference because of which the present writ petition is maintainable under Article 226, at least in respect of certain matters not falling within the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Page 42 of the supplementary affidavit affirmed on behalf of the respondents No. 2 and 3 projects prayers made by the other employees in the writ petition filed before the Supreme Court.
It is submitted that when the said prayers are compared with the prayers in this writ petition it would be seen that in the present writ petition the decision to wind up NCSM is also under challenge apart from the service matters of the employees and this prayer relating to the very decision to wind up NCSM is outside the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal and is required to be adjudicated upon by this Court in its writ jurisdiction, but in the other writ petition filed by the other employees before the Supreme Court there was no such prayer challenging the decision to wind up NCSM.
This submission, I find, is not factually correct because prayer (i) in the writ petition filed by other employees before the Supreme Court also contained, as it appears from page 20 of the supplementary affidavit affirmed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 2 and 3, is a prayer to pass an order, direction or appropriate writ declaring the action of the respondents in closing NCSM and retrenching the employees of the NCSM is illegal, unjustified, unconstitutional and violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution.
Therefore in the said writ petition filed before the Supreme Court also the action of the respondents in closing down NCSM was under challenge on grounds of violation of fundamental rights and in spite of that the Supreme Court directed the matter to be transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal.
There is, therefore, no reason why it should be held now that this writ petition should be entertained by this Court in its writ jurisdiction.
I, therefore, hold that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the present writ petition.
But even assuming, for the sake of argument, that this Court has in its writ jurisdiction the power to entertain a writ petition challenging the decision of the Government or for that matter of the NCSM to wind up the council, I must say that this power of judicial review is indeed a limited one.
8.
I may mention here that the Supreme Court on transfer petition (C) No. 9/91 of 1993 recorded an order dated the 4th April, 1994 asking this Court to dispose of the present writ petition as expeditiously as possible and also directed that High Court may first consider the preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition and depending upon its result to decide the writ petition.
Accordingly, this Court heard the learned Advocates, of the parties concerned on the preliminary objection regarding maintainability at the first instance and then reserving its decision thereon also heard the writ petition on merit so that if the preliminary objection is found to be not sustainable in that case the court may dispose of the writ petition itself on merit.
Regarding the preliminary objection that the matter involved in the writ petition is required to be decided by the Central Administrative Tribunal had not by this court in its writ jurisdiction, I must say that in view of the order of the Supreme Court and in view of the relevant provisions of the Administrative Tribunal Act this Court has no reason to hold that the writ petition is entertainable by this court which would be rather contrary to the letter and spirit of the order of the Supreme Court on the writ petition filed by certain other employees.
But even assuming, for the sake of argument that this court has jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition in respect of the prayer challenging the decision to wind up NCSM I must say that for reasons recorded thereafter the petitioners' said prayer also must fail.
Here I would also like to mention that the respondents took the plea that no part of the cause of action for the writ petition has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this court and therefore this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition.
This argument however does not seem to be tenable in view of the fact that the four petitioners who filed the writ petition were posted and working in an office of NCSM which office is situated in West Bengal within the territorial jurisdiction of this court and the petitioners also received the retrenchment notices at such place within the jurisdiction of this court and as such a part of the cause of action for the present writ petition has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this court.
Consequently, the objection relating to territorial jurisdiction is found to be not tenable.
The other point of objection is regarding the question whether the NCSM can be said to be 'State' or 'authority' within the meaning of Articles 12 and 226 of the Constitution.
The notification issued by the Central Government as already referred to, by which the NCSM and certain other organisations have been brought under the ambit of the Administrative Tribunals Act clearly states that Section 14(3) of the Administrative Tribunal Act shall apply to the corporations or societies and other authorities mentioned in the schedule, (including NCSM), being the corporation or societies and other authorities owned or controlled by the Government.
That being so NCSM being admittedly an organisation owned or controlled by the Government the same is an authority amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this court.
9.
Now coming to the question whether there is ground for this Court to interfere with the decision of the Government of India or for that matter, of the NCSM to wind up the council, I must note at the very outset that the scope of judicial review in the matter is rather limited.
The learned Advocate for the petitioners argued that the decision to wind up or close down the NCSM is arbitrary and if any state action is vitiated by arbitrariness the writ court can and should strike down such arbitrary action.
In this connection he also referred to certain decisions of the Supreme Court viz. Ajay Hasia v. Khaled Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487 : 1980(3) SLR 467(SC); Managing Director, UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vinay Narayan Vajapee, (1980)3 SCC 459 : 1980(1) SLR 497 (SC); AL Kalra v. Project and Equipment Corporation, (1984)3 SCC 316 : 1984(2) SLR 446 (SC) etc.
There is no doubt that any state action must not be arbitrary and if any such action is vitiated by arbitrariness the writ Court has jurisdiction to strike it down.
The question in the present case is whether the decision of the Government of India to wind up the NCSM is arbitrary.
It is the contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioners in this regard that in spite of the recommendation of the expert group for the continuance of NCSM the Government of India took the decision to wind up the same and that being so the decision is arbitrary.
It is also submitted by him that grounds highlighted for winding up NCSM are not tenable in view of the report of the expert group.
He has also pointed out certain aspects which, according to him, do not sustian the grounds cited for winding up the NCSM.
That the Government decision to wind up NCSM has not been taken without any consideration of relevant matters altogether is evident from the fact that the Government purportingly took notice of the recommendations made by the expert group and also recorded its own reasons for which it has decided to wind up the council in spite of the recommendation of the expert group for its continuance.
It is needless to say that the recommendation of the expert group is not binding on the Government and the Government is free to take its decision this way or that way as it may consider proper in its own assessment.
The question whether the reasons assigned by the Government for winding up the NCSM are logically correct or not and whether these are sufficient to outweigh or counteract the reasons assigned by the expert group recommending continuance of the Council cannot be examined by the Court in a manner as an examiner of a University examination evaluates the answer scripts of students appearing in examination.
The Government after taking notice of the report of the expert group and for reasons recorded by it has thought it fit, obviously as a matter of policy, to wind up the council and the correctness of this policy decision cannot be decided by applying any mathematical formula.
It is for the Government to take a policy decision on consideration of factors and aspects appearing relevant to it and to decide whether the NCSM should be continued or not and if the Government on consideration has thought it fit to wind up the council it is not for the court to interfere with that policy decision and say that the Government will have to continue the Council.
10.
As we have seen in paragraph 28 of the report of the expert group it has been mentioned that earlier a committee set up by the Department of Coal had recommended that NCSM be abolished and the job of safety propaganda be entrusted to the mining companies.
It seems the expert group recorded a contrary view and recommended for continuance of the Council.
It is thus evident that even the two bodies expressed mutually contrary views about discontinuance or continuance of the Council and that being so it is also clear that the matter was not such as could be decided this way or that by applying a mathematical formula or without rising any controversy.
Therefore, it the Government on its own consideration has, as a matter of policy, decided now to take one course the Court cannot set the same at naught simply on the ground that the decision is controversial or even on the ground that the Court does not agree with such policy decision.
Very often the Government decisions on many vital matters of public importance are controversial and debatable but that is not a ground for the court to interfere with such decision to substitute its own decision for the same.
Here it is also apparent from the report of the expert group that whatever might have been the initial success or achievement of NCSM, in the later period its efficacy and activities rather came to be arrested or stalled as it was facing tremendous financial difficulties.
The expert group no doubt recommended for continuance of NCSM but at the same time it also felt the necessity of revamping the same.
It also felt the necessity of finding out ways and means for procuring financial resources for the continuance of its activities.
The Government however has felt that the safety aspects of the mines in different spheres can be adequately dealt with otherwise as adumbrated in the concerned letter dated the 13th November, 1987.
That being so it cannot be said that the Government has acted arbitrarily in the matter so as to attract interference of the Court.
On the other hand it is crystal clear that the Government even after taking notice of the report of the expert group has felt as a mater of policy, on consideration of certain aspects of the matter that NCSM may rather be closed down.
Whether the policy of the Government is right or wrong and whether its decision would be productive or counter-productive are matters falling within the administrative domain of the Government where the Court cannot be called upon to substitute its own decision for a Government decision on policy matter.
Again a policy decision of the Government cannot be termed as arbitrary simply because the Court may consider such decision to be less sagacious or less prudent.
In the present case there is no arbitrariness in the impugned decision and therefore even if the decision is a controversial one the Court has got no scope to interfere with the same.
11.
It is argued by the learned Advocate for the petitioners that the employees of the NCSM should have been heard by the authorities before taking the decision to wind up the Council, but since that was not done the decision to wind up the Council should be held to be arbitrary.
In support of his contention he refers to the decision of the Supreme Court in National Textile Workers' Union v. PR Ramakrishnan, AIR 1983 SC 759.
That was a case in which the question was whether in proceeding for winding up of a company started in a court under the Companies Act the workers of the company have locus standi to appear and to be heard by the Court in the proceeding pending before the Court.
Obviously, in the present case there is no winding up proceeding pending in court under the Companies Act and there is not question relating to locus standi of the employees to be heard by the Court in any such proceeding.
Even then the petitioners who are employees of NCSM have moved this writ petition making grievance against the decision to close down NCSM and they have been given hearing by this court.
12.
In the result the writ petition fails and the same is accordingly dismissed.
All interim orders stand vacated.
There will however be no order as to cost.
Petition dismissed.