GS Singhvi, J - One, who approaches a Court of law with tainted hands for grant of equitable relief in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction, has no right to be heard, is the settled legal proposition and the petitioner, who belongs to the teaching profession has greater duty to abide by the truth and exhibit exemplary conduct to be followed by the future generation of the country, has no right whatsoever to be heard on the merits of the case.
This conclusion of ours is founded on the fact that the petitioner is per se guilty of concealment of material facts and also of making a patently wrong statement in the Court.
2.
The present one is the third round of litigation by the petitioner.
He joined service of the respondent-College some time in January, 1991 on the basis of appointment letter Annexure P-1 as Lecturer in mathematics on ad hoc basis.
Feeling threatened with discontinuation of service, he filed C.W.P.
No. 3950 of 1991 and a Division Bench of this Court disposed of that writ petition vide order dated 851991 protecting the right of the petitioner to continue in service till the availability of a regularly selected candidate.
However, at the same time the Court gave liberty to the College to make regular selection and observed that the petitioner will have a right to be considered at the time of such selection.
When the College had issued the advertisement dated 18.9.1993 for regular selection, the petitioner instituted C.W.P.
No. 13288 of 1993 and prayed that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise him in service.
He also prayed that non-inclusion of a nominee of the Maharishi Dayanand University in the Selection Committee is illegal and has the effect of vitiating the slection to be made.
After hearing the petitioner, this Court dismissed C.W.P.
No. 13288 of 1993 by its order dated 22101993.
While dismissing that writ petition, the Court took notice of the order dated 851991 and also the grievance of the petitioner that the advertisement issued on 18.9.1993 was unlawful and held that the petitioner cannot be heard to challenge the advertisement merely because he may have become overage for the post.
Undeterred by the unequivocal observation made by the Court about his ineligiblity, the petitioner has filed this writ petition on 30101993 and prayed that the recommendation made by the Selection Committee on 22101993 culminating in the appointment of respondent No. 5 be declared illegal and be quashed, and a direction be issued to the respondents to reconvene the meeting of the Selection Committee in accordance with the provisions of law with a further direction to them to consider his candidature for regular appointment as Lecturer in Mathematics.
3.
In paras 10 and 14 of the writ petition, it has been alleged by the petitioner that no interview letters were issued to the candidates who had applied in pursuance of the advertisement dated 18.9.1993 and he too was not called for interview.
However, on having acquired knowledge about the meeting of the Selection Committee, he went to the College and met the President and other members of the Committee and requested them not to hold the interviews but his protest was ignored and he was allowed to go away after marking his presence only.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the recommendation made by the Selection Committee on the ground that the nominee of the aforesaid University was not present in the meeting of the Selection Committee and that the selection of respondent No. 5 is vitiated because he lacks the minimum qualifications prescribed for the post of Lecturer in Mathematics.
5.
The respondents have opposed the writ petition, inter alia, on the ground of concealment of material facts and mis-statement.
They have also relied on an order passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court on 391993 regarding the composition of the Selection Committee and have asserted that in terms of the order passed by the High Court the Selection Committee was duly constituted by the College.
Respondents have further pleaded that the petitioner was in fact interviewed by the Selection Committee and his name figures at Sr. No. 2 of the merit list prepared by the Committee.
Annexure R-2 has been placed on record to show that the petitioner's candidature was considered and he has been placed at Sr. No. 2 of the waiting list.
6.
Shri Surya Kant, the learned counsel for the petitioner, made strenuous efforts to persuade this Court to condone the contumacious conduct of the petitioner in withholding the information regarding the filing of C.W.P.
No. 13288 of 1993 and also his attempt to mislead the Court in regard to the factum of his interview by the Selection Committee.
The learned counsel argued that the failure of the petitioner to incorporate the facts relating to the filing C.W.P.
No. 13288 of 1993 are in reality inconsequential and in any case they do not affect the merits of the instant case.
Learned counsel further submitted that the Selection Committee did not issue separate interview letters to the eligible candidates and that even though the petitioner might have physically appeared before the Selection Committee, he cannot be said to have been interviewed by the Committee in a regular manner.
7.
We are least impressed with the submissions made by Shri Surya Kant and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed only on the ground that the petitioner has not approached the Court with clean hands.
As we have already observed earlier, one who approaches the Court with unclean hands has no right to be heard on the merits of the case.
We may add to this that it is not open to the petitioner to choose as to what facts should be placed before the Court and what should not be.
Every petitioner owes a duty to act with due care and diligence to produce all facts relating to a particular case and place them before the Court and leave it to the Court to determine as to their relevancy.
It is not permissible to the petitioner to keep few facts under his sleeve and then say that he is innocent.
In Jai Bhagwan Jain v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula, district Ambala, C.W.P.
No. 15448 of 1993, Division Bench of this Court has examined this issue at length and then observed:  "It is the duty of the party seeking relief under Article 226 or 136 of the Constitution to make full and candid disclosure of all the facts and leave it to the Court to determine whether relief deserves to be given to the petitioner or not.
The petitioner is also under a duty to make all efforts to find out full facts of the case before filing the petition and he cannot be heard to say that he is not aware of the facts concerning him.
The petitioner has to demonstrate his bona fides before seeking relief from the Court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction.
It is not for the petitioner to decide as to which of the facts are relevant and which are not relevant.
The petitioner cannot become a judge on the question of relevancy of facts.
Non-disclosure of all the facts in a candid and straight-forward manner will necessarily warrant dismissal or a petition.
We may further add that a petitioner will not be entitled to be heard on the merits of the case where he is found guilty of concealment of facts or of making mis-statement before the Court only on the ground that no statement order has been passed by the Court.
It is to be remembered that the Court considers a petition with the assumption that the averments made in the petitoin are true and correct.
In a given situation, the Court may finally decide a petition ex parte where the non-petitioner does not appear despite service of notice.
If a party suppressess facts from the Court, such ex parte decision may be rendered on the basis of incorrect or incomplete facts.
Therefore, it is not answer to the charge of suppression of facts or mis-statement of facts before the Court to say that no interim relief has been given to the petitioner or that he has not derived any benefit.
In our opinion, the very issue of a notice on a petition is a benefit derived by the petitioner.
If subsequently it is found that the petitioner has misled the Court persuaded it in issuing notice by concealment of true facts of the case there will be ample justification for dismissing the petition."
8.
In the present case, the petitioner has succeeded in persuading this Court in passing interim order in his favour on 2.11.1993.
If at all the petitioner had disclosed the facts that he had earlier filed C.W.P.
No. 13288 of 1993 and that had been dismissed by the Court, there would have been little justification for the Court to have issued even the notice of motion, what to talk of having passed an interim order in favour of the petitioner.
Moreover if he had brought it to the notice of the Court that he had been interviewed by the Selection Committee, the Court would have non-suited him on the ground that after having taken part in the selection process the petitioner cannot make a grievance about the composition of the Selection Committee.
9.
The wanton disregard of the truth on the part of the petitioner is amply demonstrated in paras 10 and 14 of the writ petition that he was not interviewed by the Selection Committee.
It is impossible for the Court to believe this statement of the petitioner in the face of the fact that his name finds mention at Sr. No. 2 of the select list.
The petitioner has thought it convenient not to file replication to controvert the statement made by the respondent-College nor did he have the courage to say that the Selection Committee had included his name in the select list even without interview.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any reason to consider the grievance of the petitioner on merits in this writ petition.
11.
Consequently, the writ petition fails and is dismissed with costs of Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition dismissed.