RA Sharma, J - Being aggrieved by an order dated 14111991 of Labour Court, rejecting its objection, whereby the right of the workmen's representative to represent the workmen in proceedings under S. 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Act) was challenged on the ground that he is an Advocate, the employer filed a writ petition before this Court.
Learned single Judge, while deciding the writ petition, declared Section 36(4) of the Central Act and Section 6-I(2) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the UP Act) as ultra vires.
After declaring the above provisions as ultra vires the learned judge disposed of the writ petition with the observation that it is not necessary to decide the validity of the order impugned in the writ petition.
Employees' Association, which was impleaded as respondent No. 2 to the writ petition, has filed this appeal against that part of the judgment of the learned single Judge, whereby the provisions of the two Acts were declared as ultra-vires.
2.
Provisions of Section 36(4) of the Central Act and Section 6-I(2) of the UP Act, which prohibit representation of a party to a dispute pending before the Labour Court by legal practitioner except with the consent of the other party and with the leave of the Labour Court are reproduced below:  "36(4): In any proceeding (before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, a party to a dispute may be represented by legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding and (with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be)" * * * * * * "6-I(2) No party to any proceeding before a Board shall be represented by a legal practitioner, and no party to any proceeding before a Labour Court or Tribunal shall be represented by a legal practitioner, unless the consent of the other party or parties to the proceeding and the leave of the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court or Tribunal, as the case may be, has been obtained."
3.
In the writ petition only the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Kanpur and the Employees' Union were impleaded as respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
Neither the State of UP nor the Union of India were parties to the writ petition.
In its writ petition the employer has neither pleaded for declaration of the aforesaid provisions of the Central and the UP Acts as ultra vires, nor was any ground taken to that effect.
In fact there is no prayer in the writ petition for declaration of those provisions as ultra vires.
The only prayer in the writ petition is for quashing the order dated 14111991, passed by the Labour Court, rejecting the objections of the employer against the representative of the workmen.
Learned single Judge, without there being any pleading, ground and prayer to that effect, has declared the two provisions mentioned above of the Central and the UP Acts as ultra vires, in exercise of suo moto power, on the ground that they are violative of Art. 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, as they amount to unreasonable restriction on the lawyers' right to practice his profession.
4.
As the provisions of the two Acts were declared as ultra vires without giving an opportunity to the State and Union of India, this Court on 7.2.1992 passed the following order, so as to enable them to defend the provisions of their Acts.
"Since the vires of certain provision of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the UP Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is under challenge in this appeal, it is necessary to hear the learned Advocate General for the State and the learned Attorney General of India.
The appellant, is therefore, directed to implead the State of UP and the Union of India as parties in the appeal and to serve notices upon the AG of the State and the Attorney General of India intimating that the appeal will come up for hearing on 10th August, 1992.
Notices should also be served on the SC of the State and of the Union of India."
Sri KP Agarwal, learned counsel for the appellant, has stated that notices have been served on the learned Advocate General and learned Attorney General of India.
On the application of the appellant, State of UP and the Union of India have been impleaded as respondents Nos. 3 and 4 to this appeal.
5.
State of UP has, however, moved an application with a prayer to transpose it as appellant in this appeal.
As State was not a party to the writ petition and no notice was issued to it before the provisions of the Acts were declared as ultra vires and as we have already passed order on 7.2.1992, directing issue of notices to the Advocate General of State and the Attornety General of India so as to enable them to defend the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Acts, we have allowed the above application of the State vide order dated 14.7.1994 and the State of UP was transposed as appellant No. 2.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
No provision of an Act of the State can be declared as ultra vires by this Court without impleading the State as one of the respondents.
Similarly no provision of the Central Act, can be declared as ultra vires without impleading Union of India as a party.
Neither the State of UP nor the Union of India were parties to the writ petition.
Not even notices were issued to them before declaring the provisions of the two Acts as ultra vires.
Even notices to the Attorney General of India and the Advocate General of UP were not issued.
The only thing mentioned in the judgment of the learned single Judge is that on 24.2.1992 he has observed that he will decide the validity of the two provisions and had directed the learned Standing Counsel to inform the Advocate General about it.
This is clear from the following extract of the impugned judgment:  "When this case was argued before me on 24.2.1992 I had directed the petitioner to serve respondent No. 2 personally, and the said respondent was granted time to file counter affidavit.
I had also observed that on 241992 (which I had fixed for the hearing) I will also decide the question of validity of Section 6-I(2) of the UP Industrial Disputes Act, which corresponds to Section 36(4) of the Central Industrial Disputes Act, and I had directed the Standing Counsel to inform the Advocate General about my order".
The fact remains that no notice was issued to the Advocate General and asking the Standing Counsel to inform the Advocate General cannot be a subtitute of notice.
Learned Additional Advocate General has stated that he and the Advocate General had no information that the validity of the Act was to be considered by the learned Judge.
No notice or information was ever sent by the Court to the Advocate General and the Attorney General of India.
Declaring the legislative enactment or any provision thereof as ultra vires is a serious matter and such a question should not be entertained and validity of the provisions of the Act should not be decided without impleading the State/Union of India, as the case may be, and without giving them notice, so as to enable them to defend their enactments.
That apart, provision of legislative enactment cannot be declared as ultra vires by this Court in exercise of suo moto power under Art. 226 of the Constitution.
There has to be pleadings in this respect and prayer for declaration of an enactment as ultra vires has to be expressly made in the writ petition.
In the instant case this was not the position.
Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sri Ambica Mills, AIR 1974 SC 1300 : 1974 Lab IC 841, has held as under: "Be that as it may, we do not, however, think it necessary to consider whether the High Court was right in its view that the impugned provisions violated the fundamental rights of the citizen employers or employees, for, it is wise tradition with Courts that they will not adjudge on the constitutionality of statute except when they are called upon to do so when legal rights of the litigants are in actual controversy and as part of this rule is the principle that one to whom the application of a statute is constitutional will not be heard to attack the statute on the ground that it must also be taken as applying to other persons or other situations in which its application might be unconstitutional (see United State v. Ranies, (1960) 362 US 17.
"A person ordinarily is precluded from challenging the constitutionality of governmental action by invoking the rights of others and it is not sufficient that the statute or administrative regulation is unconstitutional as to other persons or classes of persons, it must affirmatively appear that the person attacking the statute comes within the class of persons affected by it".
In this connection it may be mentioned that the aforesaid provisions have been declared as ultra vires on the ground that they violate the fundamental rights of the lawyers.
Neither the petition was filed by a lawyer nor any of the lawyers was party to the petition.
The employer neither challenged the validity of the above provisions nor could he plead for declaration of those provisions as ultra vires on the ground that they violate some body's else right because it was not a case of public interest litigation.
8.
Learned Additional Advocate General and Sri KP Agarwal, learned counsel for the appellant have further contended that the two provisions mentioned hereinbefore of the two Acts are not ultra vires and have prayed for holding those provisions as valid.
In the absence of proper pleadings, it will not be proper for us to go into the question of the validity of those provisions.
If we do so, we will be committing the same error, which was committed by the learned single Judge.
9.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-respondent No. 2 is that the validity of the order impugned in the writ petition was not decided by the learned single Judge, because the aforesaid provisions of the two Acts were declared as ultra vires and if the judgment of the learned single Judge is to be set aside, this case should be remanded to him for deciding the writ petition on the merits.
This submission of the learned counsel is fully justified and has to be accepted.
The petitioner-respondent never challenged the validity of the two provisions of the two Acts and had merely prayed for quashing of the order passed by the Labour Court, whereby its objections were rejected.
It is, as such, entitled to get its writ petition decided on merits.
10.
Before parting with this case, it may be mentioned that an application was moved by the appellant, through Sri PS Tripathi, Advocate for dismissing it on the ground that the appellant has never authorised Sri KP Agarwal, Advocate to file this appeal and the appeal has been filed by Sri Agarwal without any instruction or authority of the appellant.
Sri KP Agarwal has stated that he was the counsel for the appellant in the writ petition and he has also been engaged to file and argue this appeal.
In this connection he has invited the attention of the Court to the Vakalatnama, executed by the appellant itself for filing this special appeal which has been filed along with the appeal.
When this fact was brought to the notice of Sri PS Tripathi, Advocate, he stated that he has no knowledge that appeal was filed along with the Vakalatnama, executed by the appellant itself otherwise he would not have moved such an application.
In view of the above position, we do not think it proper to pass any order on the application moved by the appellant through Sri PS Tripathi, Advocate.
It is accordingly consigned to record.
11.
This appeal is accordingly allowed.
Judgment of the learned single Judge is set aside.
The matter is remanded to the learned single Judge for deciding the writ petition on merits in accordance with law.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.