GS Singhvi, J - This will writ petition is similar to a large number of writ petitions already decided by this Court.
2.
The petitioners have claimed issue of a writ of mandamus for the grant of the benefit of higher pay scale with effect from the dates they have acquired higher qualifications.
In para-2 of the writ petition, the petitioners have set out the dates on which they acquired higher qualifications.
According to the petitioners, in terms of the policy decision of the Government circulated vide letter dated 23.7.1957, they have become entitled to be given higher pay scales.
3.
Respondents have opposed the writ petition on the ground of delay and laches and also on the ground that after the issue of Annexure R-1 dated 931990 (wrongly typed as 931991), the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of higher grades.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
The objection of delay and laches raised by the learned AAG deserves to be rejected because an identical objection raised in Rattan Singh and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) P.L.R.
274 : 1995(1) SCT 711 has been considered and rejected by a Division Bench of this Court of which one of us was a member, with the following observations:-  "Delay and laches are twin ground evolved by Courts for denying relief to a person who approaches it after a lapse of considerable time for issue of a writ under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The rule that the Court will not give relief to a person who has filed a petition after a lapse of long time is a rule evolved by the Courts.
It is not a legislative instrument like the Limitation Act which prevents the Courts from granting relief in a given case.
Rather, it is a rule of self-imposed limitation innovated by the Courts for not issuing things or where a third party would be adversely affected due to the issue of writ after a long delay.
This rule which forms part of the Judge-made law cannot, however, be applied to each and every case for non-suiting a petitioner irrespective of the nature of claim and the circumstances which have contributed to the delay in filing of the petition.
What we wish to emphasize is that no straight-jacket formula or wooden rule can be applied for declining or not declining the relief to a petitioner, who has approached the High Court for appropriate relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In case and every case the Court shall have to scrutinize the relevant facts for determining as to whether it will be appropriate to exercise jurisdiction in favour of a person who has approached it after a long lapse of time.
In a given case, Court may decline relief to a person only on the ground that he has approached it after a long lapse of time.
In a given case Court may decline relief to a person only on the ground that he has approached it after a passage of few months counted from the date of acrual of cause of action.
In another case it may give relief to a person who has filed a petition even after lapse of many years.
Primary consideration, which must weigh in the mind of the Court while adjudicating upon an objection of delay or laches, is as to whether the petitioner has been grossly negligent in pursuing his remedy and whether the delay has resulted in a situation where rights of others have been settled and it would be inequitable to unsettle those rights.
Another reason why the preliminary objection raised by the learned Assistant Advocate General merits rejection is that the respondents cannot be allowed to take advantage of their action/omission to give effect to the judgment of the Apex Court in their true spirit.
Doctrine of equality enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is binding on the State and its agencies.
The State has to take active steps for creating a situation where real equality can be enjoyed by the citizens.
The concept of fairness in the State action forms part of the doctrine of equality.
It is, therefore, imperative for the State to be fair to all its citizens.
Instead of being fair to one of the lowest paid class of its employees, the State has tried to take shelter of hyper-technical objection of delay.
We refuse to be swayed by the hallow sought to be created by the State that grant of higher pay scale to the petitioners would put the State to a lot of financial burden.
This spacious plea cannot be used to frustrate one of the basic rights available to the citizens of this country".
5.
Another argument of the learned AAG that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of higher pay scales in view of the circular dated 931990, deserves to be rejected because the circular dated 931990 is not retrospective and all petitioners had acquired higher qualifications much prior to the issue of circular dated 931990.
6.
On merits of the case the claim made by the petitioners is fully covered by the decisions of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana, 1987(4) S.L.R.
4 and other cases reference to which has been made in Rattan Singh's case (supra).
In view of these decisions we do not consider it necessary to discuss in detail the contentions advanced by the learned counsel.
Instead we adopt the reasons given in Rattan Singh's case (supra) and hold that the petitioners are entitled to appropriate relief in those terms in which it has been given to Rattan Singh and others.
7.
Consequently the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to give benefit of higher grades to the petitioners on the same line on which it has been given in Rattan Singh's case (supra).
Petition allowed.