GS Singhvi, J - This writ petition has been filed against the notice (Annexure P-13) issued for retirement of the petitioner w.e.f.
7.9.1989 on attaining the age of 55 years.
2.
After having served the Indian Army between 961953 and 1371956, the petitioner was discharged on medical ground.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Constable in the Punjab Police on 25111956.
With the bifurcation of the State of Punjab and the creation of the new State of Haryana the petitioner was allocated to the service of the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 10.12.1969 and was confirmed as such on 2061980.
He was further promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on 591984.
Lastly he was promoted as Sub Inspector on 281986.
After his attaining the age of 55 years, case of the petitioner was considered for further continuance of service.
As a result of evaluation of the record of the petitioner, the competent authority formed an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service beyond 55 years of age.
This has led to the issue of notice (Annexure P-13) dated 861989 by the Commandant, 3rd Battalion, HAP, Hisar.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned notice on two grounds.
His first plea is that the impugned notice has not been issued by the competent authority on its own but the said authority has acted under the dictates of his superior authority, i.e. Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Second plea of the petitioner is that his record of service was not such which could enable the competent authority to form an opinion that he has outlived his utility.
4.
The respondents have controverted the claim made by the petitioner on the ground that the competent authority has exercised its power under the relevant rules and after considering the record of the petitioner.
Their submission is that the impugned order has been passed by the competent authority after due application of mind to the relevant considerations.
Respondents have asserted that the petitioner's service record is tainted with several adversities and, therefore, he cannot claim a right to continue in service beyond 55 years of age.
5.
First argument of Shri Sihota, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that although the decision to retire the petitioner was to be taken by the competent authority, namely, Superintendent of Police/Commandant, Haryana Armed Police, in fact the decision had been taken by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and the competent authority has merely issued the impugned notice in a routine manner.
Shri Sihota argued that the Superintendent of Police has seen the record of the petitioner on 691989, ie one month after the issue of notice Annexure P-13 and this by itself is sufficient to show that the impugned notice has not been issued by the competent authority after due application of mind.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that no plea regarding the competence of the Commandant, 3rd Battalion, HAP, Hisar, to issue the notice of retirement has been raised in the writ petition and, therefore, the Court should not consider this plea.
Ms. Bahri further argued that the Commandant is in the rank of the Superintendent of Police and, therefore, under Rule 121 of the Punjab Police Rules, Vol. II, the Commandant could issue the order of retirement of the petitioner.
She then argued that in terms of Rule 1310 promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector is made with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police and, therefore, notice of retirement issued with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police cannot be treated as without jurisdiction.
6.
From the record, which has been produced before the Court, it is revealed that the petitioner's case for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years was placed before respondent No. 3 in March, 1989 and he (respondent No. 3) issued letter dated 13.3.1989 to the petitioner and asked him to express his willingness or unwillingness to continue in service beyond 55 years of age.
Thereafter, the petitioner's record was placed before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Madhuban, who considered the same and wrote letter No. 16061/A-2 dated 761989 to the Commandant, 3rd Battalion, H.A.P., Hisar (respondent No. 3) directing the latter to retire the petitioner from service.
On the very next day, respondent No. 3 issued the impugned notice for premature retirement of the petitioner.
7.
In so far as the question of competence of the Superintendent of Police/Commandant, 3rd Battalion to issue the notice of retirement of the petitioner is concerned, the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Manohar Lal, AIR 1987 SC 201, concludes the controversy.
In that case, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that the Superintendent of Police is competent to retire a Sub-Inspector (Non-gazetted) in terms of Rule 121 of the Punjab Police Rules, Vol. II.
The same view has been reiterated by this Court in Tahal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(2) RSJ 513.
A plain reading of Rule 133(ii) along with Rule 134. of the Punjab Police Rules also supports the conclusion that the Superintendent of Police is competent to retire a person holding the rank of Sub Inspector (Non-gazetted).
Therefore, the argument of Shri Sihota that respondent No. 3 was not competent to issue the notice of retirement of the petitioner is untenable and is liable to be rejected.
8.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid conclusion, the impugned notice of retirement cannot be upheld because the material which has been placed on the record and the record produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General show that the competent authority did not apply its mind to the record of the petitioner.
Instead it acted under the dictates of a higher authority, namely, the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The record relating to pre- mature retirement of the petitioner clearly shows that the same was considered by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and not by the Commandant, 3rd Battalion, H.A.P., Hisar.
It was the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Madhuban, who wrote letter dated 761989 to respondent No. 3 with a direction that the petitioner be given a notice of three months for retirement.
However, at the same time the Deputy Inspector General of Police cautioned the respondent No. 3 by saying that no reference to the office of the Deputy Inspector General of Police should be given in the notice of retirement.
At the cost of repetition, it needs be mentioned that respondent No. 3 issued the notice of retirement immediately after he received the letter dated 761989 and the record does not show that respondent No. 3 independently examined the record and form an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service beyond the age of 55 years.
It is, therefore, reasonable to hold that the competent authority had not applied its mind to the record of the case but had acted under the dictates of a higher authority.
9.
There may not be any exception to the notice of retirement issued by a competent authority on its own evaluation of the service record of the employee and a mere approval by the superior authority of a decision of the competent authority will not vitiate the decision taken by the competent authority.
However, where the competent authority merely acts as a post- office to issue the notice of retirement on the basis of an evaluation of the record by the higher authority, the retirement cannot be upheld on the ground that the higher authority had merely approved the action of the competent authority.
In the case in hand, the decision to retire the petitioner has been taken not by respondent No. 3 but by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and, therefore, even though the impugned notice has been issued by respondent No. 3 the same cannot be treated as lawful one.
10.
Second argument of Shri Sihota is that service record of the petitioner was not such on the basis of which any reasonable man could form an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service beyond 55 years of age.
He pointed out that after his promotion on 281986, the petitioner did not earn any adverse report casting doubt on his integrity and on the basis of his past record, it was not possible to form an opinion that the petitioner has outlived his utility.
Learned counsel argued that the adverse entries made in the service record of the petitioner prior to 1986 will be deemed to have been washed off due to his promotion and the same could not have been taken into consideration for his pre-mature retirement.
He also argued that the notices Annexures P-9 and P-11 were also liable to be ignored because no time was available to the petitioner to make representation against these notices.
Ms. Bahri argued that in a period of ten years prior to his retirement, the petitioner had earned seven reports of which three were adverse and, therefore, he did not have 70% good record of service.
She further pointed out that in the year 1973 also adverse remarks were entered in the confidential card maintained in respect of the petitioner.
In addition to this, he was punished with stoppage of two annual increments vide order dated 661989 and two recorded warnings were given to him on 14121985 and 2521986 and that these adverse reports were sufficient to enable the competent authority to form an opinion that the petitioner has outlived his utility to be retained in Government service.
11.
Upto 1992, apparently conflicting views were expressed in some of the decisions of the Supreme Court about the degree of importance to be attached to the adverse service record of an employee prior to his promotion while examining his case for pre-mature retirement/compulsory retirement.
The controversy has been finally settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, 1992(2) SCT 92(SC) : JT 1992(2) SC 1.
In para 34 of the judgment, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have culled out the following principles :-  (i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the Government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a Government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is arbitrary - in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The Government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If a Government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference.
Interference is permissible only on the grounds mentioned in (iii) above.
This aspect has been discussed in paras 30 to 32 above."
12.
From the above-quoted principles, it is clear that promotion of an employee from a lower post to a higher post does not at altogether obliterate his past service record.
It merely reduces the gravity of the adverse record, particularly when the promotion is based on merit.
This judgment has to be read along with the decision of the Supreme Court in D Ramaswami v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1982 SC 793.
While upholding the contention of the appellant D Ramaswamy that order of his compulsory retirement shortly after promotion was invalid when there was nothing even mildly suggestive of inaptitude or inefficiency thereafter and there was no entry in the service book to his discredit, the Supreme Court observed that if there was some entry, not wholly favourable to the officer after his promotion, one might hark back to similar or like entries in the past and take a decision to retire the employee.
A combined reading of these judgments shows that promotion of an officer does not altogether obliterate the previous adverse record.
It only dilutes the gravity of adversity.
However, if the employee concerned earns similar report after promotion, the previous adverse record can certainly be taken into consideration for forming an opinion that the employee has outlived his utility or that the time has arrived when he should take rest.
Adverse reports subsequent to promotion can certainly be read in conjunction with the previous adverse reports for forming an opinion that the employee has outlived his utility for public service.
In view of the above, it must be held that the contention of the learned counsel that no material was available with the competent authority to form an opinion on the issue of retirement of the petitioner cannot be accepted.
13.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed only on the ground that the competent authority did not apply its mind to the record of the petitioner but acted under the dictates of his superior officer while issuing the impugned notice and, therefore, the impugned notice is quashed.
However, it is left open to the competent authority to independently examine the record of the petitioner and take a fresh decision as to whether the petitioner should have been retained in service beyond 55 years of age.
Such decision should be taken by the competent authority within three months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The competent authority shall take a decision without being influenced by any observation made in this order.
If the competent authority once against comes to the conclusion that the petitioner did not deserve to continue beyond 55 years of age, the petitioner shall not get any other relief.
On the other hand, if it is held the petitioner had a right to continue in service beyond 55 years, the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service till the age of superannuation and he shall in that event get all monetary benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.