Brijesh Kumar, J - Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner is aggrieved by the award given by the Labour Court, Lucknow dated June 21, 1979 holding that the termination of the petitioner's services was valid and that he was not entitled for any relief.
3.
It appears that the petitioner was in the employment of opposite party No. 1.
His services were terminated on December 10, 1975.
He was paid retrenchment compensation calculating the same on the basis that he had been in the employment of opposite party No. 1 with effect from July 1, 1971 to December 10, 1975.
The petitioner raised a dispute, taking up several grounds, which was ultimately referred for adjudication to the Labour Court, by the State Government under Section 10(1)(C) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, in all eight issues are framed, out of which issue Nos. 1 and 2 were not pressed.
The main issues, however, were issue Nos. 3 to 6 which were decided together.
4.
Without entering into the facts which may have no material bearing on the precise point to be decided, suffice it to say that one of the questions to be considered was whether the employers had complied with the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act or not.
In this connection, the case of the petitioner was that full amount of retrenchment compensation as was admissible to him, was not paid.
According to him, he was employed by opposite party No. 1 since June, 1971, but for the purposes of calculating the amount of compensation, the period of employment has been reckoned with effect from July 1, 1991.
Documentary evidence has been filed by opposite party No. 1, which does not seem to have been disputed, showing that a letter of regular employment was issued to the petitioner on July 1, 1971.
The case of the petitioner, however, was that he was an employee prior to July, 1971 and had been working for opposite party No. 1 since June, 1971.
5.
The fact that letter of regular appointment was issued on 171971, is not in dispute, nor the fact that the petitioner had been working since before July, 1971, as it has been found and admitted by one of the witnesses of the employers that the petitioner had been working with effect from June 7, 1971, but he was kept on trial.
The case of opposite party No. 1 is that the period during which the opposite party No. 1 took work from the petitioner on trial, is not to be treated as period in employment with opposite party No. 1.
The Labour Court has adverted to this point and has recorded a finding of fact to the effect that the petitioner was given letter of regular appointment on July 1, 1971.
It appears that letters of temporary appointments were given to the petitioner from time to time showing that his employment was with effect from July 1, 1971.
At the same time, the Labour Court has also recorded a finding that on the own saying of opposite party No. 1, the petitioner worked with opposite party No. 1 with effect from June 7, 1971 on daily wages.
According to opposite party No. 1, it was on trial basis.
All that has to be seen, is as to what is the legal effect of the said finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court and whether the period during which the petitioner worked on casual or daily wages basis before issuance of letter of regular appointment will be counted towards total period of service for calculating retrenchment compensation.
The view which has been taken by the Labour Court is as follows :  "For the purposes of calculating retrenchment compensation, only his regular employment can be taken into consideration and this regular employment without any doubt commenced from 1st July, 1971."
6.
It was then observed that the employer had correctly calculated the retrenchment compensation.
7.
It would be beneficial to have a look at the provisions requiring payment of retrenchment compensation.
Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act provides as follows :  25F.
Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.
- No workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until -  (a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice;  (b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous (c)...." service or any part thereof in excess of six months; and  8.
From the above, what appears to be essentially required under the law, so as to be entitled for retrenchment compensation, is that the workman must have been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer.
The provision makes no distinction in the matter of nature of employment; that is to say, it may either be casual, temporary, regular or permanent, but it has to be continuous.
If a workman is asked to work for an employer and is paid for the same on daily wages basis, it would nonetheless amount to his employment by the employer.
The employer may have that in his mind that he would be watching or assessing the performance of the workman for some time engaging him on casual or daily wages basis, but that would be immaterial.
If the employment of service is continued on regular basis, preceded by temporary or daily wages employment, it cannot be argued that period spent prior to issuance of letter of regular employment is to be excluded, or it does not constitute "service" or employment.
Any other interpretation will be against the letter and the very spirit of Section 25F of the Act.
9.
On behalf of the petitioner, learned counsel has placed reliance, in support of the above proposition, upon a case reported in 1976 SCC (Labour and Services) 132, the State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money.
If this decision is seen for a limited purpose, as to whether a period of service rendered as a temporary employee can be tagged with the rest of the period the workman worked, for reckoning a period of one year, (240 days in a year), it would be clear that such a period will be counted in the total length of service.
A period of service of nine days on temporary basis was taken into account in counting total period of service rendered by the employee.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed before the Court a judgment rendered by the Madras High Court, reported in 1972 Labour Law Journal, 241, between the Pilot Pen Company (India) Private Ltd and the Presiding Officer Additional Labour Court and another.
It has been held in the said case that even a casual worker would come within the definition of 'workman'.
10.
A plain language of the relevant provisions itself, namely, Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act as well as the view taken in the two decisions referred to above, leave no room for doubt that the period of service rendered by a workman, in whatever nature it may be, namely, casual, temporary or otherwise, would amount to employment in terms of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The opposite party No. 3, namely, the Labour Court, has particularly gone wrong while holding that only period of regular employment can be taken into consideration for the purposes of calculating retrenchment compensation under the provisions of the Labour Laws.
11.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of opposite party No. 1 has then submitted that the amount which may fall short of required payment, would be so small that even though it was not paid, yet it would be a case where substantial compliance with the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act has been made.
It is submitted that whole amount has been paid and there would be no reasons for opposite party No. 1 not to pay or calculate the compensation including the period of 23 days in service rendered by the petitioner.
It is further submitted that in case substantial compliance has been made, it would not affect the validity of the termination.
In support of his contention, he has placed reliance upon 1980(40) Indian Factories and Labour Reports 27.
The facts of the said case were that the compensation had to be paid along with the notice of termination.
The payment was, however, postponed to the next day.
The plea which was raised was that since the payment was not made along with the service of notice, there was non-compliance of the provisions, hence the order was bad.
While considering this question, the Court examined the explanation submitted by the employer.
The explanation given was that it being Sunday it was not possible to make payment on that day, hence it was postponed for the next day, when it was made.
The Court held that the delay in making the payment was sufficiently explained hence it would be a case where, insistence should only be for substantial compliance with the provisions of the Act.
I am afraid, this case may not amply be applicable to the fact of the present case.
In my view, some stress has to be given to the observation made in the judgment about sufficient explanation for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act.
On facts of that case, it was held that the delay was sufficiently explained.
The non-compliance in the present case will depend upon its own facts.
It was not a case of mistake or any such helplessness, by reason of which it was not reasonably possible for the employer to comply with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was rather a case where legally incorrect stand was taken by the employer to the effect that the period of service rendered by the petitioner on trial as casual employee would not be calculated or tagged with the total period of employment for the purpose of calculating the retrenchment compensation.
This stand taken by the respondent No. 1 seems to have been hotly contested before the Labour Court which recorded a definite finding that this period was to be excluded.
In this Court too, it has been vehemently urged that the said period is liable to be excluded.
That being the position, it cannot be said that the present case is a case of substantial compliance.
It is a conscious non-compliance with the provisions of the Act on a stand which has been firmly taken by the opposite parties and which is legally not tenable.
This would not sufficiently explain the non-compliance on the part of the employer.
Therefore, without disputing the proposition of law as laid down in the case of Swadesh Press v. State of UP, (1980 (40) Indian Factories and Labour Reports 27, on facts in my view the opposite party No. 1 would not get any advantage out of that decision.
12.
In view of the discussion held above, the award of the Labour Court is not sustainable and it has to be set aside with a finding on merit to the effect that opposite party No. 1 failed to comply with the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
13.
The question next that arises is in regard to the payment of wages during all this period the petitioner was kept out of employment.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of opposite party No. 1 has drawn the attention of the Court to a statement made by the petitioner admitting that for certain period he had been working with Botliboi and Company since January 11, 1976 to August 5, 1977.
It is not very certain as to for what other period the petitioner may have been in employment with other employers and for how long he may have been out of employment.
This involves a question of fact.
It would, therefore, be left for decision by the Labour Court as to what amount the petitioner is entitled to be paid for this period.
The matter, will, therefore, have to be remanded to the Labour Court to make a fresh award in the light of the observations and findings recorded in this judgment and to arrive at the amount which is payable to the petitioner during the period he remained out of employment.
14.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed and the award of the Labour Court as contained in Annexure-1 to the writ petition is set aside.
Since the matter is quite old as the order of termination was passed in 1975, while remanding the case to the Labour Court, it is directed that the Labour Court shall give the award afresh in the light of the observations made above within a period not beyond three months from the date of presentation of a certified copy of this Judgment before it.
15.
The opposite party No. 1 shall bear the costs of the petition, which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.