RP Sethi, J - Aggrieved by the seniority list circulated vide Annexure P/4 dated 2691989, the appellants filed a writ petition in this Court praying for quashing of the said seniority list and the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Deputy Director vide Annexure P/5.
It was alleged that the impugned orders being Annexures P/4 and P/5 adversely affected the service rights of the appellants by affecting the chances of their promotion as they were the members of the service governed by (State Service Class II) Rules, 1966.
It was further prayed that a direction be issued to respondent No. 1 to consider the petitioners-appellants for promotion to the post of Deputy Director prior to respondent No. 2 who was alleged to be usurper of a public office.
The relevant facts of the case as projected by the appellants in their writ petition were that consequent upon their direct recruitment through the Punjab Service Commission as Assistant Directors in the Punjab Industries Department, all the petitioners joined the service on 2691979.
The services of the petitioners were governed by Punjab Industries Service (State Service Class 11) Rules, 1966 (for short the `Rules').
Rule 9 of the aforesaid rules provides method of recruitment.
Respondent No. 2 was initially appointed as Instructress (Leather Malerkotla) on 21121961 in the pay scale of Rs. 120-200 and continued to hold the said post till 10.1.1979 when she was promoted as Assistant Director (Designs) on ad hoc basis for a period of six months in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400 vide Annexure P/1.
She was later adjusted as Functional Manager, District Industries Centre in August, 1979 in the scale of Rs. 800-1400.
Aggrieved by her appointment, one Mr. RK Bhardwaj filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 266 of 1979 mainly on the ground that as respondent No. 2 did not possess the requisite qualifications she was not entitled to hold the post.
IS Tiwana, J vide his judgment dated 911986 quashed the promotion of respondent No. 2 holding that she was not qualified to be promoted as Assistant Director in view of the qualifications prescribed by the Government.
The action of the respondent-State is alleged to have been held to be wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Despite the judgment in the case of Mr. RK Bhardwaj, the respondent No. 2 was not reverted to her original post of instructuress (Leather Handicrafts).
During the pendency of the civil writ petition filed by Mr. RK Bhardwaj, respondent No. 2 was adjusted as Functional Manager, District Industries Centre, in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400.
On the other hand vide letter No. 1/70/79-2NI-80 dated 1691980 she was given the higher scale of Rs. 825-1580 with retrospective effect i.e. from August, 1979.
Respondent No. 2 is alleged to have been officiating as General Manager, District Industries Centre, Mohali for 8-9 months in the year 1983-84.
On 1481989, the Punjab Public Service Commission refused to approve the appointment of respondent No. 2 and found that she did not fulfil the basic qualifications/experience required for the post of Functional Manager/Assistant Director and directed respondent No. 1 to revert her to her original post vide letter Annexure P/3.
Respondent No. 1 thereafter circulated the final seniority list, Annexure P/4, on 2691989 wherein respondent No. 2 was placed are number 1 and vide Annexure P/5 issued, on the same day, another letter whereby respondent, No. 2 who was working as Functional Manager/Assistant Director was promoted as Deputy Director in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000 and was posted as Officer on Special Duty in the office of Director Industries, Punjab.
It was alleged that the impugned order fixing the seniority list and placing respondent No. 2 above the petitioners and her promotion as Deputy Director was illegal, without jurisdiction, arbitrary and against the Rules, which was void and mala fide on the grounds detailed in the writ petition.
The appellants had based their claim on the provisions of Rules 9 and 11 of the Rules.
2.
The claim of the appellants was resisted by way of written statement filed on behalf of the State through Shri KC Mahajan, Additional Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Industries, stating therein that respondent No. 2 was initially appointed as Fancy Leather Insructuress in the pay scale of Rs. 120-300 and she continued as.
such till 10.1.1979 when she was appointed and not promoted as Assistant Director Design (Misc.) on 10.1.1979 in the Design Institute, Chandigarh in the time scale of Rs. 300-600 later revised to Rs. 800-1400 w.e.f.
111979 purely ad hoc basis for a period of six months.
She was appointed as Manager (KVI) in the District Industries Centre, Ludhiana vide government order dated 381979 and allowed the pay scale of Rs. 350-900 from the date she joined as Manager i.e. with effect from 3181979.
The pay scale was thereafter revised w.e.f.
111978 to Rs. 825/580.
It was contended that appointment of respondent No. 2 as Manager was independent of her posting as Assistant Director Design (Misc.) in the Designs Institute.
The post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.) was stated to be not existing in the rules.
The post of Assistant Director to which the appellants belonged existed in the rules and had no connection whatsoever with the post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.) which was an isolated post with different qualifications for appointment and is in the Design Institute of the Industries Department.
The posts were stated to be belonging to different cadres though there was resemblance of nomenclature.
In the year 1978 the District Industries Centres (DIC) Scheme was introduced in the country with a different staffing pattern which amongst others envisaged the appointment of Functional Managers in the different District Industries Centres.
16 ex-cadre posts of Functional Manager were initially created for the aforesaid purpose which were entirely different and under a different scheme having no connection with the post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.).
The staffing pattern of District Industries Centres was revised in the year 1981 on the receipt of instructions from the Government of India and ultimately 12 posts of General Managers, 44 posts of Functional Managers and 36 posts of Project Managers were created.
After her selection as Manager (Leather Goods) on 1531979, the respondent No. 2 requested the Secretary Industries, Punjab, to spare her services for appointment in the Haryana Small Industries and Export Corporation on deputation at usual terms and conditions but on her application the Director Designs under whom she was working at that time recommended that she being expert in leather and handicraft goods should not be spared in the public interest.
The Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, Ministry of Industries, Government of India, vide letter dated 331979 desired that atleast one post of Functional Manager in each District Industries Centre should go to a woman who should be responsible for identifying the needs of rural women and helping them in exploiting the available resources by setting up income generating projects.
Respondent No. 2 was thereafter appointed as Functional Manager on 1691980.
It is submitted that Shri RK Bhardwaj filed a writ petition but it is submitted that he did not prefer any claim to the post of Functional Manager and his claim was confined to the post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.) which was given to him in compliance with the court order dated 911986.
The order of appointment of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Director (Designs) was cancelled/withdrawn in accordance with the directions of the court dated 911986.
It was submitted that quashing of appointment of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Director Design (Misc.) has no bearing on the cadre of Assistant Director to which the appellants belong.
3.
In her reply the respondent No. 2 stated that the post of Functional Manager and General Manager were not governed by the statutory rules and that the post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.) was an ex-cadre post.
She submitted that the judgment of the Court in C.W.P.
No. 266 of 1979 has no bearing as the post was not governed by the aforesaid rules.
4.
Relying upon the judgment of this Court in TS Sandhu v. State of Punjab, 1975 LIC 203, the learned Single Judge vide the judgment impugned in this appeal held that the Government was competent to determine the inter se seniority of officiating and temporary public servants in the absence of statutory rules on the point subject to the condition that while deciding such a claim the government should not contravene any of the statutory or fundamental rights of the public servants.
It was further held that the appellants have not correctly stated material facts and that the provisions of Rule 11 of the Rules were not applicable.
The learned Single Judge held that the appellants had not disclosed in the writ petition that posts of Functional Managers and the General Managers are ex-cadre posts and the aforesaid statutory rules are not applicable.
They have also not clarified in the writ petition that the post of Assistant Director Design (Misc.) was also an ex-cadre post and to that statutory rules have no application.
This matter has been fully explained by the State in the written statement and petitioners have not controverted the factual statement made therein.
The writ petition deserves to be dismissed on this short ground.
As I have heard the arguments at length, I have gone into the merits of the case but the petitioners have no case on merits also."
5.
It was contended by the appellants that the finding of the learned Single Judge was against law and facts and based upon such assumptions which are not supported by any statutory provision or the authority of law.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
The Rules were framed by the President of India in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Rule 2(b) defines the direct appointment to mean an appointment made otherwise than by promotion or by transfer of a person already in the service of the Govt. of India or Govt. of any State or Union Territory in India Service includes all its different cadres and miscellaneous posts given in Appendix 'A' to the Rules.
The cadre post means a permanent post in the service as given in appendix 'A' to the Rules.
Member of the service was defined to mean an officer holding either any of the posts mentioned in Appendix 'A' to the Rules or any post created by the Government in exercise of the powers vested in it by Notes to Rule 3 of the Rules.
Notes to Rule 3 provided:  (1) Nothing in these rules shall effect the inherent and absolute right of Government to add to or reduce the number of such posts as are given in Appendix 'A'.
(2) Any new posts created with existing/similar designations shall automatically stand merged in this service and shall be filled up through method of appointment prescribed hereinafter.
(3) The Government will have the absolute right to create new posts with different designations and scales of pay, either permanently or temporarily.
(4) The Govt. shall have full powers to change the designations of any post given in Appendix 'A' or created by it in exercise of its power under notes 1, 2, and 3 above.
Such powers shall be exercised by issue of a notification."
Rule 9 of the Rules provides the method of 'recruitment as under:  "Method of recruitment :- Recruitment to the service shall be made in the following manner:  (a) In the case of Deputy Director, Community Project Officer (Industries), Project Officer (IInd Marketing Officer) (Emporia Organisation) by promotion from amongst the Assistant Director, Assistant Controller of Stores, District Industries Officer, Store Inspection Officer, Purchase Officer (Emporia Organisation), Textile Officer (Marketing) and Textile Officer (Development) having at least five years experience as such.
(b) In the case of Assistant Director, Assistant Controller of Stores, District Industries Officer, Stores Inspection Officer, Purchase Officer (Emporia Organisation), Textile Officer (Marketing) and Textile Officer (Development).
(i) by direct appointment on the basis of selection made through a competitive examination to be held by the Commission."
Rule 11 of the Rules reads as under:  "11.
Seniority of Members of the service :  (1) The seniority inter se of members of the service holding the same class of posts shall be determined by the length of continuous service on that posts:  Provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed and person appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection.
Provided further that in the case of two members appointed on the same date their seniority shall be determined as follows:  (a) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise;  (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer;  (c) in the case of a member appointed by promotion or by transfer seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointment from which he was promoted or transferred; and  (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres their seniority shall be determined according to pay; preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the length of such service is also the same an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Notes: (1) This rule shall not apply to members appointed on purely provisional basis pending their approval from the Punjab Public Service Commission.
(ii) In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 10 the date of appointments for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subrule (1) the seniority of the members of the service referred to in the proviso to rule 3 shall be the same as it existed immediately before the commencement of these rules."
8.
It has been admitted that the pay scale of the General Manager is equal to the pay scale of the Deputy Director and that of the Assistant Director to the Functional Manager.
It was, however, submitted that the posts of General Manager, District Industries Centre were ex-cadre posts.
It is also not disputed that Shri RK Bhardwaj filed a writ petition which was decided by IS Tiwana, J vide his order dated 911986 holding:  "That equally bad was the promotion of respondent No. 2 vide order Annexure P/5 which deserves to be quashed.
I order accordingly."
Respondent No. 2 in that petition was none else excepting Vijay Laxmi, respondent No. 2 in this appeal also.
It is also not disputed that the said respondent was never reverted despite the judgment of this Court and only her promotion order was set aside.
She was allowed to hold the post of Assistant Director (Design) despite the judgment of this Court.
It is also true that said Shri Bhardwaj who had been given the relief in terms of the aforesaid judgment did not move the Court for removal of respondent No. 2 from the post held by her despite the judgment of the Court.
It is regrettable that the respondent-authorities did not comply with the direction of the Court and have tried to justify the promotion of respondent on frivolous and concocted grounds.
The only appropriate order which is required to be passed is to quash the appointment of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Director on the basis of the earlier judgment of this Court but keeping in view the fact that the said respondent has been permitted to hold the post vide subsequent orders passed in her favour, we are taking a very lenient view by not quashing her appointment as Assistant Director.
Liberal view taken by us should not be deemed to be precedent in future, However, by permitting her to remain posted on the post of Assistant Director we are of the view that she cannot be given any additional benefit for perpetuating the wrongs in her favour for reasons best known to her and the authorities responsible for lapses and omissions.
Vide Note 2 to Rule 3 of the Rules, it has been specifically provided that, "any new post created with existing or similar designations shall automatically stand merged in this service and shall be filled up through method of appointment prescribed hereinafter."
It can therefore not be said that the post held by respondent No. 2 was an ex-cadre post which did not prescribe any limit for her further promotion.
She was required to be deemed to be in the service and despite holding an ex-cadre post could be treated to be occupying the post which was held by the petitioners admittedly prior to her being appointed.
Thus we say on the assumption that permitting her to hold the post despite the order in C.W.P.
No. 266 of 1979 amounted to her appointment to the post of Assistant Director.
Respondents vide Annexure P/6 dated 3181988 considered the matter relating to the fixation of seniority of various officers in the cadre of Functional Managers/Assistant Directors of common cadre and examined the case in the light of the following guidelines:  (i) seniority must be given only for the period spent on regular service.
(ii) seniority must be given first to such of the regular Class 11 Officers whose posts were held in abeyance to create the posts of FMs or such of the regular Class 11 recruits of the department whose posts were subsequently given the posts of FMs.
(iii) seniority to such of the FMs who were appointed as such by the department subsequently should be only given from the day orders were issued to regularise their service, i.e. 11.
121986 (though these orders have yet to be approved by PPSC).
The inter se seniority of officers in this latter category should be governed by their length of service as FMs.
On the basis of the aforesaid guidelines the government decided to fix the seniority of Functional Managers/Assistant Directors as under:  1.
W.C. Monga 8.2.1979  2.
Banta Singh -do- 3.
BD Dhupar September 4.
Vijay Sharma -do- 5.
RD Sehgal -do- 6.
Manmohan Singh -do-  7.
RP Sandhu -do- 8.
VN Mathur -do- 9.
Bakhshish Singh -do- 10.
JS Bihla -do- 11.
SS Sidhu -do- 12.
SP Attri -do- 13.
Surjit Singh -do- 14.
JS.
Rai 17.9.1986  15.
Vijay Laxmi 11.121986.
16.
VK Kapur 11.121986.
While dealing with the case of respondent No. 2, it was held:  "Smt. Vijay Laxmi though has been continuing as FM on ad hoc basis since 3181979, yet her services were regularised only on 11.121986 subject to, of course, approval by the PPSC.
The PPSC approval is yet to be obtained in her case.
So strictly speaking we cannot deem her services to be regular even though orders to this effect had been passed.
The Department of Personnel has given an advice that her services should be got regularised from the PPSC.
Accordingly, at best, she can be given seniority only w.e.f.
11.121986."
The services of respondent No. 2 having been regularised on 11.121986 subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission did not justify the issuance of the impugned orders', Annexures P/4 and P/5.
As we have already observed the retention of respondent No. 2 as Functional Manager despite the order of the Court in C.W.P.
266 of 1979 and the letter of the Punjab Public Service Commission, Annexure P/3, is not only regrettable but equally condemnable.
The Supreme Court in Dr. MA Haque and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(2) SCT 618 (SC) : JT.
1993(2) SC 265 dealt with the situation where a disregard was shown to the Rules and by-passing of the Public Service Commission and held:  "If a disregard of the rules and the by-passing of Public Service Commissions are permitted, it will open a back door for illegal recruitment without limit.
In fact this Court has, of late, been witnessing a constant violation of the recruitment rules and a scant respect for the Constitutional provisions requiring recruitment to the services through the Public service Commission.
It appears that since this Court has in some cases permitted regularisation of the irregularly recruited employees, some Governments and authorities have been increasingly resorting to irregular recruitments.
The result has been that the recruitment rules and the Public Service Commissions have been kept in cold storage and candidates dictated by various considerations are being recruited as a matter of course."
Similarly in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC 188, the Supreme Court held that even when ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of exigencies of administration, the persons appointed on such posts should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange and if the candidate is not available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange some appropriate method consistent with the requirement of Article 16 should be followed, affording opportunity to all eligible citizens to prefer their claim for the post.
It is now settled proposition of law that ad hoc appointments cannot be equated with appointments made after regular selection.
In the instant case, the appointment of respondent No. 2 even on ad hoc basis is disputed but as she has been allowed to hold the post and as observed earlier by us we are not inclined to disturb her appointment at this stage but would only treat her as appointed as Assistant Director with effect from 11.121986 in view of order Annexures A/2 and P/6.
9.
The Supreme Court in State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC) : 1993(2) JT.
598 held that to enable the seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post is required to be shown to have been initially appointed according to the rules applicable.
Where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules or made as a stop gap arrangement, the officiation of such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
10.
The Supreme Court in SB Patwardhan and another v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1977 SC 2051 examined the question of seniority in service between the promotees and the direct recruits and on facts of the case, came to the conclusion that the promotees as well as the direct recruits belonging to the same cadre constitute a single integrated case because they were discharging identical functions, bore similar responsibility and acquired sufficient amount of experience in their respective assignments.
However, in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 SC 1607 the Apex Court summed up the conclusion regarding the determination of seniority and held as under:  (a) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement the officiating in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
(b) If the initial appointment is not made by following procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted.
(c) When appointments are made from more than one source, it is permissible to fix the ratio for recruitment from the different sources, and if rules are framed in this regard they must ordinarily be followed strictly.
(d) If it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota rule, it should be substituted by an appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
In case, however, the quota rule is not followed continuously for a number of years because it was impossible to do so the inference is irresistible that the quota rule had broken down.
(e) Where the quota rule has broken down and the appointments are made from one source in excess of the quota, but are made after following the procedure prescribed by the rules for the appointments, the appointees should not be pushed down below the appointees from the other source inducted in the service at a later date.
(f) Where the rules permit the authorities to relax the provisions relating to quota, ordinarily a presumption should be raised that there was such relaxation when there is a deviation from the quota rule.
(g) The quota for recruitment from the different sources may be prescribed by executive instructions, if the rules are silent on the subject.
(h) If the quota rule is prescribed by an executive instruction, and is not followed continuously for a number of years, the inference is that the executive instruction has ceased to remain operative.
(i) The posts held by the permanent Deputy Engineers as well as officiating Deputy Engineers under the State of Maharashtra belonged to the single cadre of Deputy Engineers.
(j) The decision dealing with important questions concerning a particular service given after careful consideration should be respected rather than scrutinised for finding out any possible error.
It is not in the interest of service to unsettle a settled position.
With respect to writ petition No. 1327 of 1982, we further hold:  (k) That a dispute raised by an application under Article 32 of the Constitution must be held to be barred by principles of res judicata including the rule of constructive res judicata if the same has been earlier decided by a competent court by a judgment which became final."
11.
A Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana, (C.W.P.
No. 5592 of 1989 decided on 23.9.1994) examined whole of the case law on the subject and held that the view that ad hoc service per se should be counted to determine appointee's seniority in the cadre was not acceptable.
12.
In the instant case, the service rendered by respondent No. 2 allegedly against an ex cadre post and that too on the basis of Annexure P/6 clearly mentions that services of respondent No. 2 were regularised with effect from 11.121986 subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Even though the Punjab Public Service Commission did not give its approval yet it was mentioned in the said annexure," accordingly, at best, she can be given seniority only w.e.f.
11.121986."
Applying the test laid down in various judgments of the Supreme Court and of this Court it can safely be said that respondent No. 2 could not be treated as senior than the appellants.
13.
The learned Single Judge did not take note of the fact of the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 266 of 1979 decided on 9111986 and ignored the relevance of Note (ii) to Rule 3 of the Rules.
The posts of Functional Manager and General Manager could not be held to be ex-cadre posts for the purposes of conferment of additional advantages in favour of respondent No. 2.
Rule 11 was in fact applicable in the instant case and the learned Single Judge was not justified in holding that the said Rule had no bearing on the case.
Assuming the finding of the learned Single Judge to be correct it could not by any stretch of imagination be held that despite the post of Functional Manager and General Manager being ex-cadre posts, a joint seniority list of Assistant Directors and Functional Managers could be prepared to regulate the further promotions.
It is not understandable as to how the petitioners alone were benefited by the action of the respondents.
The mere fact that the appellants were intended to be benefited is by itself sufficient to conclude that the posts held by them and respondent No. 2 were equal for the purposes of promotion and therefore a joint seniority list was prepared.
The reliance of the learned Single Judge upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalit Mohan Deb and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1972 SC 995, was misplaced, The learned Single Judge wrongly rejected the contention of the counsel for the petitioners so far as setting aside of promotion of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Director vide the Court judgment was concerned, in view of our judgment, the respondent No. 2 was not entitled to hold the post of Assistant Director after the same was set aside by a Court verdict.
The learned counsel for the respondents in this appeal have not been a position to justify the judgment impugned or the action taken by the respondents while passing the orders Annexures P/4 and P/5.
14.
In view of what has been stated hereinabove, this appeal is allowed by setting aside the impugned judgment dated 1111991.
Consequently, the orders impugned in the writ petition dated 2691989, Annexures P/4 and P/5, are set aside.
It is, however, held that respondent No. 2 shall be deemed to have been promoted to the post of Assistant Director w.e.f.
11.121986 without affecting the rights of the appellants.
The further Promotion, if any, of the respondent No. 2 shall be deemed to be void and illegal.
The respondent shall determine the seniority of the parties in terms of our directions in this appeal placing respondent No. 2 as junior to the appellants and grant them all consequential benefits.
The appellants are also held entitled to payment of costs which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.