NK Jain & R Saxena, JJ.
- This special appeal under section 18 of the Rajasthan High Court Ordinance has been filed against the order of the learned Single Judge dt. 29.7.1993 whereby while allowing the writ petition he has ordered that the petitioner will be entitled to the grade of Rs. 355-570, the revised grade of which is Rs. 490-840, as revised from time to time.
2.
Learned counsel for the appellant-non-petitioners has contended that the learned Single Judge has erred in granting pay scale of Rs. 355-570 to the petitioner-respondent since the respondent is not ITI qualified and the appellants have rightly fixed him in the pay scale of Rs. 420-740, which was equivalent to the old pay scale of Rs. 295-500, provided for non-ITI He has relied on V Markendriya v. State of Andhra Pradash, AIR 1989 SC 1308.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-respondent has not been able to dispute the ratio laid down by the Apex Court in V Markendriya's case (supra) but contended that a Division Bench of this Court in Ravi Shanker Acharya v. State (D.B.C.W.
Petition No. 3368/88) decided on 1.10.93 has considered the Single Bench decisions rendered in Bajrang Singh v. State (SBCW Petition No. 3052/83) decided on 10121991 and Sohan Lal v. State (SBCW Petition No. 2580/83) decided on 23785, and directed the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner and fix his pay scale in the grade of Rs. 355-570 provided to ITI holders.
4.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the impugned order as well as the decisions cited at Bar.
5.
In V Markendriya v. State of AP (supra) the members of the Andhra Pradesh Engineering Subordinate Service as Supervisors in Category 1 of the Engineering Branch, who were granted lower pay scale being non-graduate in comparison to graduate Supervisors preferred an appeal before the Apex Court against the judgment of Division Bench by which order of the learned Single Judge granting same scale of pay to the non-graduate Supervisors as prescribed for the graduate Supervisors was set aside.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court while holding that the classification made between the graduate Supervisors and non-graduate Supervisors is reasonable and the State Government did not violate Arts.
14 & 16 of the Constitution in prescribing different scales of pay for them, observed as under :-  ``The principle of `equal pay for equal work' is not abstract one.
It is open to the State to prescribe different scale of pay for different cadres having regard to nature, duties, responsibilities and educational qualifications.
Different grades are laid down in service with varying qualification for entry into particular grade.
Higher qualification and experience based on length of service are valid considerations for prescribing different pay scales for different cadres."
6.
It is settled that reasonable classification is permissible provided different treatment to the two classes of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved and principle of equal pay for equal work is applicable among equals but it cannot be applied to unequals.
It is also settled that the State can prescribe different pay scales for different cadres having higher qualification and experience based on length of service.
7.
Applying the same principles in the present case, we have no hesitation in stating that the learned Single Judge has erred in granting same pay scale to the respondent, who is a non-ITI as is prescribed for ITI holders Tracer since the provisions of Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution do not exclude the laying down of selective tests, nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
8.
So far as the Division Bench decision of this court rendered in Ravi Shanker v. State (supra) is concerned, the same is not of any advantage to the petitioner-respondent as in that case vires of clauses which classifies the pay scale on the basis of qualification was abandoned but the case was decided on the mutual consent of the parties on the basis of decisions of this Court rendered in Bajrang Singh v. State (supra) and Sohan Lal v. State (supra), which is clear from the order itself, wherein it is recorded that ``The counsel for the parties agree that the case is squarely covered by the decisions cited above."
Apart from that, at that point of time the decision of their lordships of the Supreme Court rendered in V Markendriya v. State of AP.
(supra) was not brought to the notice of the Court.
Therefore, the Division Bench decision relied by the counsel for the petitioner-respondent is is not applicable and in our opinion, the said decision is perincuriam.
9.
Validity of a rule which provides that fresh recruited untrained teacher will receive fix pay of Rs. 130/- until he got training whereas pay scale of trained teacher is Rs. 160 to 360, was challenged before this court in another case.
This Court struck down the rule in part making distinction in the pay of trained and untrained teacher.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Raj.
v. Gopi Kishan, 1992(3) SCT 490 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 1754, while accepting the State appeal held that rule making distinction in their pay scales on the basis of their educational qualifications is not discriminatory.
Similar view has been expressed by the Apex Court in State of WB v. Hari Narayan & Ors., AIR (1994) 4 SCC 78.
10.
The petitioner-respondent cannot take advantage of the decision rendered in DB Civil Special Appeal No. 1011/94 (Defect) decided on 18794 filed against the common order of learned Single Judge as that special appeal was dismissed as time barred since the appellant failed to furnish the explanation of delay of 212 days.
While dismissing the special appeal the Division Bench has observed as under :-  ``Of course on merits, the State has a good case on account of the decision of the Supreme Court rendered in V Markendriya v. State of Andhra Pradesh (supra) but since the appeal is hopelessly barred by time, we cannot help the State.
Whenever a suitable case comes up for consideration on behalf of the State we will go into the merits.
The application and appeal are dismissed."
11.
In view of what we have discussed above, the impugned order dt. 29.7.93 passed by the learned Single Judge granting pay scale of Rs. 355-570 to the petitioner-respondent deserves to be set aside.
12.
In the result, the special appeal is allowed.
The impugned order dt. 20.7.93 is set aside.
Parties to bear their own costs.