TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of writ petition Nos. 68 of 1983 and 446 of 1983.
Both arise out of a common order passed by the Labour Court, Gwalior which order was affirmed by the Industrial Court.
These petitions arise out of the following facts :  The dispute arise almost two decades back 4th of August, 1974, which was an auspicious day for all citizens of this country, proved to be inauspicious so far as the petitioner Anand Prakash Verma is concerned.
The petitioner wanted a holiday on this day it being a Raksha Bandhan.
According to the petitioner, Raksha Bandhan day was recognised as a paid holiday for the textile industry and as the carpet industry in which the respondent No1-Management is engaged, is textile industry, the petitioner formed a view that he could not be asked to work on this day.
As the petitioner did not attend to his work on 4th of August, 1974, his wages were going to be deducted and this led to some agitational approach.
The bone of contention was as to whether Raksha Bandhan is a paid holiday or not.
The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet on 1st of September, 1974 in which it was mentioned that he instigated other workers to resort to strike and on account of his action, the work in the respondent-company remained paralysed from 31st of August, 1974 to 1st of September, 1974.
The management formed an opinion that the petitioner did not obey the lawful and reasonable order of the management.
He was asked to show cause within 72 hours.
An enquiry was held and the petitioner was dismissed from service on 11 of November, 1974.
The petitioner served a notice of demand and thereafter approached the Labour Court pleading that his dismissal was not in accordance with law.
2.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that the petitioner was not given reasonable opportunity and as such the domestic enquiry held by the management was said to be not properly conducted.
The Labour Court itself held an enquiry and came to the conclusion that the petitioner is guilty of misconduct but it awarded compensation in lieu of re-instatement.
Both the parties felt aggrieved by the order passed by the Labour Court and appealed before the Industrial Court at Indore.
Before the Industrial Court, no objection was taken with regard to the finding of the Labour Court and this is so specifically noticed in para 4 of the order passed by the Industrial Court.
The only point which was agitated was whether the misconduct was proved or not.
The allegations made against the petitioner that he asked other workers not to work on 31 of August, 1974 and on account of the disturbance so caused the work in the factory remained suspended for two days was held to be duly proved.
These allegations were found to be of serious nature but the Industrial Court agreed with the Labour Court and did not interfere with the ultimate order passed by the Labour Court.
The Industrial Court was of the view that under normal course the workman would have been entitled to reinstatement but taking into consideration his previous entire conduct, the Industrial Court found no justification to interfere with the final order passed by the Labour Court.
3.
In the present petition, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that his client was entitled to reinstatement with full backwages.
According to him, the finding recorded as to guilt of misconduct under Standing Order 12 (1) (k) and (1) is not sustainable.
The management had, however, taken a plea that as the workman had resorted to illegal strikes and has asked other workers also not to work, therefore, he was not entitled to any relief.
The workman having taken part in illegal strike was not entitled to any further relief from the Labour Court.
It has also been contended that the Labour Court should have gone into the question of illegality of the strike and as this has not been done the order passed by the Labour Court and the Industrial Court are liable to be quashed.
4.
I have examined the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
The question as to whether a particular action of the workman in abstaining from work amounts to strike or not can be got examined in section 62 of the MPIR Act, 1960.
This was not done by the management.
Proceedings in this regard are to be got initiated within a period of three months of the happening of the event.
This was not done, by the management.
As no proceedings were got initiated by the respondent-management, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the management has no merit.
As such, the Labour Court was under obligation to go into the question as to the illegality or otherwise of the conduct of the workman in abstaining from work.
It was for the management to resort to section 62 of the Act.
This was not done.
As such, the management cannot contend that the Labour Court or the Industrial Court has gone wrong in this regard.
The contention of the workman that as his action in abstaining from work did not tantamount to going on strike, therefore, he was entitled to reinstatement is again an argument which cannot be accepted for two reasons.
Firstly, the Labour Court as well as the Industrial Court have come to the conclusion that the petitioner-workman was guilty of misconduct and in the present petition under Article 227 it would not be appropriate for me to sit as a Court of appeal and re-examine the correctness of the finding recorded in this regard.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Sri Rama Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1723 and later on in the case of Union of India v. Parma Nanda, AIR 1989 SC 1185 has observed that finding with regard to quantum of punishment should not be interfered with by the High Court.
The later on decision in this regard may also be noted.
This is reported as SBI v. Samendra Kishore Endow and another, AIR 1994 SCW 1465.
It would be apt to note what was said by the Supreme Court of India in the case of M/s. Indian Iron and Steel Co v. Their Workmen, AIR 1958 SC 130:  "(10) As to Civil Appeal 45 on behalf of the workmen in which the prayer is for payment of full compensation, it is sufficient to state that no question of principle is involved.
The Fifth Industrial Tribunal refused to give compensation for the period anterior to October 2, 1953, on the ground that the workmen themselves tried to coerce Company by `slow down' tactics etc; for the period after Octobesr 2, 1953, the Tribunal allowed half the wages as compensation on the ground that some of the workmen were near Burnpur and might have joined earlier, some claimed to come back to their services as of right without any explanation, and none of the workmen had done any actual work for the period.
As we have said, no question of principle is involved and we do not think that the Tribunal has committed any error in the matter of awarding compensation."
5.
In this case, the Labour Court as well as the Industrial Court has exercised their discretion in a judicial manner and nothing has been indicated that this discretion was in any way not proper or lacked propriety.
The finding recorded is that the workman was guilty of misconduct.
His previous conduct was also taken note of and the Labour Court declined the relief of reinstatement and granted only 50% of the backwages.
What was said with regard to the limitations in the matter of examining the quantum of punishment would apply even to this aspect of the matter.
This Court is not to sit as a Court of appeal.
I do not find any merit in the contention raised by the petitioner workman or by the respondent management.
As such, both the petitions i.e., one preferred by the workman and the other preferred by the management are dismissed.
There would be no order as to costs.
Security, if deposited, shall be refunded.
Ordered accordingly.