NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the impugned order dated 1411988 is wrong, illegal, arbitrary or against the reservation quota policy and directions of the Hon'ble High Court.
As per averments made in the plaint, the plaintiff was initially appointed as a Clerk in the Industrial Training Department on 231984.
He is a member of the Scheduled Castes community and so is entitled to the benefit of reservation.
Channel of promotion of the plaintiff from the post of Clerk is that of Accountant and then Assistant.
It is further the case of the plaintiff that though he fulfilled all the conditions of promotion, yet he was ignored from promotion vide order dated 1411988 whereby only one scheduled caste person was promoted, whereas three persons under the reservation quota were required to be promoted.
Defendants in the written statement took preliminary objection that the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties and that the plaintiff had got no cause of action to file the present suit.
The jurisdiction of the Court was also challenged.
The channel of promotion as stated by the plaintiff was accepted to be true.
As regards ignoring the claim of the plaintiff to the post of Accountant, it was stated that out of 22 posts of Accountants four posts were filled by promotion from members of the Scheduled Castes as per Government instructions dated 2281985.
Since the prescribed percentage of a particular community has already been reached, plaintiff has no case at all and suit is liable to be dismissed.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the impugned order No.TE/110/18/1296 dt. 14.1.88 passed by deft.
No3 in respect of the promotion of the three junior employees the department by ignoring the plaintiff, is illegal, null and void, unjust, without jurisdiction and inoperative against the rights of the plaintiff and is liable to be set aside?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?
OPD.
3.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit?
OPD.
4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action?
OPD.
5.
Whether the defendants have disobeyed the order dt. 15.6.88 alleged in the petition?
OPP 6.
Relief.
The trial Court on the basis of evidence decided issue No.1 in favour of the plaintiff but issues No.2 and 3 were decided against the defendants.
Issue No4 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed and order dated 1411988 was declared to be illegal, null and void.
4.
Before the lower appellate Court, the State of Haryana contested the finding of the trial Court.
It was contended that the Accountants and Assistants form two separate cadres of promotion from Clerks.
Out of 22 posts of Accountants, 4 posts were filled by way of promotion from the members of the Scheduled Castes category after 291979, the date from which the roster was maintained according to the government instructions.
According to the appellants, in fact, five persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes were already working and so there was no vacancy in the reserve quota.
It was further argued that the promotion to the post of Assistant require two years experience as Accountant and five years experience as Clerk.
It was thus contended that against four posts reserved for Scheduled Castes five are already working and so the claim of the plaintiff was rightly ignored.
The lower appellate Court after considering the respective contentions raised by the counsel came to the conclusion that whereas there is no dispute between the parties with regard to availability of the reserved vacancy, the dispute relates whether reservation policy, in fact, has been given effect to.
The appellate Court applying the reservation quota i.e. 20% to the posts of Accountants available, reached to a conclusion that only four members from the Scheduled Castes could be accommodated whereas, in fact, five were holding the post and reserved this finding of the trial Court.
Resultantly, the judgment and decree of the trial Court was reversed and suit was dismissed.
5.
The first submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that respondents have erred in law in not adhering to the implementation to the reservation policy of the Haryana State relating to the Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, Ex-Servicemen and physically handicapped person.
As per this policy, 20% amongst Class-III and Class IV posts are to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
According to the appellant, the channel of promotion is from Clerk to Accountant and then to Assistant.
As per facts on record, on 26.8.1985, 18 persons were promoted out of which three from Scheduled Castes and 15 from the general category.
On 1391985, 18 persons were promoted but none from Scheduled Castes was promoted.
On 31121986, out of 7, one from Scheduled Castes was promoted.
On 1311987 out of 19, four scheduled castes, two backward classes and 13 from general category were promoted.
On 30101987 two scheduled castes, one backward and 11 other general category were promoted and on 1411988, two scheduled castes, one backward and 12 from the general category were promoted.
The above noted information has been given by one of the witnesses on the basis of record.
Admittedly, the ratio of scheduled castes persons as per reservation policy of the State Government had not been adhered to.
In fact, two more persons are to be promoted from the scheduled castes category during the year 1985-88.
There is also a fallacy in the approach of the defendants that this percentage of 20% is to be maintained at each cadre i.e. amongst Clerks, Accountants and Assistant separately.
According to the appellant, this ratio of Scheduled Castes i.e. 20% is to be maintained even if promotions in the promoted category exceed this percentage.
6.
I find substance in this contention of the learned counsel for the appellant.
As per policy, 20% of persons have to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit as and when promotions are to be made.
It is no where stipulated that persons from scheduled castes are not to be promoted in case their percentage amongst the existing vacancies to the post for which promotions are to be made already exist.
If this interpretation as canvassed by the defendants is accepted, at times none from the Scheduled Castes would be promoted.
This is not the intendment of the rules.
Scheduled Castes persons are entitled to their 20% quota as and when promotions are made from Clerk to Accountants or from Accountants to Assistants.
It is yet to be seen whether any relief can be granted to the appellant.
As per tentative seniority list of Clerks as on 111988, appellant Dhani Ram is shown to be at serial No.178.
Persons senior to him, namely, Dharambir Singh and Ram Avtar (Scheduled Castes) are shown at serial No.175 and 176, who have a prior right to be considered when compared to the plaintiff.
Thus, no relief can be given to the plaintiff.
However, it is held that the defendants have erred in not following the reservation policy.
The appellant has been able to demonstrate that on account of misconstruing the reservation rule two persons from Scheduled Castes have been deprived from their right of promotion.
Thus, though no substantive relief can be granted to the appellant as persons senior to him have not come forward to challenge the impugned order, yet these observations of the Court shall be kept in view by the defendants and the necessary correction will be made so as to bring in line with the intendment of the rules.
With these observations, the appeal is, however, dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.