S Parvatha Rao, J. (Oral) - I do not find any ground for admitting this Writ Petition seeking a writ of mandamus declaring the action of respondents 1 and 2 as bad.
2.
The petitioner states that he is now working as Divisional Accounts Officer, HW and HLC Division, Tungabhadra Dam, Hospet taluk, on being deputed by the 1st respondent.
The Government of Andhra Pradesh wanted him back and by order dated 18.4.1994 posted him at the office of the Executive Engineer, Dam Division No. 1, Srisailam Project, with effect from 151994.
On his representation, the Government agreed to continue him on deputation upto 31101994 only.
He now wants to be continued upto 3151995 because his son is studying Diesel Mechanic Course there and he suffers from Epilepsy and therefore they have to look after him.
Now the petitioner has received orders in Memo No. 955/E1/84 dated 11101994 from the 2nd respondent repatriating him to his parent department.
3.
The 2nd respondent is the Secretary, Tungabhadra Board, Tungabhadra Dam in Karnataka State.
This Court has no territorial jurisdiction to issue a Writ under Article 226 of the Constitution to the 2nd respondent as regards his Memo dated 11101994.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner urges that on humanitarian grounds this Court should interfere.
But this Court can do justice only according to law and not on humanitarian grounds.
The Supreme Court in a number of decisions has deprecated interference under Article 226 merely on humanitarian grounds without any legal base.
In LIC v. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar, 1994(2) SCT 548 (SC) : (1994) 2 S.C.C.
718, the Supreme Court observes that the High Courts and the Administrative Tribunals cannot confer benediction impelled by sympathetic considerations, and that yielding to instinct will tend to ignore the cold logic of law, and that justice according to law is a principle as old as the hills, and that the Courts are to administer law as they find it, however, inconvenient it may be.
The Supreme Court further cautioned :  ``The Courts should endeavour to find out whether a particular case in which sympathetic considerations are to be weighed falls within the scope of law.
Disregardful of law, however hard the case may be, it should never be done.''
5.
Even in the case of transfers, the Supreme Court observed in Rajendra Roy v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 65 (SC) : (1993)1 SCC 148 as follows :-  ``It is true that the order of transfer often causes a lot of difficulties and dislocation in the family set-up of the concerned employees but on that score the order of transfer is not liable to be struck down.
Unless such order is passed mala fide or in violation of the rules of service and guidelines for transfer without any proper justification, the Court and the Tribunal should not interfere with the order of transfer.
In a transferable post an order of transfer is a normal consequence and personal difficulties are matters for consideration of the department.''
6.
In the present case, what the petitioner seeks is that he should be continued on deputation at the Tungabhadra dam on personal considerations of hardship.
He has no right to be continued on deputation.
He does not impute any mala fide or any violation of any Rules applicable to him.
In the circumstances, I do not see how this Court can interfere.
It is for the authorities to consider the genuine difficulties of the petitioner.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the authorities have not considered his difficulties because in fact he was continued upto 31101994 on the very same considerations which he seeks to urge now.
It even after the consideration of his difficulties, the authorities concerned decide not to continue him on deputation and require him back, this Court cannot interfere with the decision of the authorities concerned when no mala fides or violation of any Rule is imputed.
7.
In the circumstances, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
This order, however, does not in any way preclude the authorities concerned from considering the further representations of the petitioner, if any, made to them.
Petition dismissed.