Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner impugns the order dated January 25, 1986 by which he was reverted from the post of Zilledar to that of Assistant Revenue Clerk.
The challenge is two-fold.
Firstly, it has been contended that the order of reversion having been withdrawn by the Department in respect of certain persons who are junior to the petitioner, their failure to pass a similar order in respect of the petitioner is discriminatory.
Secondly, it is urged that the order of reversion was passed only on the ground that the direct recruits had to be appointed.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the direct recruits were already holding posts falling to their share and as such, the petitioner could not have been reverted to make room for them.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
It has been pointed out that under the rules, only 40% posts have to be filled up by promotion.
The cadre of Zilledars consists of 139 posts.
The share of the promotees comes to 56 posts.
They are already occupying posts beyond their share.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that the orders of reversion in respect of various persons mentioned by the petitioner in para 12 of the writ petition were withdrawn on account of the directions given by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 162 of 1986 and not suo motu by the Department.
3.
Admittedly, the order of reversion was passed on January 25, 1986.
The petitioner had filed this writ petition on March 5, 1993.
The writ petition, was thus filed after a lapse of more than seven years.
Even a suit filed after such a long delay would be barred by limitation.
Mr. Sood, however, submits that the cause of action had accrued to the petitioner on account of the fact that the orders of reversion in respect of various persons junior to the petitioner had been withdrawn on July 25, 1992 and December 24, 1992.
The explanation given by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
These two orders, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-3 and P-4 with the writ petition, had been passed by the Department in pursuance to the Judgment of the High Court in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1384 of 1984 and 162 of 1986.
It is clear that various persons who had been reverted by the Department at different times including those who had been reverted in the year 1986 along with the petitioner had approached this Court through the above mentioned two petitions.
This Court had (found) the orders of reversion to be illegal and had consequently allowed the writ petitions.
The Department had to implement the directions given by this Court.
It did so.
The orders passed by the Department in pursuance to the directions of this Court cannot be said to furnish any cause of action to the petitioner.
In fact, the cause of action had accrued to him on January 25, 1986 when the orders of reversion had been passed.
He could have challenged it at that time.
Those who did, got the necessary relief.
The petitioner who slept, cannot be now permitted to agitate the matter after the lapse of such a long delay.
As observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai and others, AIR 1964 SC 1006, it would be proper for the wit court to decline to interfere in a case where a triable issue of limitation arises.
In the present case, the delay is patent.
The suit for challenge to the order would be clearly barred by limitation.
In such a situation, the writ petition cannot be entertained.
4.
Even on merits, the two-fold challenge made by the petitioner seems to be wholly devoid of substance.
As already noticed, the number of posts falling to the share of promotees are already occupied by the persons from that category.
As for the challenge on the ground that various juniors are today continuing to work as Zilledars, it only deserves to be noticed that it is so because they had approached this Court at the first available opportunity.
They having got the relief from this court, the petitioner cannot be permitted to argue that the action of the Department suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Still further, none of the so-called juniors has been impleaded as a party.
No order to the prejudice of any person can be passed in his absence.
5.
Mr. Sood submits that even today persons junior to the petitioner continue to hold the higher posts of Zilledars.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner is far senior to them and the respondents should consider his claim for promotion.
Since persons who are alleged to be juniors have not been impleaded as parties, it is not possible for this court to give any specific directions.
However, the petitioner may submit a representation and if such a representation is submitted, the Department would consider and decide it in accordance with law within two months by passing a speaking order.
Looked at from any angle, the petition seems to be lacking in merit.
It is consequently dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.