GS Singhvi, J - This revision petition is directed against the order dated 21.1.1994 passed by the learned Sub Judge lst Class, Amritsar dismissing an application filed by the plaintiff-petitioner under Order 6, Rule 17, CPC  2.
Suit filed by the plaintiff-petitioner against the respondents for declaring the selection made in the year 1991 for appointment to the posts of Office Assistants to be illegal is pending before the trial court.
Petitioner has questioned the selection on the ground that the procedure adopted by the Departmental Selection Committee is not fair and proper.
Petitioner has prayed that the selection made by the Departmental Selection Committee should not be utilized for making appointments on the posts of Office Assistants.
3.
During the pendency of the suit, the petitioner filed an application under Order, 6 Rule 17, C.P.C. for leave to amend the plaint by incorporating a plea that the marks fixed for the interview were more than 50 per cent.
4.
By its impugned order, the learned trial court has declined the request of the petitioner for amendment of the plaint.
In doing so, the learned trial court has taken the view that the amendment sought for by the petitioner would change the nature of the case because the plaintiff-petitioner wants to challenge the instructions issued by the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
5.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties and after perusing the impugned order, I am fully convinced that the impugned order deserves to be set aside.
Principles regarding amendment in the pleadings have been laid down by the Supreme Court and various High Courts.
In Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal v. National Building Works.
Gurgaon, A.I.R. 1969 SC 1267, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that amendment in the pleadings should be liberally allowed and the Court should not adopt a hypertechnical approach in dealing with the applications for leave to amend the pleadings.
In LJL each and Co., Ltd. and another v. M/s Jardine Skinner and Co., A.I.R. 1957 SC 357, the Supreme Court held that an amendment should be ordered if that is required to be made in the interest of justice.
In PH Patil v. KS Patil, A.I.R. 1957 SC 363, the Supreme Court held :-  "All amendments ought to be allowed which satisfy the two conditions (a) of not working injustice to the other side, and (b) of being necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between the parties.
Amendments should be refused only where the other party cannot be placed in the same position as if the pleading had been originally correct, but the amendment would cause him an injury which could not be compensated in costs."
The learned trial Judge has not given any cogent reason for declining the request of the petitioner for amendment of the plaint.
It has not held that any right vesting in the defendant-respondents would be adversely affected by accepting the request of the plaintiff-petitioner.
Learned counsel for the respondents has also not claimed that the amendment takes away any right vesting in the respondents.
Moreover, it cannot altogether be ignored that the plaintiff-petitioner has already challenged the selection proceedings and by amending the plaint, he was doing nothing more than adding one more ground to challenge the selection made by the respondents.
Such an amendment is necessary for a proper decision of the suit and the interest of justice would have been served by accepting the amendment application and in my opinion that the learned trial court has committed a patent illegality in the exercise of its jurisdiction to decide the application for amendment.
If the impugned order is not set aside, it will cause serious injustice to the petitioner.
In the result, the revision petition is allowed.
Order dated 21.1.1994 passed by the learned Sub Judge lst Class, Amritsar is set aside.
The application for amendment of the plaint filed by the petitioner in the trial court stands allowed.
The court below shall now proceed further in accordance with law.
Parties to bear their own costs.