B Subhashan Reddy, J - This is a case where the petitioner, an employee of the Visakhapatnam Port Trust, is sought to be terminated after a long tenure of service.
The petitioner was initially appointed as a Messenger on 1041970.
He was promoted from the post of Messenger to the post of Junior Driver on 15121971 and during the year 1983 he was further promoted to the post of Driver-Grade I There are no allegations of misconduct against the petitioner.
However, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner in the year 1982 on the ground that at the time of his appointment he had produced a false school certificate.
In response thereto the petitioner had produced another school certificate, but that was not considered.
Thereupon, the petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 11907 of 1983 and this Court by order dated 24.12.1987 directed the concerned authority to enquire into the matter keeping in view the second certificate produced the petitioner.
In the further enquiry, it was found that the second certificate produced by the petitioner was genuine.
But, that landed the petitioner in another difficulty, as the second certificate, which was found to be genuine, shows that the petitioner was aged 31 years on the date of his appointment.
According to the regulations, which were in force on the date of his appointment, the maximum age limit for entry into service was 25 years.
On that ground the petitioner's services were terminated under the impugned order dated 31101988.
Challenging that order, the present writ petition has been filed and stay of operation of the impugned order was obtained.
By virtue of the stay order the petitioner had been continuing in service.
As of now the petitioner is aged little over 54 years and he has got a further service of 3 years and 10-1/2 months.
2.
The contention of Mr. V Parabrahma Sastry, learned Counsel for the petitioner, is that the circumstances, that the petitioner had been in service for 18 years as on the date of the impugned order and 22 years as on this date, do not warrant termination, as after this length of service the respondent has got no right to terminate the service of the petitioner.
3.
It is not a case where the petitioner had filed the second certificate and the respondents had not probed into the age of the petitioner at the time of his recruitment, or that knowingly the concerned authority had appointed the petitioner so as to plead the doctrine of estoppel.
Here is a case where the petitioner had filed the first certificate to get into service, showing his age as 21 years, as otherwise he would have been age barred on the basis of second certificate.
The petitioner is neither entitled for any equity nor can he raise the plea of estoppel as of right because of the lapse on the part of the respondents in the context of the second certificate.
In fact, the learned Counsel for the respondent-Port Trust vehemently contended that the petitioner had played fraud on the appointing authority by producing a false certificate suppressing his real age, that the fraud vitiates everything and his initial appointment is void ab initio and as such the petitioner is not at all entitled for any indulgence from this Court, more so in an equitable forum under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Counsel for the respondents relied on the following three decisions in support of his 'contention' - RN Nanjundappa v. Tithimminh, 1972 SLR 94, Eranallor Service Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Labour Court & others, 1986(2) LLJ 492 and P.V.
Chander Rao v. Singareni Colleries Co Ltd, 1992 Lab.IC 1454 : 1992(1) SLR 777 (AP).
4.
In RN Nanjundappa v. Tithimminh (supra) the point before Supreme Court was as to whether regularisation is a mode of recruitment.
Refuting the argument of the respondents that regularisation was itself a mode of appointment, the Supreme Court had emphatically laid down that the method of recruitment and qualifications for each State Civil Service was set forth in the rules of recruitment of such service specially made in that behalf and that regularisation cannot be said to be a mode of recruitment and to accede to such a proposition would be to introduce a new head of appointment in defiance of rules resulting in setting at naught the rules themselves.
The contention to trace the power of regularisation to Article 162 of the Constitution of India, was repelled.
This ruling of the Supreme Court has no bearing to the facts of the instant case.
5.
In Eranallor Service Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Labour Court & Others (supra) the point for consideration of a learned single Judge of the Kerala High Court was the power of the appointing authority without prior approval of the Registrar, which was mandatory under the rules governing the situation.
As no prior permission was obtained from the Registrar by the appointing authority, it was held that the appointing authority lacked jurisdiction and as such the initial appointment was void ab initio for inherent lack of jurisdiction.
This judgment also is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
6.
In P.V.
Chander Rao v. Singareni Colleries Co Ltd (supra) a learned single Judge of this Court considered the plea put forth by the petitioners claiming Clerk's status, which was a promotion post over the post of Badli Fillers, on the ground that the petitioners though were matriculates initially when they were appointed as Badli Fillers, but later they were officiating as Clerks and that inasmuch as they had become graduates from Maithili University, they were eligible for appointment to the post of Clerk.
But, as the Maithili University was neither a recognised University established by a Central or State Act nor a deemed University under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, it was held that the Maithili University is not empowered to award its own degrees in terms of the provisions of Section 22 of the U.G.C.
Act and as such the petitioners therein could not claim themselves as degree holders.
The said case also has got no bearing on the facts of the instant case.
7.
The instant case is simple.
The petitioner would not have been appointed to the post of Messenger had he produced the second certificate, which was held to be real.
According to the second certificate, his date of birth is 171938.
Purposefully the petitioner had filed the first certificate showing his age as 21 years with the sole object of securing employment.
At the time of production of certificate, it was incumbent upon the appointing authority to verify the genuineness of the certificate.
At least the genuineness of the certificate ought to have been verified within a reasonable time thereafter.
Certainly a period of 13 years is not a reasonable period to initiate any disciplinary enquiry on the ground of production of false certificate.
It is true that fraud was played on the appointing authority, but the said fraud was to be detected within a reasonable time with due diligence as held by the Supreme Court in Shri Krishan v. Kurukshetra University, AIR 1976 SC 376 and followed by this Court in various cases.
Now after 22 years of service, that too unblemished, rendered by the petitioner to say that he has to go out of service on the ground that had he produced the genuine certificate he would not have been appointed, will be quite unreasonable and inequitous causing irreparable injury and hardship to the petitioner.
After all, the petitioner, who had crossed 54 years, has no past misconduct.
There is also no charge framed specifically on this ground and no enquiry was held by the disciplinary authority.
8.
On hearing Counsel on either side and on the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the considered view that this case does not warrant further consideration either of this Court or the respondents.
However, I feel it proper that the petitioner should realise the effect of fraud, which he has played on the appointing authority at the time of recruitment.
Equity does not mean that the petitioner should go scot free even without infclitment of a minor penalty.
In the circumstances, while holding that the petitioner is not liable to be terminated from service and that he is entitled to continue in service till his superannuation, I direct the respondents to withhold all future increments of the petitioner from this date till he retires on superannuation, but his continuity of service shall not be disrupted for his terminal benefits.
9.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Ordered accordingly.