GS Singhvi, J - In all these writ petitions, common questions of law based on almost identical facts arise for determination and, therefore, they are being disposed of by a common order.
2.
For the purpose of appreciation of the controversy involved in these petitions, I deem fit it proper to make reference to the facts from C.W.P.
No. 3444 of 1984 and C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990.
3.
Most of the 34 petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 3444 of 1984 possess the qualifications of MA and B.Sc.
Lib.
Science or Diploma in Lib.
Science.
A few of them possess the qualifications of B.A./B.Sc.
and Bachelor of Lib.
Science.
All of them were working as Senior Librarians in different colleges and libraries in the State of Punjab at the time of the filing of the petition.
All of them belong to the College Cadre of Librarians and their posts are inter-transferable.
The petitioners joined service in the year 1973 and thereafter.
At the time of their recruitment, minimum qualifications required for the post of Librarian were B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
with a Degree or Diploma in Library Science.
The pay-scale of the post of Librarians in the college libraries as well as in the public libraries was revised with effect from 1111966 as is evident from the sanction conveyed by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Education Department, to the Director of Public Instruction, vide letter dated 331976, Annexure P2.
In pursuance of this sanction, all the petitioners started getting pay in the scale of Rs. 300-600.
This pay scale was subsequently revised to Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111978 on the recommendations of the Punjab Pay Commission.
In the meantime, the Government of Punjab revised the qualifications for recruitment to the posts of Librarians and as per the revised qualifications enumerated in Annexure P4 dated 16121976 only that person was eligible to be appointed as Librarian who possessed the qualifications of MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
with Degree or Diploma in Library Science or M.Lib.
4.
Petitioners have claimed that University Grants Commission (for short the 'UGC') had treated the Librarians at par with the teaching and research staff in colleges and the Government of Punjab had maintained parity in the pay-scales of the posts of teachers (Lecturers) in the colleges and the Librarians for a considerable long period.
However, this parity was disturbed when the Government issued notification dated 25.2.1977 and revised the pay scale of the teachers from Rs. 300-600 to Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
In this manner, the Government for the first time introduced a disparity in the pay-scales of the Librarians on the one hand and the University/College Teachers on the other hand.
Petitioners have pleaded that further discrimination has been introduced by the Government by prescribing the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980 in respect of Librarians having the qualifications of B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
Degree and first or second class in B.Sc.
Library Science or a Diploma in Lib.
Science.
Petitioners have also made reference to the fact that Government has given revised pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 to the Directors/Instructors of Physical Education with any distinction of qualifications but it has been done in the case of Librarians.
5.
In C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990, petitioners Rattan Lal Saini and others have stated that they are working as Senior Librarians in different colleges and district Libraries in the State of Haryana.
They belong to the College Cadre of Librarians and their posts are inter-transferable.
At the time of initial appointment they possessed the minimum qualification prescribed for the post of Librarian, namely, B.A/B.Sc./B.Com.
with a Degree or Diploma in Lib.
Science.
Their pay-scale was revised with effect from 1111966.
In the year 1977 the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare (Department of Education) recommended revision of pay-scales of the Librarians.
These recommendations were for the introduction of the pay-scale of Rs. 550/900, 700-1100 and 700- 1300 with effect from 111973.
These petitioners have also referred to the parity between Lecturers and Librarians in the matter of pay-scales and have stated that this parity was disturbed when Lecturers were given the scale of 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
Regarding College Librarians, the pay- scale was revised to Rs. 700-1600 but this scale was to be given only with effect from 141980 and to those who possessed the qualifications specified in the letter dated 2121985, Annexure P-8.
The qualifications enumerated in the letter dated 2121985 were first or second class B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
Degree plus first or second class M.Lib.
Science Degree; or first or second class MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
Degree with first or second class B.Lib.
Science or a Diploma in Library Science.
Representations and protests of were made against the action of the Government of granting the higher scale of pay only to those possessing the qualifications enumerated in the letter dated 2121985.
Subsequently, the Government of India in consultation with the UGC wrote a letter dated 1611987, Annexure P.9, to the Education Secretaries of various State Governments and opined that the requirement of higher qualifications be relaxed in cases of those Librarians who had been appointed on or before 31121972.
Following these directives of the Government of India, the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, wrote letter dated 14121987, Annexure P10, to the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, and clarified that the scale of Rs. 700-1600 be given to the existing incumbents of the posts of librarians in Colleges who possessed the qualifications prescribed in Annexure P.1 appended to the letter dated 2121985 without insisting on first or second class in the Degree, Diploma or other prescribed educational qualifications.
However, the scale of Rs. 700-1600 was to be given with effect from 141980 on the satisfaction of the University/College concerned that the experience and quality of work of a particular Librarian justified the grant of upgraded scale.
Petitioners' further assertion is that they were given the benefit of the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 (revised Rs. 550-990) vide order dated 14.2.1979, Annexure P11 issued by the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana.
Similar orders were passed in respect of other persons on 21.12.1979 and 941982.
However, the benefit of the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 has not been allowed to the petitioners though a large number of persons junior to the petitioners have been given that benefit vide letter dated 2661987, Annexure P19.
6.
In all the petitions, the petitioners have pleaded that they have been subjected to discrimination by denial of pay in the scale of Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111973 and Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980.
Only in C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990 the petitioners have confined their claim to the grant of pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
Petitioners have asserted that the posts of Librarians were treated at par with those of Lecturers in the Universities/Colleges in the matter of grant of pay-scales and, therefore, there is no justification for denial of higher scale when revision of the pay-scales of Lecturers was brought about with effect from 111973.
7.
In reply to C.W.P.
No. 3444 of 1984, respondents have pleaded that duties and sphere of the teaching staff are not similar in nature with those of the Librarians and, therefore, there was no parity between the two.
Regarding the designation of the petitioners, respondents have stated that there is no post of Senior Librarian and that all the petitioners are designated as Librarians.
Respondents have denied the allegation of the petitioners that the latter were equated with the teaching staff.
They have further pleaded that though the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Government of India, had recommended revision of the existing pay-scales of the Librarians from Rs. 300-600 to Rs. 550-900, the Government of Punjab revised the pay-scale of the Librarians to Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111978.
Regarding teachers, the respondents have mentioned that there were three scales of pay, i.e. Rs. 300-600, Rs. 400-800 and Rs. 700-1100.
All these scales of pay were merged into one pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973.
While reiterating that the nature of duties being performed by the Librarians is not similar to the nature of duties of the teachers (Lecturers) in the Universities/Colleges, the respondents have once again emphasised that no parity can be claimed in the matter of pay-scales.
Respondents have also disputed the claim of the petitioners for parity in the matter of pay-scales of Librarians and Instructors, Physical Education.
8.
The first question which needs determination in these writ petitions, except C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990, is as to whether the petitioners are entitled to claim parity with teachers (Lecturers in the Universities/Colleges).
Though the Committee constituted by the UGC in the year 1957 under the chairmanship of Shri Ranganathan submitted a report in the year 1959 and recommended that the status and the salary scales of the library staff should be the same as those of the teaching the research staff, there is nothing on the record to suggest or to prove that the said recommendations had been accepted by the UGC, the Government of India or the Government of Punjab.
The extract of the report of the Third Pay Commission to which a reference has been made in para 11 of C.W.P.
No. 3444 of 1984 also suggests that the Third Pay Commission had taken note of some similarity in the pay-scales of Librarians on the one hand and the teaching staff on the other hand, but once again no material has been placed on record to show that the Government of India had acted on the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission to treat the Librarians at par with the teaching staff.
Apart from the absence of any evidence to show that the recommendations made by the Committee constituted by the UGC and the Third Pay Commission had been accepted by the competent authority and given effect to, I find total absence of any material on the record of these cases to show the similarity in the nature of duties being performed by the teaching staff (Lecturers in the Universities/Colleges) and the Librarians.
Except making a bald statement in the writ petitions that the Librarians have been treated at par with the teaching staff, the petitioners have failed to specify the actual duties being performed or required to be performed by the Librarians on the one hand and the Lecturers employed in the Universities/Colleges on the other hand.
The petitioners have also not stated as to what are the minimum qualifications prescribed for the recruitment of teachers in the Universities/Colleges.
Since the petitioners have come forward with a plea of discrimination in the matter of pay-scales between the teachers and the Librarians, it was their duty to have placed sufficient material as before the Court to hold that the Government had treated the holders of the posts in the two cadres at par for a long period and it has now disturbed the parity without any reason or justification.
The burden to prove the charge of the discrimination primarily was upon the petitioners.
They have failed to discharge this burden and, therefore, merely on the strength of the fact that at one or the other point of time the Librarians were paid the same pay-scale as was admissible to the Lecturers, the petitioners cannot claim that they have been discriminated.
A strong factor which is sufficient to rebut the plea of the petitioners that there was a parity in the pay-scales of the Lecturers and the Librarians is that the cadre of Lecturers was divided into different pay-scales, i.e. Rs. 300-600, Rs. 400-800 and Rs. 700-1100 No such scales existed for Librarians even on 1111966 or prior thereto.
Hence, the claim of the petitioners that they have been discriminated, vis-a-vis Lecturers, is untenable and is rejected.
9.
Second point which requires determination relates to the claim of the petitioners that when their pay-scale has been revised from Rs. 300-600 to Rs. 700-1200, such revision should have been enforced with effect from 111973 and not from 111978.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that when the Government has itself accepted the fact that the benefit of revised pay-scale should be extended to the petitioners, there is no justification for denying this benefit to them from a date the persons holding posts in other cadres have been given that benefit.
10.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has not been able to show any justification for fixing the date of giving the revised pay-scales to the Librarians on 111978 when other employees have been given the benefit of the revised pay-scales with effect from 111973.
She could not point out any reason for restricting the benefit of revised pay-scales to the Librarians with effect from 111978 only.
Apart from the absence of any explanation by the respondents in their written statement about the implementation of the revised pay-scale of Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111978 instead of 111973, I am firmly of the view that once the Government has realised the need for revising the pay-scales of the employees, different dates cannot be fixed for giving benefit of the revised pay-scale to the employees belonging to different cadres.
Revision of pay-scales of the employees is undertaken primarily with a view to provide a cushion to them against the rising cost of living indicated by the rise in the price index.
The Government realises that on account of increase in the prices of various commodities, the employees face difficulty in meeting their day-to-day requirements and, therefore, their salaries should be revised.
With this view, the Government appoints Commissions and Committees to go into the various issues concerning the demands of the employees for revised pay-scales.
When a decision is taken by the Government on the basis of reports/recommendations of the Commission/Committee, it is imperative for the Government to give effect to the revision in pay-scales in respect of all categories of employees and this has to be implemented from the same date.
It is not possible to comprehend that for one set of employees the revision of pay-scales is made effective from one particular date and in the case of other set of employees it is made effective from some other date.
Such a policy on the part of the Government will per se offend Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In a somewhat similar situation, the apex Court declared the action of the Government in giving effect to the revised pay-scales only to one set of employees as discriminatory (Purshottam Lal v. Union of India and another, 1973(1) S.L.R.
633).
That was a case which arose out of the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission.
The Commission had recommended revision of pay-scales of various categories of employees.
Revision of pay-scales of Research Assistants Grade II and Computers was made effective from the date of issue of the order, although in the case of other categories of employees it was made effective from 171959.
An argument was advanced on behalf of the Government that the Pay Commission report did not deal with Research Assistants Grade II and Computers.
Their Lordships held that once the Government had accepted the recommendations of the Pay Commission, it cannot implement the report only in respect of some employees and if it does so it acts in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Similarly, in The Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India and another v. Union of India & others, 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC) : 1991 Supp.
(2) SCC 565, the Court held that the benefit of revised pay-scales should be given to the employees from the same date.
Although that case primarily related to disparity in the pay-scales of the two sister Corporations, the Court held that benefit of revised pay-scales should be given to the employees from the same date.
In that case, the revision of pay-scales of the employees of Footwear Corporation was made effective from 2541986 but the Court directed that the revised pay-scales should be made effect with effect from 181983.
11.
Another important question which requires determination by the Court relates to the grant of pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980 only to those employees who possessed the qualifications specified in the order by which this pay-scale was introduced.
A perusal of Annexures P.9 and P10 filed with C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990 clearly shows that the Government of India has granted the revised pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 to all the Librarians who were in service on 31121972 and the Government of Haryana has also sanctioned this scale of pay to the existing Librarians with effect from 141980.
However, benefit of this scale of pay has not been given to the petitioners in any of these petitions.
Even employees of the Government of Haryana, who are petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990, have not been given the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980.
12.
The admitted facts, which have come on record, show that recruitment to the posts of Librarians used to be made under the 1973 Punjab Rules, and minimum qualifications prescribed in Appendix 'D' read with Rule 5(ii) for the post of Librarian was Degree with training in Library Science.
The Government of Punjab revised the qualifications vide letter dated 16121976, Annexure P4 in C.W.P.
No. 3444 of 1984.
Thus those who were to be appointed on or after 17121976 were required to possess the qualification of MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
with Diploma/Degree in Library Science or M. Lib.
When the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 was introduced, it was provided that this grade will be admissible only to those who possessed either of the following qualifications :-  "First or second Class B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
Degree with first or second Class M. Lib.
Science Degree; OR First or second class MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
Degree with First or Second Class B Lib.
Science, or Diploma in Library Science."
As a consequence of prescription of these qualifications a number of existing Librarians were deprived of the benefit of the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980.
In this manner, within the cadre of Librarians two classes have been created for the purposes of pay-scales.
One class of Librarians who possessed qualifications specified above is held entitled to the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600.
The other set of Librarians is entitled to the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1200.
Apart from the fact that the UGC has granted relaxation in the matter of grant of higher pay-scale to the Librarians who were in service on 31121972, I am of the opinion that in these cases, the respondents have failed to advance any reasonable justification for grant of different pay-scales to the same set of employees belonging to the cadre of Librarians.
While petitioners have specifically pleaded that they possess the minimum qualifications which were prescribed at the time of their recruitment and their duties and functions are identical to the functions of the Librarians who have been appointed with higher qualifications prescribed by the Government of Punjab in 1976 and by the Government of Haryana at a later point of time, respondents have not placed any material before the Court to show any qualitative or quantitative difference in the nature of duties and functions required to be performed by the Librarians who possess qualifications of B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
and Bachelor of Library Science/Diploma of Library Science without first or second class in their degree course and those having similar qualifications with first or second class in their degree course.
Likewise, no difference has been pointed out in the nature of duties being performed by those having first or second class MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
degree vis-a-vis those having the qualification of B.A/B.Sc./B.Com.
In the face of total absence of any averment by the respondents that there is some difference in the nature of duties being performed by the Librarians possessing different qualifications, it is reasonable to conclude that all Librarians employed in the college cadre discharge identical duties and perform identical functions, and that there is no special feature in the performance of duties by those possessing first or second class in their degree and those not possessing such a class.
Respondents have also not been able to show that persons having first or second class in their degree course or those possessing post-graduate degree give superior performance as against those not having first or second class in their degree course or those who do not possess any degree in MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
It is, thus, clear that the job requirement of the Librarians is not such which makes it imperative that a person must possess degree with first or second class or must possess post-graduate qualifications.
Logically, it can be said that requirement of qualification of degree with first or second class or a post-graduate degree does not have any direct relation with the nature of duties and functions required to be discharged/performed by a Librarian in the college cadre.
In this view of the matter, it is not possible to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that they are entitled to differentiate between the same set of employees in the matter of pay-scales only on the strength of better division/class at the graduation level or post-graduation level.
Consequently, it has to be held that the action of the respondents in giving pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980 only to those having first or second class B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
or first or second class in MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
or with first or second class bachelor in Library Science or Diploma in Library Science is discriminatory and is contrary to Articles 14 and 16 read with Article 39(d) of the Constitution.
13.
While grant of higher pay-scale on the basis of educational qualifications may not be abhorrent to the constitutional scheme in all cases, wherever a challenge is made to the grant of different pay-scales to the similar set of employees only on the strength of better educational qualifications it is obligatory for the respondent Government to place relevant material before the Court to justify the distinction between the same set of employees in the matter of pay-scales.
Reasons, which constitute the basis of decision of the employer to give different pay-scales to the employees belonging to the same cadre/class/group, must be brought before the Court to justify the action of the employer.
In a number of decided cases the Courts have upheld the grant of different scales of pay based on qualifications whereas in a number of other cases the Court has held the action of the employer to be discriminatory.
Before I make reference to some of the decided cases, which are directly on the issue, I deem it proper to make reference to some observations made by the apex Court in Mohammad Shujat Ali v. The State of Andhra Pradesh, 1974(2) S.L.R.
508.
The issue which arose before the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in that case related to the alleged discrimination between degree holders and diploma holders in the matter of promotion.
While dealing with the issue, the Constitution Bench examined the ambit and scope of equality clause and the doctrine of classification.
Their Lordships observed :-  "Article 14 ensures to every person equality before law and equal protection of the laws and Article 16 lays down that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
Article 16 is only an instance or incident of the guarantee of equality enshrined in Article 14, it gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the sphere of public employment.
The concept of equal opportunity to be found in Article 16 permeates the whole spectrum of an individual's employment from appointment through promotion and termination to the payment of gratuity and pension and gives expression to the ideal of equality of opportunity which is one of the great socio-economic objectives set out in the Preamble of the Constitution."
The Court further proceeded to observe :-  "A reasonable classification is one which includes all persons or things similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law.
There should be no discrimination between one person or thing and another, if as regards the subject-matter of the legislation their position is substantially the same.
This is sometimes epigrammatically described by saying that what the constitutional code of equality and equal opportunity requires is that among equals, the law should be equal and that like should be treated alike.
But the basic principle underlying the doctrine is that the legislature should have the right to classify and impose special burdens upon or grant special benefits to person or things grouped together under the classification, so long as the classification is of persons or things similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the legislation, so that all persons or things similarly situated are treated alike by law.
The test which has been evolved for this purpose is and this test has been consistently applied by this Court in all decided cases since the commencement of the Constitution that the classification must be founded on the intelligible differentia which distinguishes certain persons or things that are grouped together from others and that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the legislation.
But we have to be constantly on our guard to see that this test which has been evolved as a matter of practical necessity with a view to reconciling the demand for equality with the need for special legislation directed towards specific ends necessitated by the complex and varied problems which require solution at the hands of the legislature, does not degenerate into rigid formula to be blindly and mechanically applied whenever the validity of any legislation is called in question.
The fundamental guarantee is of equal protection of the laws and the doctrine of classification is only a subsidiary rule evolved by courts to give a practical content to that guarantee by accommodating it with the practical needs of the society and it should not be allowed to submerge and drown the precious guarantee of equality.
The doctrine of classification should not be carried to a point where instead of being a useful servant, it becomes a dangerous master, for otherwise, as pointed out by Chandrachud, J, in State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa, 1974(1) S.C.C.
19, the guarantee of equality will be submerged in class legislation masquerading as laws meant to govern well marked classes characterised by different and distinct attainments.
But from these decisions it cannot be laid down as an invariable rule that whenever any classification is made on the basis of variant educational qualifications such classification must be held to be valid, irrespective of the nature and purpose of the classification or the quality and extent of the differences in the educational qualifications.
It must be remembered that "life has relations not capable always of division into inflexible compartments".
The moulds expand and shrink.
The test of reasonable classification has to be applied in such case on its peculiar facts and circumstances.
It may be perfectly legitimate for the administration to say that having regard to the nature of the functions and duties attached to the post, for the purpose of achieving efficiency public service, only degree holders in engineering shall be eligible for promotion and not diploma or certificate holders.
That is what happened in State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa (supra) and a somewhat similar position also obtained in Union of India v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli, (1973)3 S.C.C.
592.
But where graduates and non-graduates are both regarded as fit, and, therefore, eligible for promotion, it is difficult to see how, consistently with the claim for equal opportunity, any differentiation can be made between them by laying down a quota of promotion for each and giving preferential treatment to graduates over non-graduates in the matter of fixation of such quota.
As pointed out by Krishna Iyer, J in the State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa, 1974(1) S.C.C.
19, "the soul of Article 16 is the promotion of the common man's capabilities, over-powering environmental adversities and opening up full opportunities to develop in official life without succumbing to the sophistic argument of the elite that talent is the privilege of the few and they must rule."
To permit discrimination based on educational attainments not obliged by the nature of the duties of the higher post is to stifle the social thrust of the equality case.
A rule of promotion, which while conceding that non-graduate Supervisors are also fit to be promoted as Assistant Engineers, reserves a higher quota of vacancies for promotion for graduate Supervisors as against non-graduate Supervisors, would clearly be calculated to destroy the guarantee of equal opportunity."
Having indicated the ambit and scope of the equality clause and the principles, which should govern the application of the doctrine of classification, I shall now refer to some of the cases on which reliance has been placed by the rival sides.
14. in PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1984 S.C. 541, a disparity in the pay-scale of the existing employees qua new incumbents was introduced on the basis of some educational qualifications.
Declaring the action of the employer as discriminatory, the Supreme Court observed :  "The principle 'equal pay for equal work' is deducible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) and may be properly applied to the cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.
Even though the three petitioners were respectively holding the post of Professor in Animal Pathology, Animal Genetics and Veterinary Parasitology all attached to Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) from 1963, 1970 and 1970 respectively, when the pay-scale for the post of Professor, on the recommendation of the University Grants Commission underwent an upward revision to Rs. 1100-1600, the ICAR instead of straightaway granting the scale to the petitioners, the holders of the posts of Professor, proceeded to issue an advertisement on May 21, 1974 inviting fresh applications for the post of Professor in the three subjects in which the petitioners were already holding the post of Professor and simultaneously appointed some others in different subjects and disciplines as Professors and gave them the revised scale while the petitioners were left to languish in the old scale.
This was a glaring example of discriminatory treatment accorded to old, experienced and highly qualified hands with an evil eye and unequal hand and the guarantee of equality in all its pervasive character must enable Supreme Court to remove discrimination and to restore fair play in action.
The classification of existing incumbents as being distinct and separate from newly recruited hands with flimsy change in essential qualification would be wholly irrational and arbitrary."
15.
Similarly, in State of Mysore v. B Basavalingappa, A.I.R. 1987 SC 411, their Lordships of the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Karnataka High Court holding that when there was no substantial difference between the two persons holding posts in the same cadre and they were discharging identical duties, different pay-scales could not be enforced merely on the basis of education qualifications.
16.
In The State of Punjab v. Lekh Raj Bowry MA Ayurvedalankar and others, 1967 S.L.R.
816, a Division Bench of this Court held that once different employees have been merged into a single cadre, different treatment cannot be meted out to them in respect of pay-scales despite difference in the educational qualifications.
17.
In V Markendeya v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, 1989(3) S.L.R.
34, the Supreme Court did recognise the right of the employer to make classification based on educational and academic qualification but from the following observations of the Court it is clear that this distinction must have relation to the duties attached to the post for achieving efficiency in the service :  "Classification in service founded on the basis of educational and academic qualifications is now will recognised.
It is open to the administration to give preference to a class of employees on the basis of educational qualifications having regard to the nature of duties attached to the post for the purpose of achieving efficiency in public services."
18.
In State of UP v. JP.
Chaurasia and others, A.I.R. 1989 S.C. 19, the Supreme Court upheld the classification of Bench Secretaries in Grade I and Grade II and held that where higher grade was given on the basis of merit-cum-seniority, it cannot be termed as arbitrary or unreasonable and that classification based on experience is a reasonable classification.
19.
In Shyam Babu Verma v. Union of India, 1994(2) SCT 296 (SC) : JT 1994(1) SC 574 the Supreme Court held that different pay-scales can be prescribed on the basis of educational qualifications and experience and that Court should not disturb the classification made by a body of experts.
That was a case in which the petitioners were Pharmacists who had been granted pay-scale of Rs. 330-480 instead of Rs. 330-560 with effect from 1973 and a higher pay-scale of Rs. 330-560 after 10 years service.
The petitioners questioned the reduction in the pay-scale after several years by asserting that they have been discriminated.
Third Pay Commission, which had gone into the question of revision of pay-scales placed the Pharmacists in two categories according to their qualifications.
First category consisted of those Pharmacists who possessed qualifications prescribed in clauses (a) to (c) of section 31 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948, and the second category consisted of those Pharmacists who fulfilled the conditions of eligibility specified in clause (d) of section 31.
According to the recommendations of the said Pay Commission, the petitioners, who fell in 2nd category were entitled to the grant of pay-scale of Rs. 330-480 but were given the pay-scale of Rs. 330-560 They claimed parity in the matter of pay-scales.
While rejecting their claim, the Court held that when the Pay Commission had prescribed two pay-scales having regard to the qualification prescribed under the Act, there was no scope for holding that they have been discriminated.
20.
The principle which emerges from the above referred decisions is that the employer has a right to prescribe different pay-scales for employee, belonging to the same cadre but the prescription of different pay-scales must have a direct nexus with the job requirement of a particular post and the Court will not interfere where different pay-scales are prescribed on the basis of educational qualifications with the object of improving efficiency of service having regard to the nature of duties.
However, a caution was clearly administered in Mohammad Shujat Ali's case (supra) when the Constitution Bench observed that the doctrine of classification should not be blindly and mechanically applied when especially the validity of any action is questioned in a Court of law and that whenever the classification is made on the basis of various educational qualifications, it cannot be upheld irrespective of the nature and purpose of the classification or the quality and extent of the differences in the educational qualifications.
21.
As I have already noted above, in these cases the respondents have failed to offer any justification or plausible explanation for making a distinction between the Librarians holding posts in the College Cadre.
At the cost of repetition, I would like to emphasise that the respondents have not even pleaded that a person possessing first or second class B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
or a person possessing first or second class MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
performs duties of a Librarian more efficiently than a person possessing that qualification but without first or second class.
Indeed, the respondents have miserably failed to take note of the long experience gained by the existing employees while bringing about a distinction between those who have secured first or second class in their degree qualification and those who have not.
The result of the action of respondents has been that the persons who have rendered long service have been put to a lower scale of pay qua those who may have entered the service after 1976.
This difference in the pay-scales which is totally unconnected with the job requirement of the Librarians cannot but be characterised as potently arbitrary and discriminatory.
Failure of the respondents to justify this distinction with reference to the object of their action leads to an irresistible conclusion that prescription of different pay-scales has resulted in infringement of the fundamental right of equality available to the petitioners under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
22.
In the result, the writ petitions are partly allowed.
Claim of the petitioners for grant of parity with the teachers in the Universities/Colleges is rejected.
However, the respondent-Government of Punjab is directed to give benefit of the revised pay-scale of Rs. 700-1200 to the petitioners with effect from 111973 and of the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 141980.
Respondent-Government of Haryana is also directed to give benefit of the pay-scale of Rs. 700-1600 to the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 648 of 1990 with effect from 141980.
Necessary action for the grant of monetary benefit to the petitioners in terms of these directions should be taken within a period of 4 months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
Costs made easy.
Petition partly allowed.