TS Doabia, J - The petitioner is a practising advocate.
He pleads that he has a right to plead the cause of government - as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor.
According to him his services could not be brought to an end without affording him an opportunity to meet the reasons which the State may have on its confidential and privileged files.
He wants that Rule 18 of Law Manual - the Charter of his appointment - should be given full effect and wants the Court to shut its eyes to Rules 19 contained in the same Manual.
Before dealing with legal issues, the factual position may be noticed in brief.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Third Additional Government Pleader and Third Additional Public Prosecutor for the first time for the Gwalior Division on 2nd May, 1986.
Two separate orders were issued in this regard.
These are Annexures P/1 and P/2 with the petition.
The body of the order does not indicate the tenure of the petitioner but in the endorsement at Serial No. 4 of the order which was meant for the petitioner, it is indicated that the appointment is under Rules 18 and 19 of the Law Manual.
The recital in the endorsement is to the effect that the appointment would be valid upto 28th December, 1987 or till his successor assumes office.
Strictly speaking this appointment was not in consonance with Rule 18 as this initial appointment was more than one year but less than three years.
Even though the term of petitioner was still subsisting, on December, 1986 by two separate orders, the petitioner was appointed as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor.
The copies of the orders so passed by the State Government have been placed on record as Annexures P/3 and P/4.
Again nothing is mentioned about the duration of tenure in the main orders.
The period of tenure has been indicated in the endorsement meant for the petitioner.
The appointment is said to be in terms of Rules 18 and 19 of the Law Manual.
It is indicated that the appointment would be for a period of one year or till his successor assumes office.
The aforementioned period of one year came to an end on 25th December, 1987.
The tenure of the petitioner was not extended.
The petitioner however continued to work as the Government work could not be left unattended.
On 23rd February, 1988 two separate orders were issued.
The petitioner was appointed as Government Pleader as also Public Prosecutor.
These orders were given retrospective effect.
The appointment of the petitioner was to be effective with effect from 26th of December, 1987.
The tenure has again been fixed in the endorsement meant for the petitioner.
The tenure is said to be for 3 years or till a successor assumes office.
It is further mentioned that later event would determine the tenure.
Source of power to make the appointment is again Rules 18 and 19 of the Law Manual.
It would not be out of place to mention that these orders were to come to an end on 25th December, 1990 as vide orders annexures P 5 and P/6 the appointment was effective from 26th December, 1987.
The petitioner however suggests that his tenure of three years would come to an end on 23rd February, 1991 ie, after the expiry of three years to be counted from the date of issuance of the two orders referred to above.
3.
The petitioner thereafter, makes reference to another order passed by the State Government.
This is dated 15th March, 1990.
By this communication the Government informed all Public Prosecutors and Government Pleaders in the State to continue to perform their duties as before.
This is Annexure P/7.
What unnerved the petitioner forcing him to file this petition is Annexure P/8.
This was issued on 22nd March, 1990.
By this, the Government sought a Panel of Advocates who could be considered for the office of Public Prosecutors and Government Pleaders.
It was Annexure 8 which caused apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that his tenure may be brought to an end.
He filed the present petition on 16th May, 1990.
He challenged his apprehended termination of tenure.
The sequence of events after the filing of the writ petition be noticed.
4.
When this writ petition came up for motion hearing on 28th May, 1990, the State counsel took time to file reply.
An application was also filed by one member of the Bar.
He sought intervention in the matter.
He wanted to place his point of view before the Court.
On 27th June, 1990 return filed by the State Government was made part of the Court record.
A prayer for amendment of the writ petition was also made.
The petitioner wanted to challenge order Annexure P/9.
This stood issued on 26th June, 1990.
This order was passed in the exercise of the powers conferred on the State Government under Rule 19 of the Law Manual.
The services of the petitioner were brought to an end.
He was given one month's notice to arrange his affairs.
Simultaneously Shri NC Jain, Advocate was appointed as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor.
The prayer to amend the writ petition was also allowed on 27th June, 1990 itself.
5.
Before noticing other events, the stand of the respondents State in its reply to the petitioner as originally filed may be noticed.
6.
The broad stand taken is that the relationship between the petitioner and the State is that of a client and advocate and as an advocate he has no right to force himself on his client.
The state's plea is that Rules 18 and 19 have to be read together and that effect has to be given to both the provisions.
According to the State the tenure of three years mentioned in Rule 18 is subject to the provisions of Rule 19.
The State Government wants Rule 19 to be read as a proviso to Rule 18 as otherwise according to the State this provision would be rendered otiose and meaningless.
The assertion of the petitioner that action is being taken because of political reasons as there was a change of Government was denied.
The State Government also reminded the petitioner about the healthy convention under which the Advocate General of the State resigns whenever there is a change and a new head of State assumes Constitutional functions.
It was pointed out that the Government Pleader or the Public Prosecutor conducting the government cases must be such a person who should have confidence of the State administration and that the person in office should voluntarily demit the office.
Series of complaints with regard to the manner in which the petitioner was conducting himself as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor have been appended as Annexures R/1 to R/40.
Certain observations made in Judgments and orders passed by courts including this Court vis-a-vis the manner in which Government cases were being handled was also pointed out.
This return is dated 8th June, 1990 and as noticed above was taken on record on 27th June, 1990.
It was stated therein that further action in accordance with Rules would be taken.
This action as noticed above matured in the shape of Annexure P/9.
7.
As noticed above, after the return was filed by the State, the petitioner sought leave to amend the writ petition.
This prayer was granted and amendments were permitted to be incorporated.
Permission was also sought to file a rejoinder.
8.
Even though, the order Annexure P/9 became effective after the expiry of one month ie, on 25th June, 1990, this Court on 3rd August, 1990 passed an interim order.
The relevant portion is as under :  "In any case, because of petitioner's serious challenge to State Government's order terminating his services and because of the fact that it is not possible for us to dispose of the petition finally today, his status has to be protected for the time being, and we are making a direction in that regard.
He shall not discharge any function of Government Pleader or Public Prosecutor, but he shall enjoy the status of "Government Pleader" under the order of his appointment, until further orders.
To further protect his interest, we also direct that the State Government shall not give effect to its order dated 26.6.1990 and that Shri NC Jain who is present in Court, and who has now been appointed as Government Pleader to take over charge from the petitioner, shall not do so until further orders.
A direction to the petitioner is also pre-eminently warranted.
We direct him to hand over all briefs which he holds, to the District Magistrate and we direct the District Magistrate to make ad hoc arrangement, until further orders, for pursuing the pending cases and also for all litigations in which State is involved, past, present and future through such counsel as may enjoy the confidence of the District Magistrate to entrust any work to Shri NC Jain also in that regard without giving work to him or other counsel in the capacity of Government Pleader.
A copy of this order shall be sent to the District Magistrate Gwalior by the Registry.
He shall circulate this order of ours to the Courts concerned so that steps are taken in those courts on behalf of the State Government by such counsel as may be appointed by the District Magistrate and care is taken by Courts concerned to give effect to this order.
9.
The record may remain incomplete if reference is not made to another order passed by this Court in MCC No. 270/90.
This was a contempt petition alleging wilful violation of the above order.
The Division Bench disposed of the contempt petition by making following observation :-  "It appears that after its interim order of this Court, the District Magistrate directed by his order dated 7.8.1990 that Shri MPS Bhadoria, Ist Addl.
Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor should look after the work until further orders.
By his subsequent order dated 20.8.1990 the District Magistrate directed that all such cases handed over to Shri MPS Bhadoria would henceforth be looked after by one Shri Nemichand Jain, Advocate.
It is stated that this subsequent order in favour of Shri Nemichand Jain amounted to appointment of Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor in place of the petitioner Shri Sushil Sharma in utter disregard of the interim order made by this Court on 3.8.1990.
We fail to understand from the aforesaid facts that how any contempt is made by the non applicants.
There was no order restraining the respondents from appointing any person as Government Pleader or Public Prosecutor for district Gwalior.
The order only protected the status of the petitioner as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor by appointment of another person as Government Advocate and Public Prosecutor it cannot be said that the status of the petitioner in pursuance of the ad interim writ granted in his favour was in any way infringed.
Even if it may be held that some technical contempt of court is committed by the respondents by appointing Shri Nemichand Jain, Advocate as Government Pleader during the operation of the ad interim writ granted on 3.8.1990 in favour of the petitioner.
It cannot be said to be of such a nature which is substantially interfered or tending to substantially interfered with the due course of justice and, therefore, in the light of Section 13 of the Contempt of Courts Act no action against the non-applicants is called for.
For the said reasons the rule issued against the non-applicants is hereby discharged."
Thus the effect of the interim order passed on August, 1990 was diluted.
This gave a signal to State Government to take further steps to appoint Shri Nemichand Jain as Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor.
10.
Reverting back to the chronological events which took place in the matter of disposal of the present petition it may be seen that the case was adjourned from time to time.
On 15th November, 1990, an application was moved by Shri Nemichand Jain, Advocate praying that he may also be permitted to intervene in the matter.
This prayer was granted by the Court on 14th December, 1990.
The petitioner raised no objection.
Shri Jain is the person who succeeded the petitioner and would have worked as Public Prosecutor and Government Pleader but for the interim order dated 3rd August, 1990 and who was so appointed after contempt petition i.e., MCC No. 270 of 1990 was rejected.
On 8th March, 1991, additional return was filed.
The petitioner filed the rejoinder on 15th March, 1991.
Shri Nemichand Jain filed his return on 20th March, 1991.
The matter came up again for hearing before the motion Bench on 26th March, 1991.
There was difference of opinion.
The matter was referred to a third Hon'ble Judge of this Court.
He concurred with the view which was in favour of admission of the writ petition.
It was concluded that the case is not of the type which merited dismissal in limine.
The petitioner was ordered to be heard on merits by the appropriate Bench.
This order has since been reported as Sushil Sharma v. State of MP, 1992(2) SCT 626 (MP) : 1992(1) MPJR IM.
After admission when the matter came up for hearing on 16th September, 1992 it was pointed out to the Bench hearing the case that same question of law was being considered before a Division Bench at Main Seat at Jabalpur.
To avoid contradictory judgment this petition was adjourned to await the decision which may be given at Jabalpur.
On 30th September, 1992, the copy of the judgment passed at the Main Seat at Jabalpur in MP No. 2144 of 1990 decided on 16th September, 1992 was placed on the record of this case  11.
The averments made in the amended writ petition may also now be taken note of.
The additional ground to challenge the validity of order Annexure P/9 is that it does not disclose any reason.
It was termed as capricious, discriminatory and arbitrary.
It was also pleaded that the termination of tenure is because of change of Government having different political ideology.
The petitioner contended that he was entitled to an opportunity of hearing and rebut the material on the basis of which his services were brought to an end before the tenure fixed vide orders annexures P/5 and P/6.
It is also stated that order annexure P/9 was an empty formality inasmuch as the State Government had already made up its mind to terminate his tenure.
An additional return was filed to the amended petition.
This is dated 20th January, 1991.
This was filed on 8th March, 1991.
A plea was taken that the term of the petitioner having come to an end and successor having been appointed the petitioner, has no subsisting cause of action.
Order Annexure P/9 was described as a simple order of termination or what is known to service jurisprudence as "innocuous" or without "stigma".
12.
The respondent State has placed on record Annexures R/1 and R/40 with the return.
The State has at the same time pleaded that these annexures are not the basis of the order Annexure P/9.
It will be relevant to note in brief the contents of these annexures.
13.
Annexure R/1 is a First Information Report lodged by one Motiram Singh against the petitioner in Police Station at Gwalior.
This is under Sections 406, 392 and 207 of the Indian Penal Code.
It is dated 5th June, 1992.
The name of the petitioner is mentioned in this First Information Report.
Annexure R/2 is an order-sheet in BF No. 1324 of 1986 passed by the Court of Second Additional Sessions Judge, Gwalior.
This is an order by which the petitioner was granted bail.
There is another order-sheet in BF No. 1854 of 1986 in which the Sessions Judge, Gwalior granted bail to the petitioner.
This is Annexure R/3.
Annexure R/4 is a complaint made by one Vinod Singh Tomar.
This contains a serious allegation.
It is alleged that a sum of Rs. 50,000/- was demanded by the petitioner from the complainant.
14.
The news item published in the various newspapers regarding the manner in which the petitioner was discharging his public duties Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor has also been placed on record.
These are Annexure R/5, R/9, R/10, R/19, R/24, R/26 to R/29 and R/30.
These news items were published in various newspapers from time to time between 22nd June, 1988 to 12th June, 1989.
A Demi official letter written by District Magistrate with regard to complaints against the petitioner has been placed on record as Annexure R/6.
A report made by District Prosecution Officer dated 14th March, 1988 form part of Annexure R/7.
Annexure R/11 is a complaint made to the Superintendent of Police, Gwalior.
The complaint is made by one Hansimal son of Hirachand.
The report submitted by District Prosecution Officer dated 14th February, 1989 form the part of Annexures R/13 and R/14.
There is a complaint supported by an affidavit of one Mohan Singh.
This Mohan Singh had submitted a complaint to the District Judge, Gwalior.
This is Annexure R/21.
A complaint submitted by some Advocates to the Law Secretary is Annexure R/23.
Complaints submitted by Prem Singh, Advocate and others to the Law Ministry and District Magistrate form part of Annexures R/36 to R/40.
A poster which was pasted on the Court's premises and other places at Gwalior has been appended as Annexure R/20.
Reference has been made to certain reports made by Dr. Nathani to the Superintendent of Police.
These are Annexures R/30 to R/32.
It may be possible to contend that all aforementioned annexures are one-sided versions.
Perhaps to avoid this criticism some orders passed by this Court in the judicial proceedings have been placed on the record of this case.
Annexure R/15 is an order passed by this Court.
By this order, operation of bail order in Criminal Miscellaneous case No. 217 of 1989 was stayed.
This was passed by this Court in a matter in which the petitioner appeared as Public Prosecutor in the trial Court in a case arising Sections 307 and 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code.
R/34 is an order passed by this Court in MP No. 994 of 1989.
The Division Bench made the following observations :  "Our attention is drawn by Shri RD Jain to the fact that the order dated 21.12.1988 passed by the trial Court discloses a different state of affairs.
He has submitted that the trial Court had continued the temporary injunction on concession made in that regard by Government Pleader Shri Sushil Sharma.
That does not speak good of either the learned government Pleader and much less of the Court.
The Court has to discharge its own duties in accordance with law and nothing stood in the way of disposing of the matter finally by the Court notwithstanding concession of the Government Pleader for status quo to be maintained.
What is alarming is that the suit eventually ended in dismissal on the ground of maintainability.
In such circumstances passing an ex parte temporary injunction and allowing that to continue for about two years is a serious matter of which we take serious notice.
We would like it to be understood by the concerned Court that we have not appreciated that Court's treatment of the matter and we would expect that in such matters, the Court would keep in mind its statutory duty in accordance with law.
We hope that we would not have any occasion in future to notice such remissness on the part of the Court concerned.
In so far as the Government Pleader's conduct is concerned, we say nothing on that because it is the matter between the counsel and the client.
We would like, however, to bring it to the notice of the State Government that it would be within their competence to deal with their counsel in such manner as they would consider fit and proper regarding counsel's conduct noticed hereinabove.
We direct the Registry to send a copy of this order to the Secretary to Government, Madhya Pradesh, Law Department, Bhopal, for necessary action.
With a copy of the order, shall be sent a copy of the order passed by the trial Court on 21.12.1988 in which concession of Shri Sushil Sharma, is noticed  15.
Another document which has simply been placed on record by the State is Annexure R/12.
This is an order by which the services of the petitioner were terminated by the same Government which appointed him and in whose political ideology the petitioner had explicit faith.
This order is dated 31st December, 1988.
The petitioner has not adverted to this order, may be he thought that this may weaken his case of legal malice on which he is heavily placing reliance.
This order was duly received by the petitioner on 2nd January, 1989.
The operation of the above order was however stayed on 30th January, 1989.
The above fact becomes apparent from the Government file.
This would be dealt with again at appropriate place.
The above is the factual picture as presented by the petitioner and the State.
16.
As the submissions made by the petitioner and the State in the present writ petition are based on inferences which they want to draw from Rules 15 to 19 of Law Manual, they may also be noticed.
They are as under :  15.
Appointments :- All appointments of Public Prosecutors and Additional Public Prosecutors shall be made by Government.
Government may call for recommendations for these posts from the District Magistrate at the head quarters of the sessions division of other area concerned.
The District Magistrate shall then consult the District and Sessions Judge demi-officially and submit the latter's opinion along with his own and also a list of pleaders practising in his district to government.
16.
Participation in politics and freedom from pecuniary embarrassments :- No person shall be appointed as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor unless he agrees in writing to take no part in politics during the tenure of his appointment and gives a declaration in writing that he is free from pecuniary embarrassments.
17.
Probation and confirmation :- Every Government pleader or Additional Government Pleader shall be considered to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of his taking charge.
At the end of that period the District Magistrate shall submit a report through the District and Sessions Judge to Government upon his conduct and ability.
Should his work prove to have been unsatisfactory his services may be dispensed with without notice, should the report be satisfactory he shall be confirmed.
For any sufficient Government may extend the period of probation.
(2) The District Magistrate shall, by the 15th January each year, submit a report to Government through the District and Sessions Judge upon the conduct and ability of the Public Prosecutor or the Additional Public Prosecutor who has been confirmed under sub-rule (1).
The report shall be marked confidential.
18.
Terms of office :- A Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader shall be appointed for a period of three years, excluding the period of his probation and may be re-appointed for further periods not exceeding three years at a time.
Ordinarily no person will be appointed a Government Pleader or an Additional Government Pleader after he attains the age of sixty-two years or continued in that office after he attains that age.
Notwithstanding the expiry of the period, a Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader shall continue, as such, until he is re-appointed or his successor is appointed.
19.
Termination of term :- (1) Government may, at any time and without assigning any reason, dispensed with the services of a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor after giving him one month's notice.
(2) A Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor may resign his appointment after giving one month's notice.
On the basis of the above facts and the statutory provisions the petitioner has raised a contention that order Annexure P/9 suffers from the same vice which existed in the case of Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP., AIR 1991 SC 537 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
575 and that on the same reasoning which led the Supreme Court to quash the order of the Uttar Pradesh Government the present order Annexure P/9 should also be quashed.
According to the petitioner the order is not based on any reason as none has been communicated.
According to him the order is part of an omnibus process initiated with a view to terminate the tenure of all Government Pleaders and Public Prosecutors.
According to the petitioner the order is open to judicial review and if it is so reviewed then it cannot pass the tests laid down by the Supreme Court.
The requirement to have a report from the District Magistrate was essential.
According to the petitioner their reports are in his favour.
Had his case been considered properly he would have earned a renewed tenure.
He submits that order of termination which has served no public purpose is liable to be quashed.
The petitioner has also submitted that on the plain reading of Rule 18, he stood confirmed and his Services could not be brought to an end to.
He has also based his case on legal malice.
17.
As the petitioner is placing reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 537 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
575 it would be appropriate to take note of this case.
18.
In this case the Court while dealing with the status and duties of Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor observed that the expression "Professional engagement" is used therein to distinguish it from "appointment to a post under the Government" in the strict sense.
It was elaborated that this does not necessarily mean that such an official does not hold any public office or that the engagement is purely private with no public element attaching to it.
After examining the provisions of Legal Remembrance's Manual as applicable to the State of Uttar Pradesh it was observed that there can be no doubt that the functions which a Public Prosecutor performs relate to a public purpose entrusting him with the responsibility of so acting only in the interest of administration of justice.
It was observed that in the case of Public Prosecutor, this additional public element flowing from statutory provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure, invest them with the attribute of holder of a public office which cannot be whittled down by the assertion that their engagement is purely professional between a client and his lawyer with no public element attaching to it.
The argument of the State that the appointment of the Government counsel by the State Government is only a professional engagement similar to that which exists between a private client and his lawyer, or that it is purely contractual with no public element attaching to it, which may be terminated at any time at the sweet will of the Government excluding judicial review was negatived.
It was held that the nature of the appointment is sufficient to attract Article 14 of the Constitution and the validity of order of termination would be within the sweep of judicial review.
It was concluded that the State cannot be permitted to assume the "split personality of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in the contractual field so as to impress on it all the characteristics of the state at the threshold while making a contract requiring it to fulfil the obligation of Article 14 of the Constitution and thereafter permitting it to cast off its garb of State to adorn the new robe of a private body during the subsistence of the contract enabling it to act arbitrarily subject only to the contractual obligations and remedies flowing from it."
It was accordingly held that contractual acts are equally open to judicial review and laid down that the State actions are required to be non arbitrary and justified on the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It was in this context it was laid down that the State action should be based on some reasons, which reason need not be communicated to the appointee.
It was further concluded that the expression "at any time" merely means that the termination may be made even during the subsistence of the term of appointment and the expression "without assigning any cause" means without communicating any cause to the appointee whose appointment is terminated.
It was however held that the term without existence of any cause.
It merely means that the reason for which the termination is made need not to be assigned or communicated to the appointee.
19.
As the State action in Shrilekha Vidyarthi's case failed on the above touchstone and the action was held to be drastic and sweeping it was concluded that there was non-application of mind.
As the termination of all appointees was by one omnibus order even though their appointments were individual the Supreme Court was unable to appreciate the same and it was found that there is no reasonable basis for the drastic and sweeping action throughout the State, particularly when the provisions in the Legal Remembrancer's Manual provided ordinarily for renewal of the tenure of the appointees.
The stand of the State was described as "beautifully vague" and conveying nothing of substance which could furnish any tangible support to the action taken by it.
The argument of the State that many of the old incumbents were to be re-appointed even after this exercise, was used against it and was taken to be a factor disclosing infirmity in the stand of State.
It was observed that if existing appointees were to be continued by giving them fresh appointments, the action of first terminating their appointment and then giving them fresh appointment is to say the least, uninformed by reason and does not even fall within the scope of the disclosed reason to streaming the conduct of government cases and effective prosecution thereof.
The Court was of the view that it is difficult to digest that every Government Counsel in all the districts of the State of UP was required to be replaced in order to streamline the conduct of Government cases.
20.
The fact that there existed a detailed procedure for renewal of tenure was taken note of.
This procedure included initiation of process three months in advance.
The requirement to have the report of the District Judge was held to be an important factor.
It was accordingly concluded that the rights of existing incumbent could not be covered by common reason applicable to all of them justifying their termination in one stroke and requirement to show a reasonable ground was held to be imperative.
It was further observed that "in the case of existing appointees, a decision has to be first reached about their non-suitability for renewal before deciding to take steps for making fresh appointments to replace them.
None of these steps were taken and no material has been produced to show that any existing incumbent was found unsuitable for the office on objective assessment before the decision to replace all by fresh appointees was taken."
21.
As the detailed procedure as indicated in the Legal Remembrancer's Manual was not followed it was concluded that the action of the State must perish on the ground of arbitrariness which is an available ground for judicial review in such a situation.
22.
The position in this case is different.
The difference is on facts.
The difference is on the scope and ambit of the Rules.
First the difference on factual aspect may be noticed.
23.
It will be appropriate to take notice of the circumstances which led to the termination of the tenure of the petitioner vide Annexure P/9.
For this, we may have to go back to the month of December, 1988.
In a note dated 31st December, 1988, it has been mentioned that in August, 1988, the then Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh had given directions to the effect that the services of the petitioner be brought to an end and that requisite orders be issued in this regard.
As this was not done, on 29th December, 1988, the Chief Minister made an inquiry as to why his orders remain un-compiled with.
Thereafter, orders were issued for bringing an end to the tenure of the petitioner.
This order is dated 31st December, 1988.
As noticed above this order is annexure R/12 and forms part of the annexures R/1 to R/40 placed on record by the State.
This order has merely been placed on record.
The reading of return filed by the State does not make any mention of this order.
The petitioner was aware of this order but he has chosen not to take the Court into confidence.
This fact has been kept concealed.
The petitioner made some representation and an order staying the operation of the order R/12 was passed on 30th January, 1989.
In the meantime reports were also sought with regard to the working of the petitioner.
This fact is being mentioned to show that the assertion of the petitioner that he is being victimised on account of change of Government is not true.
The change in Government took place in March, 1990.
The process initiated by the previous Government was given effect to.
It was in these circumstances Annexure P/9 was issued.
24.
We are satisfied that the order is based on reasons.
This is in terms of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Shrilekha's case (supra).
The reasons do exist.
There was no necessity to convey them to the petitioner.
Such is the view expressed in the case of Shrilekha (supra) on which the petitioner places reliance.
This is the view expressed by the Division Bench of this Court while dealing with similar (rather same) matter in Padamdhar Pandey v. State of MP and others, 1994(1) MPJR 103.
25.
The contention of the petitioner that the State Government has taken an omnibus decision with a view to terminate the tenure of all Government pleaders and there was no individual application of mind is again not correct.
The file indicates that the case of the petitioner alone was under consideration.
Material available on the file was taken into consideration.
It was accordingly decided to issue one month's notice.
We have examined the file and find that the order was not passed on extraneous consideration but was passed on facts and figures which were in existence.
The very Government in whose political wisdom the petitioner reposed his faith had terminated the tenure of the petitioner.
The fact that erstwhile Chief Minister had also decided to terminate the services of the petitioner by giving one month's notice was also before the decision making authority.
The fact that there was a stay was also taken note of.
The order passed by this Court in MP No. 994 of 1989 was also on the file.
There was sufficient material on the record to reach a conclusion.
Thus the order passed by the State Government vide annexure P/9 cannot be said to be based on extraneous consideration.
The case of the petitioner is not part of any omnibus process.
His case was considered as an individual.
26.
The further contention of the petitioner that it was mandatory to have report of the District Magistrate and District Judge is again without any merit.
The observations made by this Court were available to the Government and have been taken note of.
As such, the petitioner's grievance on this score is also of no consequence.
Even otherwise the decision given in Shrilekha's case, AIR 1991 SC 537 is distinguishable.
The procedure indicated in Manual applicable to the State of Uttar Pradesh is detailed and elaborate.
The points of distinction are as under :  (i) Paragraph 703 relates to the appointment of the District Government Counsel.
Whenever the post of any of the District Government counsel is likely to fall vacant or when a new post has been created, the concerned District Magistrate has to notify the vacancy to the members of the Bar.
(ii) The District Magistrate is to ask those who want to be considered for appointment to give their names to him with their particulars such as age, length of practice at the Bar, proficiency in Hindi, Income-tax paid by him on professional income during the last three years, details of the work handled by them during the proceeding two years duly verified by the Court and also to state whether they have practised on the criminal, civil or revenue side.
(iii) The District Magistrate has to give due weight to the claim of the existing incumbents, if any, and has to submit confidentially in the order of preference the names of the legal practitioners to the Legal Remembrancer.
(iv) The District Magistrate has also to send to the Legal Remembrancer, the bio data submitted by other candidates with such comments that he and the District Judge may like to make.
(v) Paragraph 704 then states that on receipt of the recommendations of the District Magistrate, the Legal Rememberancer may, if necessary, make such further inquiry about the candidate as he may deem necessary and then submit the recommendations of the District Magistrate along with his own opinion for the orders of the Government whose decision shall be final.
(vi) Paragraph 7.08 deals with the renewal of the term of the District Government Counsel and states that at least three month's before the expiry of the term, the District Magistrate shall after consulting the District Judge and considering the incumbent's past record of work and conduct and age, report to the Legal Remembrancer together with a statement of work done by him, whether in his opinion, the term of appointment of such counsel should be renewed or not.
(vii) The District Magistrate has to send along with his own recommendations, the opinion of the District Judge.
While giving his recommendations for renewal of the term the District Judge has to give an estimate of the judicial standpoint his capacity as a lawyer and his professional conduct.
(viii) This procedure is to be followed on the expiry of every successive period of renewed appointment.
For the above purpose the District Magistrate and the District Judge is required to keep a character roll and maintain a record of the work done by the District Government Counsel and the capacity displayed by him in the discharge of his work.
Most of the above guidelines are missing in the Manual as applicable to the State of Madhya Pradesh.
As a matter of fact what was said by the Supreme Court of India in State of UP v. UP State Law Officers Association, 1994 AIR SCW 1389 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
863 with regard to the appointment of Government Law Officer to look after Government work would be applicable.
It was said in the above case that the method of appointment does not ensure that meritorious alone will always be appointed.
The Court observed "those who come to be appointed by such arbitrary procedure can hardly complain if the termination of appointment is equally arbitrary.
Those who come by the back-door have to go by the same door.
This is more so when the order of appointment itself stipulates that the appointment is terminable at any time without assigning any reason."
27.
In the present case there is nothing on the record that vacancy was ever notified to the Bar or the detailed procedure indicated in Shrilekha's case was ever in contemplation.
Thus not only on facts but also in law the position of the petitioners is distinguishable.
28.
The further contention of the petitioner that he got automatic confirmation and his tenure was assured, may also be examined.
According to him, the fact that he was appointed for a period of three years is a clear pointer that he was duly confirmed.
Accordingly to him, his services could not be brought to a premature end.
29.
A reading of Rule 17 makes it clear that every Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader is to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of his taking charge.
During the period of probation of one year, his services can be dispensed with without notice.
Then comes Rule 18.
This provides for appointment of a Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader for a period of three years.
The period of probation is not to form part of this three years' tenure.
The only additional benefit which has been conferred under Rule 18 is that the termination of the term is to be preceded by a notice of one month.
It is pertinent to note that both Rules 18 and 19 deal with the term of office.
Rule 18 provides the outer limit of three years.
The idea appears to be that the Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader is not to have a tenure of more than three years at a time.
The contention of the petitioner that he is entitled to a fixed tenure of three years is not correct.
The real intention of Rule 18 is that in no case the appointment should be more than three years.
The only additional right conferred on a Government Pleader is that he is entitled to a notice so that he may arrange his affairs with a view to re-establish himself in private practice.
A similar right stands conferred on the Government.
In case a Government Pleader wishes to resign he has to give one month's notice so that the Government may also make suitable arrangements.
The word "notwithstanding the expiry of period of Government Pleader and Additional Government Pleader shall continue as such until he is re-appointed or his successor is appointed," show that the purpose behind this rule was to see that there is no gap in the matter of handling Government work.
For various reasons it may not be possible for the Government to make immediate appointment and this contingency stand provided for in the shape of the clause referred to above.
30.
Thus a reading of Rules 18 and 19 makes it apparent :  (i) A Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader does enjoy a tenure which is not exceeded 3 years;  (ii) the intention behind Rule 18 is to not to give a tenure to a Government Pleader or Additional Government Pleader which may be more than 3 years;  (iii) this tenure of 3 years can be brought to an end by giving one month notice;  (iv) the order should not be based on non-existing grounds but should have some basis on government file which bases need not be communicated to the appointee;  (v) reasons need not be given in the order by which services of a Government Pleader are brought to an end by giving one months' notice; and  (vi) in case challenge is made to the order of termination then the Court can look into the Government file to see that the order has not been passed by the State Government mala fide or on extraneous consideration.
The idea is to see that protection of Article 14 is available to the person concerned and the Government has not acted arbitrarily.
31.
Another argument has been raised on the basis of the decision given in the case of Harpal Singh v. State of UP, 1993 AIR SCW 2843.
We are of the view that the ratio of the above case is not attracted.
32.
The petitioner's counsel had stated that in the event of order of Government being found to be invalid his client is entitled to be compensated.
He gave no criteria for assessing this compensation.
When asked about the income of the petitioner it was pointed out that he is not an income-tax payee.
We leave this matter here and say no more.
33.
We are of the view that valid reasons existed for passing order Annexure P/9 and as per the law laid down by Supreme Court of India in Shrilekha's case these reasons are not required to be communicated.
Rules 18 and 19 provide for the outer limit of the tenure of Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor and this can be brought to an end before this period.
The order Annexure P/9 could be subjected to judicial review and when so subjected it was found to be not in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The plea of legal mala fide though raised could not be established.
As a matter of fact there exists none.
The process initiated by the previous Government was processed and final action taken in accordance with law.
Order annexure P/9 is valid.
There is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.