TS Doabia, J - The petitioners in this writ petition are Lower Division Clerks, Tax Collectors and Tracers.
One of them is a telephone operator.
They are all getting salary in the grade of Rs. 515-800 As such, they contend that they belong to one category.
According to them in the matter of further promotions, they are to be treated alike that is all of them should be eligible for promotion as they form one group notwithstanding the nature of work assigned to them.
According to them their jobs and duties are interchangeable.
The grievances of the petitioners be serialised as under :  (i) that, they are being denied the benefit of equal pay for equal work;  (ii) that, even though they have put in more than 10 years or more service, their services have not been regularised; and  (iii) that, in the matter of regularisation the Corporation is not sticking to the principle of seniority.
Their grievance is that they should be regularised in accordance with their seniority determined from the date of entering in service.
2.
The case of the Corporation is that the principle of equal pay for equal work is being given full respect.
It is further stated that in the matter of regularisation the petitioners have no absolute right as some of them do not possess basic qualifications.
It is further stated that some of them were given back door entry and their appointment was not in accordance with law and therefore, they are not entitled to claim regularisation.
The claim of equal pay for equal work and regularisation is thus the main issue.
First the claim regarding equal pay for equal work may be seen.
3.
It is true that principle of equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by our Constitution to a fundamental right.
This however is not a ground to non-suit the petitioner.
When Article 9(d) is read it does indicate that Constitutional aim is that State shall not deny to any citizen equality before law.
Equality clause as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution would become meaningless to a vast majority of people who look forward to the protective umbrella of Articles 14, 19 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
The firm is to ensure that the employee with the same status, experience and seniority receive equal treatment when they are doing similar work.
4.
The Supreme Court in the case of Kishori Mohan Lal Bakshi v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1113 and State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh, AIR 1963 SC 913 was held that the abstract principle of Equal pay for Equal work has nothing to do with equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution on India.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 the Supreme Court taking note of the Preamble to Constitution of International Labour Organisation which recognised the concept of 'equal remuneration for work of equal value" came to a conclusion that the concept of equal pay for equal work is deducible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(d).
This concept assumed concrete shape when in Supreme Court Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, 1993(3) SCT 137 (SC) : AIR 1990 SC 344 the Court observed that "...although the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' does not come within Art. 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine, but if any classification is made relating to the pay-scale and such classification is unreasonable and/or if unequal pay is based on no classification, then Art. 14 will at once be attracted and such classification should be set at naught and equal pay be directed to be given for equal work.
In other words, where unequal pay has brought about a discrimination within the meaning of Art. 14 of the Constitution, it will be a case of 'equal pay for equal work', as envisaged by Art. 14 of the Constitution.
If the classification is proper and reasonable and has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' will not have any application even though the persons doing the same work are not getting the same pay.
In short, so long as it is not a case of discrimination under Art. 14 of the Constitution, the abstract doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work', as envisaged by Art. 39(d) of the Constitution, has no manner of application, nor is it enforceable in view of Art. 37 of the Constitution.
Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, (1986)1 SCC 637 may be cited as a case of 'equal pay for equal work' as envisaged by Art. 14 and not of the abstract doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work'."
5.
In PK Ramachandra Iyer and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 SC 541, petitioners were working as Professors in a particular grade.
Fresh advertisements were issued.
These were in a revised pay-scales.
Even though the advertisements were cancelled the Supreme Court held that the petitioners were entitled to revised pay-scales.
The Court elaborated the concept underlying the Constitutional intendment under Article 39(d) and was of the view that the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is deducible from those Articles and may be properly applied to the cases of unequal scales of pay eased on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.
It was held :  "The case in hand is a glaring example of discriminatory treatment accorded to old, experienced and highly qualified hands with an evil eye and unequal hand and the guarantee of equality in all its pervasive character must enable this Court to remove discrimination and restore fair play in action.
No attempt was made to sustain the scales of pay for the post of Professor on the doctrine of classification of existing incumbents as being distinct and separate from newly recruited hand with flimsy change in essential qualification would be wholly irrational and arbitrary.
The case of the petitioners for being put in the revised scale of Rs. 1100-1600 from the date on which newly created posts of Professors in sister disciplines in IVRI and other institutes were created and filled in, revised scale is unanswerable and must be conceded."
6.
Where differentiation is sought to be justified on ground of dissimilarity of responsibility, confidentiality and relationship with public there may be some rational nexus.
Thus in Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 1291, where the Stenographers (Grade I) who were attached with officers sought parity with the pay-scale of Stenographers attached to the Joint Secretaries and Officers above that rank, the claim was negatived.
It was observed :  "In this case the differentiation has been sought to be justified in view of the nature and the types of the work done, that is, on intelligible basis.
The same amount of physical work may entail different quality of work, some more sensitive, some requiring more tact, some less - it varies from nature and culture of employment.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
If it has a rational nexus with the object to be sought for, as reiterated before a certain amount of value judgment of the administrative authorities who are charged with fixing the pay scale has to be left with them and it cannot be interfered with by the Court unless it is demonstrated that either it is irrational or based on no basis or arrived at mala fide either in law or in fact.
In the light of the averments made and in the facts mentioned before, it is not possible to say that the differentiation is based on no rational nexus with the object sought for to be achieved."
"Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental right.
But equal pay must depend upon the nature of the work done, it cannot be judged by the mere volume of work, there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
One cannot deny that often the difference is a matter of degree and that there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration in fixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bona fide, reasonably on an intelligible criterion which has a rational nexus with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
It is important to emphasise that equal pay for equal work is a concomitant of Article 14 of the Constitution.
But it follows naturally that equal pay for unequal work will be a negation of that right."
7.
Again in the case of Purshotam Lal v Union of India, AIR 1973 SC 1088, it was held that implementation of the revised pay scale in a particular category of servants from a date later than that recommended by the Pay Commission and thus non-implementations of its report only in respect of those persons amounts to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Constitution Bench in Laljee Dubey v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 252, again reiterated the same principle.
8.
The basic principles on which differentiation would not amount to discrimination violative of either Article 14 or Article 16(1) of the Constitution are well settled.
Article 14 of the Constitution strikes at the arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment.
It is attracted where equals are treated differently without any reasonable basis.
The.
principle underlying the guarantee is that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike both in privileges conferred and liabilities imposed.
Equal laws must be applied equally and there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject-matter of either administrative action or of legislation, their position is substantially the same.
Article 14 forbids class legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation or administrative mandate.
The classification must, however, be founded on an intelligible basis which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational nexus with the object to be achieved by the differentiation made in the statute or order in question.
In other words, there ought to be casual connection between the basis of classification and the object of the classification.
9.
The question of discrimination cannot be decided in isolation.
The Supreme Court reiterated that in addition to the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', the pay structure of the employees of the Government should reflect many other social values.
The Supreme Court also emphasised the need for evolution and implementation of a scientific national policy of income, wages and prices.
10.
In P Savita v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1124, the Supreme Court was dealing with senior draughtsmen doing the same work and discharging the similar functions and duties.
They were classified into two groups, on the basis of seniority with two different pay scales.
The question was whether it was discriminatory.
It was held that it was.
The Supreme Court reiterated that a group of draughtsmen entitled to higher scale of pay was not selected by any process nor is it based on any merit-cum-seniority basis, but is based only on seniority-cum-fitness.
Moreover, it was found that, the senior draughtsmen divided into two groups were in the same department doing identical and same work.
It was not a case of different grades created on the ground of higher qualification either academic or otherwise or an entitlement by any other criteria.
Thus the classification between the two groups of senior draughtsmen was without any basis.
11.
In Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP., (supra) the Supreme Court was concerned with the casual workers on daily wage basis engaged by the Government in different Nehru Yuvak Kendras in the country performing the same duties as performed by the regular class IV employees against the sanctioned strength.
The claim was allowed with certain directions on the basis of the facts found.
See also in this connection Union of India v. R G Kashikar, AIR 1986 SC 431.
12.
In MP Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 485, the Supreme Court on the facts of that case found that among the employees of the Central Bureau of Investigation, there were two classes of officials namely deputationists and non-deputationists amongst Sub-Inspectors, Inspectors and Deputy Superintendents of Police.
There was discrimination among the two groups with regard to payment of special pay.
Special pay related to arduous nature of duties to be performed.
Whether they belong to the category of deputationists or non-deputationists - payment of different rates of special pay, it was held in the facts of the case, that it did not pass the test of reasonable classification.
13.
In Mackinnon Machenzie and Co Ltd v. Audrey D'Costa, (SLP (Civil) No.1265/87 decided on March 26, 1987) AIR 1987 SC 1281, the question was the different treatment between male and female stenographers.
But there differentiation was based on the ground of sex.
It was struck down.
It was held to be violative of Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution.
14.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 and later in Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP (supra), Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, AIR 1986 SC 584, Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2049, Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504 and P Savita v. Union of India (supra), the Supreme Court implemented the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'.
The Court relief granted relief on the principle of equal pay on the basis of same or similar work performed by two classes of employees under the same employer even though the two classes of employees did not constitute the same service.
But in all the aforesaid cases relief was granted only after it was found that discrimination was practised in giving different scales of pay in violation of the equality clause enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The principle - of 'equal pay for equal work' is not abstract one, it is open to the State to prescribe different scale of pay for different cadres, having regard to nature, duties, responsibilities and educational qualifications.
Different grades are laid down in service with varying qualifications for entry into, particular grade.
Higher qualification and experience based on length of service are valid consideration for prescribing different pay scales for different cadres.
The application of doctrine arises where employees are equal in every respect, in educational qualifications, duties, functions and measure of responsibilities and yet they are denied equality in pay.
If the classification for prescribing different scales of pay is founded on reasonable nexus the principle will not apply.
But if the classification is founded on unreal and unreasonable basis it would violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' must have its way.
In a number of decisions the Supreme Court claim for 'equal pay for equal work' has been negatived on the ground that the different pay scales prescribed for persons doing similar or same work is permissible on the basis of classification founded on the measure of responsibilities, educational qualifications, experience and other allied matters.
15.
In , the Supreme Court negatived the claim of Bench Secretaries for equal pay for equal work on the basis of reasonable classification based on merit, experience and seniority though both set of employees were performing the similar duties and having similar responsibilities.
In State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, AIR 1989 SC 19 Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, AIR 1989 SC 1256, the Supreme Court refused to grant relief to the petitioner for parity in pay on the application of the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' or the ground of reasonable classification on the basis of educational qualifications.
16.
In view of the above decisions one can say that where two classes of employees perform identical or similar duties and carry out the same functions with the same measure of responsibility having same academic qualifications, they would be entitled to equal pay.
If the State denies them equality in pay, its action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, and the Court will strike down the discrimination and grant relief to the aggrieved employees but before such relief is granted the Court must consider and analyse the rationale behind the State action in prescribing two different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant posts, the Court finds that the classification made by the State in giving different treatment to the two classes of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is applicable among equals, it cannot be applied to unequals.
Relief to an aggrieved person seeking to enforce the principle of equal pay for equal work can be granted only after it is demonstrated before the Court that invidious discrimination is practised by the State in prescribing two different scales for the two classes of employees without there being any reasonable classification for the same.
If the aggrieved employees fail to demonstrate discrimination, the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' cannot be enforced by Court in abstract.
The question what scale should be provided to a particular class of service must be left to the Executive and only when discrimination is practised amongst the equals, the Court should intervene to undo the wrong and to ensure equality among the similarly placed employees.
The Court however cannot prescribe equal scales of pay for different classes of employees.
17.
The Supreme Court in the case of V Markendeya and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, AIR 1989 SC 1308, held that the case of graduate overseers had all along been treated as separate entity from the non-graduate supervisors and they had been drawing different pay since long.
The Constitution Bench had already recorded findings that two sets of officers, namely, graduate Supervisors and non-graduate Supervisors do not belong to the same class of service and unequal treatment relating to promotion is justified on the basis of educational qualification.
Therefore the classification made between the graduate Supervisors and non-graduate Supervisors is reasonable and the State Government did no violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in prescribing different scales of pay for them.
18.
In Dr. OZ Hussain v. Union of India and Ors, AIR 1990 SC 311, it was held that allowances such as book allowance, risk allowance, conveyance allowance and higher degree allowance admissible to doctors in medical wing is Directorate of Health Services should also be paid non-medical group scientists.
19.
In Paras Nath and another and Mammon Singh and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 298, classification of semi-skilled workers as unskilled workers was held to be invalid.
Thus Dairy Mates, Junior Plant Operators and semi-skilled operators were placed in the category of Sweepers, Chowkidars and Malis - un-skilled worker.
It was held that semi-skilled workers could not be classified as un-skilled.
Employees joining a project before a particular date were given compensatory allowance.
This was denied to others.
This was held to be discriminatory in State of Rajasthan v. Gurcharan Singh Grewal and others, AIR 1990 SC 1760.
20.
Similarly payment of higher grades to employees merely on the ground that they were at headquarters were held to be discriminatory in Gopika Ranjan Choudhary, General Secretary of Union of Assam Rifles Non-Gazetted Employees, North East Region v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1212.
Where Air-Conditioned coach attendants of Northern Railway were denied over-time allowance but others were paid, it was held to be discriminatory in Abid Hussain and others v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 820.
21.
In RD Gupta and others etc. v Lt.
Governor Delhi Admn.
and others etc., AIR 1987 SC 2086, it was held that all the ministerial staff working in the NDMC are entitled to get pay scales as per SS Committee Report and likewise all of them are entitled to be given ex-gratia payment to only the staff working in the electricity wing and the water wing cannot be legally sustained as it suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Thus even though the principle of equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a fundamental right it is definitely a constitutional goal.
There is no doubt that principle of equal pay for equal work is no longer an abstract utopian there must be intrinsic reliable cogent evidence to show that the two posts regarding which parity is sought are identical and carry the same degree of responsibility.
Once this is shown then equality clause will step in and equal protection of law would become a reality.
22.
In Daily Rated Casual Labourers played under P&T Department through Dak Tar Mazdoor Manch v. Union of India and others, AIR 1987 SC 2342, the denial of minimum pay in pay-scales of regularly employed workmen - casual labourers was held to be violative of the concept of Equal pay for equal work.
Reliance was placed on the decision given in Dhirendra Chamoli's case (supra) wherein similar view was taken with regard to employees working in Nehru Yuvak Kendras.
23.
Employees working as vaccinators and immunisors on daily wages for more than eight years were denied the salary and allowances payable to regularly employed doing same type of work.
This was held to be bad in Delhi Municipal Karamchari Ekta Union (Regd.)
v. PL Singh and others, AIR 1988 SC 519.
It was observed that there is 'no justification for the Corporation extracting the same amount of work from the workmen concerned on payment of daily wages at rates lower than the minimum salary which is being paid to other workmen who have been recruited regularly even though the workmen involved in the case had been working for a number of years.
Nearly six years had elapsed from the date of the reference but without any change in the attitude of the Corporation.
24.
Again employees working as contingent paid staff of Income Tax Department were held entitled to minimum pay in pay-scales.
See : UP Income-tax Department Continent Paid Staff Welfare Association v. Union of India and others, AIR 988 SC 517.
25 Some Bank employees were promoted earlier while other employees were promoted late.
Both groups of promotees were doing same type of work.
Higher wages were given to one group of promotees from back date.
It was held that this benefit cannot be denied to others.
See : UP.
Rajya Sahakari Bhoomi Vikas Bank Ltd, UP.
v. Its Workmen, AIR 1990 SC 495.
26.
Classification in revised pension formula between pensioners on basis of date of retirement was held to be violative in DS Nakara and others v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130.
It was held that Article 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
In order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, viz., (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group; and (ii) that the differentia must have a rational relation to the objects sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
(see : Ram Krishna Dalmia v. SR Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 538 at p.547).
The classification may be founded on differential basis according to objects sought to be achieved but what is implicit in it is that there ought to be nexus i.e., casual connection between the basis of classification and object of the statute under consideration.
It is equally well settled by the decisions of Supreme Court that Article 14 condemns discrimination not only by a substantive law but also by a law of procedure.
Thus the fundamental principle is that Article 14 forbids class legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation which classification must satisfy the twin tests of classification being founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
27.
In the matter of grant of family pension it was held in JS Rukmani v. Government of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1985 SC 785 that there is no warrant for making distinction between widows of one class of government servants and the widows of another class merely on the basis of the place where the government servant last served at the time of superannuation.
It was observed :  "...although in both cases the Government servant served the same State namely, the former State of Madras and superannuated before the reorganisation of the States.
We are therefore of the view that the restrictive limitation imposed by the Government order dated 18th March, 1982 confining the benefit of family pension to the members of the family of only those government servants who last served at a place falling within the territories of the successor State of Tamil Nadu must be held to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and hence unconstitutional and void."
28.
The option given to the Railway employees covered by Provident Fund Scheme to switch over to pension scheme from specified cut-off date is not discriminatory.
See : Krishena Kumar v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 1782.
29.
In Deoki Nandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409, it was held by the Supreme Court :  "The payment of pension does not depend upon the discretion of the Government but is governed by the relevant rules and anyone entitled to the pension under the rules can claim it as a matter of right."
30.
In Smt. Poonamal v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC, it was pointed out (at p. 1198) :  "Where the Government servant rendered service to compensate which a family pension scheme is devised, the widow and the dependent minors would equally be entitled to family pension as a matter of right."
31.
Since pension is linked with past service and the avowed purpose of the Pension Rules is to provide sustenance in old age, distinction between marriage during service and marriage after retirement appears to be indeed arbitrary, This view was expressed in Smt. Bhagwanti v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 2088.
32.
Daily rated or casual employees are not entitled to wages for days they do not work.
See : Union of India v. Rajinder Kumar Sharma, AIR 1933 SC 1317.
33.
In State of MP v. Pramod Bhartiya, AIR 1993 SC 286 : 1993(1) S.C.T.
138, it was held that it is not enough to say that qualifications are same nor it is enough to say that schools are the same status.
It is also not sufficient to say that the service conditions are similar.
The question is whether they discharge similar duties, functions and responsibilities, It was said that 'it would be evident from this definition that the stress is upon the similarity of skill, effort and responsibility when performed under similar conditions'.
It was observed :  "We cannot ignore or overlook this reality.
It is a not a matter of assumption but one of proof.
The respondents (original petitioners) have failed to establish that their duties, responsibilities and functions are similar to those of the non-technical lecturers in Technical Colleges.
They have also failed to establish that the distinction between their scale of pay and that of non-technical lecturers working in Technical Schools is either irrational and that it has no basis, or that it is vitiated, by mala fides, either in law or in fact - see the approach adopted in Federation case (AIR 1988 SC 1291).
It must be remembered that since the plea of equal pay for equal work has to be examined with reference to Art.14 the burden is upon the petitioners to establish their right to equal pay, or the plea of discrimination, as the case may be.
This burden the original petitioners (respondents herein) have failed to discharge."
It was accordingly held that the grades payable to non-technical lecturers in technical schools are not required to be given to lecturers in non-technical schools.
34.
In National Federation of State NFC (Physical Education) Teachers Association and others v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 196 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 369, the facts were that a National Discipline Scheme was started under the scheme for instituting discipline and imparting training in mass drill among the younger generation in the refugee camps and colonies.
The scheme was thereafter transferred to the Ministry of Education.
It was enlarged to cover a number of high schools.
A new programme known as National Fitness Corps was formed.
It was decided that the N.DS instructors could function in the schools under the administrative control to the State Government.
They would be transferred to the States and merged with the cadre of Physical Education Teachers of the respective States.
Pursuant to this, the Central Government informed the State to take over the administrative control of the NFC teachers and absorb them in the State service into equivalent cadre and any expenditure on the staff was to be reimbursed by the Government.
Since the scheme was introduced in the middle school classes, namely classes V to XI and not in the primary classes, physical instructors urged that they cannot be fixed on the pay scale as applicable to primary school teachers.
There were no scales one for primary school teacher and another for secondary school teacher.
It was held :  "Where the responsibilities are different and the nature of work is also different physical instructors cannot be heard to contend that they will be entitled to the scale of pay as is applicable to secondary school teachers was a mere coincidence that the revised pay scale of Junior Grade I instructors was equivalent to that of primary teachers of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan.
They did not have the essential qualification to be taken in service in Central Schools as Physical Education Teachers, therefore, could not be given their pay scales, regardless of the fact that they were doing the duties of Physical Education Teachers."
35.
As a matter of fact gradation based on qualification is permissible.
Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Science and others (supra).
In such case principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be applied, State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, (supra).
36.
Part-time lecturers working for more hours every day as compared to regularly appointed lecturers are entitled to be paid according to minimum of pay-scales prescribed for regularly appointed lecturers.
The fact they were not gainfully appointed elsewhere was taken note of Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1994 SC 265.
The decision given in State of Punjab v. Surinder Kumar 1992(1) SCT 538 (SC) : (1992) 1 SCC 489 was distinguished as in that case they were seeking absorption and regularisation.
37.
In Board of Trustees for the Port of Calcutta v. Achintya Kumar Mohan Lal, 1993(3) SCT 270 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2278, employees of non-statutory canteens in Port Trust sought parity with employees of statutory canteens.
Their claim was not rejected but the concerned employees were allowed to give better particulars to substantiate their claim.
38.
However in the case of M.M.R.
Khan v Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 937, there were three types employees working in Railway canteens.
These were :  (i) Statutory Canteen - Canteens required to be provided compulsorily in view of Section 46 of the Factories Act, 1948;  (ii) Non-Statutory Recognised Canteens - Canteens run in the establishments which may or may not be governed by the Act aforesaid, but such non-statutory Canteens have been established with the prior approval and recognition of the Railway Board as per the procedure detailed in the Railway Establishments Manual; and  (iii) Non-Statutory Non-Recognised Canteens - Canteens which employ 100 or less than 100 employees but are established without the prior approval or recognition of the Railway Board.
With regard to canteens (i) and (ii) it was held :  "that even employees of the non-statutory Canteen have to be treated at par with the employees, in the statutory Canteens, because such canteens had been established with the prior approval and recognition of the Railway Board as per the procedure detailed in the Railway Establishment Manual.
For arriving at the said conclusion, this Court made reference to different paragraphs of the Railway Establishment Manual and to the materials on record to show as to how such non-statutory canteens were being managed under the direct supervision of the railway administration.
In that connection, it was also pointed out as to how Railway Board had prescribed a minimum dearness allowance relief to employees of such non-statutory canteens and the scales of pay, the enhanced dearness allowance were being revised.
In respect of employees working in the metropolitan cities, the Railway Board had fixed the scales of pay of the employees working in all non-statutory canteens which were being revised from time to time by different orders issued by the Railway Board."
With regard to (iii) category of canteens it was held :  "The canteens are run more or less on ad hoc basis, the railway administration having no control on their working neither is there a record of these canteens nor of the contractors who run them who keep on changing, much less of the workers engaged in these canteens are not entitled to claim the status of the railway servants."
39.
See also Surendra Prasad Khugsal v. Chairman, MMT Corpn.
of India and another, AIR 1993 SC 2491 : 1993(4) S.C.T.
795, where on account of disputed facts matter was directed to be referred to Industrial Court.
Even though the cumulative effect of Articles 14 and 16 is to ensure that the employees with the same status, experience and seniority and doing similar work in the same cadre receive equal treatment yet it must be established as a factual reality.
It may be seen that Article 16 is a specific application of the general principle of equality contained in Article 14.
The object of the two Articles is to ensure equality of opportunity in matters relating to public offices.
40.
Employees of Education Department deputed to Engineering College for teaching non-technical subjects not possessing necessary qualifications were held to be not entitled to revised scales.
41.
Assistant Audit Officers belonging to the office of Comptroller and Audit General and working with Railway Audit Department wanted to have facilities like Railway passes and quotas etc.
It was held that they cannot claim parity with Group B Officers of Indian Railways.
Central Railway Audit Staff Association v. Director of Audit, Central Railways, AIR 1993 SC 2467 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
264.
42.
Thus as per the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India the following principles emerge in the matter of grant of equal pay for equal work :  (i) The claim for equal pay for equal work is not to be decided as an abstract doctrine.
Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 334;  (ii) Aggrieved employee must demonstrate discrimination, V Markendeya and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others (supra),  (iii) Equality claim would be attracted where classification is unreasonable or is not based on any principle, PK Ramachandra Iyer and other v. Union of India and others and Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India and others (supra)  (iv) Equal pay must depend upon the nature of work done.
It cannot be judged by the mere of work.
Differentiation despite similarity of functional work but due to dissimilarity of the, responsibility, confidentiality is not discriminatory, Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) and others v. Union of India and others (supra)  (v) Even in the matter of allowance the concept of equality would step in Dr. Ms. OZ Hussain v. Union of India and others (supra), abid Hussain and others etc v. Union of India and others (supra), and The Union of India v. All India Union Services Pensioners Association and another (supra).
(vi) Non-giving of allowance merely by fixing a cut-off date is not legal.
State of Rajasthan v. Gurcharan Singh (supra) and UP Rajya Sahakari Bhoomi Vikas Bank Ltd UP v. Its Workmen (supra);  (vii) Differentiation on the basis that an employee is working in headquarters may also be bad, Gopika Ranjan Choudhary, General Secretary of Union of Assam Rifles Non-Gazetted Employees, North East Region v. Union of India and others (supra);  (viii) Classification in two groups i.e., deputation and non-deputation in the matter of pay-scales is again bad.
MP Singh and others v. Union of India and others, (supra);  (ix) In the matter of grant of pension discrimination cannot be made on the basis of date of retirement one getting higher and the other getting lower pension, DS Nakara and others v. Union of India (supra).
However option given to employees to opt for pension scheme and prescribing a cut-off date is not bad, Krishena Kumar v. Union of India and others (supra).
Again making a classification in the matter of grant of family pension on the basis whether the marriage took place before retirement or after retirement would be bad.
Smt. Bhagwanti v. Union of India (supra);  (x) Classification in the grant of pension to widows on the basis of place of service of their husbands even though in the same State is bad Smt. JS Rukmani, etc. v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others (supra);  (xi) Payment of higher salary on the basis of higher qualification is permissible, Dr. C Girijambal v. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, AIR SC 1537.
Similarly employees working in one institution other institutions cannot claim parity with All cannot claim parity with other Institutions, All India Sainik Schools Employees Association v. The Defence Minister-cum-Chairman, Board of Governors, Sainik School Society, New Delhi and others, AIR 1989 SC 88;  (xii) In the matter of revision of pay scales two groups were formed not on the bases of merit-cum-seniority but on the bases of seniority-cum-fitness though they were performing the same duties would be bad, P.Savita and others v. Union of India and others (supra) and Delhi Veterinary Association v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 SC 1211;  (xiii) Discrimination on the basis of sex alone would be bad Mackinnon Mackenzie and Co Ltd v. Audrey D'Costa and another, (supra);  (xiv) Denial of same scale of pay to same staff under one Ministry is bad.
YK Mehta and others v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 1970;  (xv) Semi-skilled and skilled cannot be clubed together, Paras Nath and another and Mamman Singh and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 298; and  (xvi) Part-time employees doing work for same or more work hours are to get the same pay as regular employees, Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1994 SC 265.
43.
In the present case it is the admitted case of both sides that the petitioners are performing similar duties under the same employer.
As such any dissimilar treatment with regard to pay would be in breach of the concept of equal pay for equal work.
The claim with regard to regularisation may now be examined.
44.
Ordinarily speaking the creation and abolition of a post is the prerogative of the Employer.
It is for the employer to lay down conditions of service.
In State of Haryana and others etc. etc. v. Piara Singh and others etc. etc., 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2130, it was held that the Court comes into the picture only to ensure observance of fundamental rights, statutory provisions Rules and other instructions, if any, governing the conditions of service.
The main concern of the Court in such matters is to ensure the Rule of law and to see that the executive acts fairly and gives a fair deal to its employees consistent with the requirements of Articles 14 and 16.
It also means that the State should not exploit its employees nor should it seek to take advantage of the helplessness and misery, of either the unemployed persons or the employees as the case may be.
As is often said, the State must be a model employer.
It was keeping in view the above aspects it was held that 'a person should not be kept in a temporary or ad hoc appointment for long.
The Court presumes in such a situation that there is need and warrant for a regular post and accordingly directs regularisation.'
45.
The problem of keeping casual workers for too long came up consideration in Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP., (surpa).
The Court dealt with this problem and directed the Central Government to accord to these persons who are employed by the Nehru Yuvak Kendras and who are concededly performing the same duties as Class IV employees, the same salary and conditions of service as are being received by Class IV employees, except regularisation which cannot be done since there were no sanctioned posts.
It was observed :  "But we hope and trust that posts will be sanctioned by the Central Government in the different Nehru Yuvak Kendras, so that these persons can be regularised.
It is not at all desirable that any management and particularly the Central Government should continue to employ persons on casual basis in organisations which have been in existence for over 12 years."
46.
In Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD.
(supra), this problem again cropped up.
It took serious note of and expressed its anguish in the following words :  "We are not a little surprised that such an argument should be advanced on behalf of the Central Government 36 years after the passing of the Constitution and 11 years after the forty-second Amendment proclaiming India as a socialist republic.
The Central Government like all organs of the State is committed to the Directive Principles of State Policy and Article 39 enshrines the principle of equal pay for equal work."
"...For the benefit of those who do not seem to be aware of it, we may point out that the decision in Randhir Singh case has been followed in any number of cases by this Court and has been confirmed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India, (supra).
The Central Government, the State Governments and likewise, all public sector undertakings are expected to function like model and enlightened employers."
47.
In the case of Daily Rated Casual Labour employed under Posts and Telegraphs Department v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2342, the Court while considering this aspect said :  "...Of those rights the question of security of work is of utmost importance.
If a person does not have the feeling that he belongs to an organisation engaged in production he will not put forward his best effort to produce more.
That sense of belonging arises only when he feels that he will not be turned out of employment the next day at the whim of the management.
It is for this reason it is being repeatedly observed by those who are in charge of economic affairs of the countries in different parts of the World that as far as possible security of work should be assured to the employees so that they may contribute to the maximisation of production.
It is again for this reason that managements and the governmental agencies in particular should not allow workers to remain as casual labourers or temporary employees for an unreasonably long period of time ..."  48.
In Dharwad Distt.
P.W.D.
Literate Daily Wages Employees Association and others, etc. v. State of Karnataka and others, etc., AIR 1990 SC 883, the Court took note of all the decisions rendered in a decade and observed :  "We have referred to several precedents - all rendered within the current decade - to emphasise upon the feature that equal pay for equal work and providing security for service by regularising casual employment within a reasonable period have been unanimously accepted by this Court as a constitutional goal to our socialistic polity.
Article 141 of the Constitution provides how the decisions of this Court are to be treated and we do not think there is any need to remind the instrumentalities of the State be it of the Centre or the State, or the public sector that the Constitution-makers wanted them to be bound by what this Court said by way of interpreting the law."
49.
The same problem again came up for consideration in Jacob M Puthuparambil and others v. Kerala Water Authority and others, AIR 1990 SC 2228 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
627.
A scheme framed was approved with some modification.
The claim for regularisation was again recognised.
50.
In Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, Delhi and others, 1992(1) SCT 425 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 789, the Court observed that regularisation cannot be claimed where an employee is employed under a scheme and the scheme comes to an end.
The direction given was as under :  "In the circumstances, it is not possible to accede to the request of the petitioners that the respondents be directed to regularise them.
The most that can be done for them is to direct the respondent-Delhi Administration to keep them on a panel and if they are registered with the Employment Exchange and are qualified to be appointed on the relevant posts, give them a preference in employment whenever there occurs a vacancy in the regular posts, which direction we give hereby."
51.
Casual labour employed in Construction Division of Railways completing 120 days of service were held entitled to regularisation as temporary employees in Union of India and others v. Basant Lal and others, 1992(2) SCT 297 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 188.
This decision was based on the basis of instructions issued by the Railway which permitted enforcing of such direction.
52.
The matter came to be considered at some length in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2130.
The Court was of the view that the employer should frame a scheme.
It was said that 'the proper course would be that each State prepares a scheme, if one is not already in vogue, for regularisation of such employees consistent with its reservation policy and if a scheme is already framed, the same may be made consistent with our observations herein so as to reduce avoidable litigation in this behalf.
If and when such person is regularised he should be placed immediately below, the last regularly appointed employee in that category, class or service, as the case may be.'
The other guidelines were laid down as under -  "The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such situation, efforts should always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employees by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete alongwith others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or termporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the presting cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available exchange some appropriate method consistent with the requirements of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly.
An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available through the above processes.
If for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State."
With regard to work-charged employees it was observed :  "So far as the work-charged employees and casual labour are concerned, the effort must be to regularise them as far as possible and as early as possible subject to their fulfilling the qualifications, if any, prescribed for the post and subject also to availability of work, If a casual labourer is continued for fairly long spell-say two or three years - a presumption may arise that there is regular need for his services.
In such a situation, it becomes obligatory for the concerned authority to examine the feasibility of his regularisation.
While doing so, the authorities ought to adopt a positive approach coupled with an empathy for the person.
As has been repeatedly stressed by this Court, security of tenure is necessary for an employee to give his best to the job".
53.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, the Corporation must frame a scheme to regularise ad hoc employees.
The policy of ad hoc appointment should be resorted to where it is of utmost importance.
Until a scheme is framed by the Corporation the employees who have completed 10 years of service be regularised.
This would be done on the basis of seniority.
An employee who has joined earlier would be regularised first.
In the matter of promotions, all things equal seniority shall be given due regard.
54.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.