RS Mongia and JL Gupta, JJ.
- The Punjab Government through the Labour Commissioner, Punjab, referred the dispute between the parties under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court at Amritsar vide order dated February 14, 1985.
The dispute referred was "whether termination of services of Sh. Hardeep Singh Workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ? "
2.
When the matter was taken up by the Labour Court at Amritsar, the respondent-Management took a preliminary objection to the territorial jurisdiction of the Labour Court at Amritsar.
According to it, the dispute could be adjudicated by the Labour Court at Patiala and not at Amritsar.
Issues were framed and one of the issues was regarding whether the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the reference.
Evidence was led on to all issues on merits as well as on the question of jurisdiction.
The Labour Court at Amritsar held that it had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the reference and refrained itself from going into the merits.
Aggrieved by the Award of the Labour Court dated May 11, 1993, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Government is entitled to refer a dispute to any Labour Court in the State of Punjab and further under Section 33-B of the Act, the State Government has the power to transfer a reference from one Labour Court to another after recording reasons for the same.
The learned counsel further submitted that the Labour Court at Amritsar has the territorial jurisdiction.
In any case, he has submitted that since the entire evidence on merits had been led, it would be in the interest of justice if the matter is decided on merits by the Labour Court at Amritsar.
4.
Learned Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that if the Labour Court at Amritsar had neither territorial jurisdiction, even the parties by consent could confer jurisdiction.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the par ties, we are of the opinion that if the State Government under Section 33-B of the Act can transfer a reference from one Labour Court to another for reasons to be recorded under Section 10 it can as well make reference initially to any Court, this Court in the interest of justice can also ask a particular Labour Court to decide a reference.
6.
Taking into consideration the fact that entire evidence has already been led before the Labour Court at Amritsar, the hotel where the workman was working i.e. International Hotel is also at Amritsar and no prejudice would be caused to the management if the reference is decided by the Labour Court, Amritsar, it would be in the fitness of the things on the facts of this case that Labour Court at Amritsar decides the reference on merits.
7.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and set aside the impugned award dated May 11, 1993 and remand the case to the Labour Court at Amritsar to decide the same on merits.
Since the matter has been pending in that Court for about 9 years, it is directed that the matter be decided within two months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the Labour Court at Amritsar on September 1, 1994.
The office is directed to immediately despatch the order to that Court.
Order accordingly.