Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - Can a person who is senior in the Haryana Education Service Class I be denied a pay scale which has been granted to a junior only on the ground that the said junior has put in longer years to total service ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined the Education Service on December 8, 1960.
She was initially appointed in the school cadre.
While working as such, she was selected for direct recruitment as a Lecturer.
She joined as such on December 23, 1970.
She competed for direct recruitment to the post of Principal.
The Haryana Public Service Commission selected her.
She was appointed as Principal on May 22, 1982.
On March 31, 1990, the petitioner retired after having put in more than 29 years of service.
The petitioner rightly claims to be highly qualified.
She possesses the qualifications of LL.B., MA (Hindi) MA (History) M.ED and Ph.D in History.
3.
In pursuance to the recommendations of the University Grants Commission, the State of Haryana issued instructions vide letter dated February 24, 1988, inter alias providing for the revision of pay scales of the posts of Principals.
It was decided to grant "Professor's grade of Rs. 4500-7300 to the Principals of Govt. and non-Govt.
Colleges, who have put in a total service of 25 years, with effect from 111986....." Apprehending that persons who had been appointed as Principals after her but had completed 25 years of service earlier than her would be granted the higher pay scale which may not be given to her, the petitioner submitted a representation on August 16, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
This was followed by another representation which was forwarded by the Chandigarh Administration (where she was on deputation) to the Director of Higher Education, Haryana vide letter dated February 2, 1989.
A copy of the letter alongwith the representation has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
The grievance made by the petitioner in these representations was not redressed by the department.
However, some of the petitioner's colleagues approached this Court through CWP 2912 of 1989 (BR Vashisht etc. v. State of Haryana).
This writ petition was decided on January 11, 1991.
The State of Haryana was directed to examine the claim of the petitioners in the light of the factual and legal position stated in the representation submitted by the petitioners within two months from the date of the receipt of the order.
In pursuance to these directions, the matter was decided by the Financial Commissioner (Education) vide orders dated July 26, 1991.
It was held that the claim made by the petitioners was not tenable and that the condition of 25 years imposed by the State Government was valid.
As a result, the representations were rejected.
Undaunted, the petitioner submitted another representation in December, 1991.
A copy of this representation is Annexure P8 with the writ petition.
Having failed to get any response from the respondent, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner claims that the decision of the Government to grant Professor's grade to only such Principals as had completed 25 years of service and to deny it to others, who are senior in the service is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
A written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent.
Certain preliminary objections have been raised.
The only objection which has been pressed at the hearing of the case is to the effect that the writ petition suffers from the vice of delay and laches.
On merits, the factual position has not been disputed.
It is, however, averred that the decision of the State Government does not offend Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and that the criterion adopted by the respondent is legal and valid.
5.
Mr. Gopi Chand, learned counsel for the petitioner, has pointed out that various persons junior to the petitioner in the Haryana Education Service Class-I (College Branch) have already been granted the scale of Rs. 4500-7300 with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioner, though senior to them, has not been granted the said scale of pay.
To illustrate, the learned counsel has pointed out that in the Gradation List as it stood on April 12, 1986, the name of Ms. Sudha Tiwari appears at Sr. No. 19.
She has already been granted the higher scale of pay.
As against this, the petitioner who had been appointed as Principal about 7 months prior to her and whose name appears at Sr. No. 18 has not been granted the scale of Rs. 4500-7300.
Learned counsel submits that the policy instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated July 14, 1988, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition (wrongly mentioned as Annexure P-3 in the writ petition) are illegal inasmuch as these provide that pay scale shall be admissible on completion of 25 years of service and not on the basis of the inter se seniority.
According to the counsel, the instructions are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondent, has primarily contended that the writ petition suffers from the vice of laches and on this basis alone it deserves to be dismissed.
On merits, the learned counsel has submitted that the prescription of 25 years of service to entitle a person to a higher scale of pay is just and reasonable and does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
Since the learned counsel for the respondent has primarily banked on the plea of delay, it may be considered at the outset.
In a nutshell, the contention is that the instructions dated July 14, 1988 have been challenged through the writ petition which was filed in this Court on November 18, 1992.
According to the counsel, the claim suffers from delay.
In this behalf, it is relevant to notice that soon after the issue of the impugned instructions on July 14, 1988, the petitioner had submitted a representation dated August 16, 1988.
This was followed by another representation of January, 1989, which was forwarded by the Chandigarh Administration to the respondent vide letter dated February 2, 1989.
In the meantime, certain colleagues of the petitioner had approached this Court through CWP No. 2912 of 1989.
This writ petition was decided by this Court on January, 11, 1991 and directions were given to the respondent to treat the writ petition as a representation and to decide it within two months.
The matter was decided by the Financial Commissioner to the Government vide order dated July 26, 1991.
The petitioner had then submitted a representation in December, 1991.
Having failed to hear anything in reply for almost 11 months, the petitioner had approached this Court.
In the written statement it has not been averred that a decision on any of the representation submitted by the petitioner was, ever communicated to her by the respondent.
At the hearing, Mr. Jaswant Singh has conceded that no decision on any of these representations was ever conveyed to the petitioner.
Still further, it is also clear from the record that some of the colleagues of the petitioner had approached this Court through C.W.P.
No. 2912 of 1989.
The petitioner could have legitimately believed that since the Court is seized of the matter, the decision as may be finally delivered by the Court shall be uniformly applicable to all concerned.
Furthermore, even when directions were given by this Court for treating the writ petition as a representation and deciding it, the respondent only granted hearing to the persons who had filed the writ petition but not to the petitioner.
She still submitted another representation.
Even that was not decided.
The only averment pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent is to the effect that the representations were considered and filed.
Even this decision to file the representations was admittedly not conveyed to the petitioner.
8.
It is true that the High Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction does not normally entertain belated claims.
Persons who are not vigilant are not entitled to invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court.
This may not be a prescribed rule or law, but it has been consistently followed by Courts, however, in this context, the totality of circumstances have to be taken into consideration.
On a perusal of the pleadings of the parties and the facts of the case, it is apparent that the petitioner was the vigilant.
She was following up her case with the Department.
She was not even favoured with a reply.
In this situation, if she chose not to rush to the Courts, it cannot be said that she was not vigilant.
9.
Another fact which deserves mention is that the petitioner is claiming the grant of the higher scale, refixation of pay with the necessary consequences of revisions of pension etc.
It is the admitted position that her retiral benefits have been computed on the basis that she had superannuated while working in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
In case, she is found to be entitled to the higher scale of pay her pension and gratuity will have to be recalculated.
This provides a continuing cause of action to the petitioner.
Thirdly, it also deserves notice that the decision of the Government has already been found to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in CWP No. 11292 of 1991 (Balbir Singh Rathee v. The State of Haryana and Anr.) 1994(1) SCT 169 (P&H) decided on January 31, 1994.
In spite of that, the respondent is raising a plea of limitation against the petitioner.
An authority which does not consider it appropriate to even convey the decision on a representation submitted to it by a fairly Senior Officer cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong.
The Financial handicap that a retired person faces cannot be lost sight of.
Moreover, it also deserves mention that in case like the present one, wherein no third party rights have accrued the plea of delay cannot normally be treated as fatal.
10.
Mr. Jaswant Singh contends that a triable issue of limitation arises.
He submits that the cause of action had accrued to the petitioner immediately on the issue of the letter dated July 14, 1988 or at least on the day when the junior was granted the higher scale.
However, the learned counsel is unable to point out the date on which Ms. Sudha Tiwari had been granted the higher scale of pay.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the cause of action had finally accrued to the petitioner by the mere issue of the letter.
It is only when a person junior to the petitioner was granted the higher scale of pay that a cause of action can be said to have accrued to her.
This date has not been disclosed by the respondent.
In such a situation, it does not appear to be fair to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of delay alone.
This is all the more so as the petition has already been pending for more than a year and a half in this Court.
Dismissal of the writ petition on the ground of delay at this stage would result in depriving her of even the alternative remedy before the Civil Court.
11.
Mr. Jaswant Singh has referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in SS Rathore v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1990 SC 10.
In this case, it has been categorically held that "the cause of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse order but on the date when the order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made and where no such order is made, though the remedy has been availed of a six months' period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making of the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen".
In this case, their Lordships have held that "repeated unsuccessful representations not provided by law are not governed by this principle ......." (Emphasis supplied) In the present case, there is nothing to show that any of the representations submitted by the petitioner was unsuccessful.
Admittedly, no decision was ever conveyed.
In case of a petition for issue of a writ of mandamus, there has to be a demand and a denial before a citizen can move the Court.
In the present case, there was no order passed by the respondent on the representations which were in the nature of a demand.
The denial was not there.
12.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the writ petition cannot be dismissed on the mere ground of delay.
13.
On merits, it is the undisputed position that in view of the impugned instructions, persons junior to the petitioner have been placed in the scale of Rs. 4500-7300 while the petitioner was granted the scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
This was happened on account of reason that by the letter dated July 14, 1988, the Government had decided to grant the higher scale to only those Principals who had put in a total service of 25 years with effect from January 1, 1986.
The apparent result is that persons, who were working as Lecturers but were not found suitable either for direct recruitment or for promotion and were thus superseded and appointed as Principal after her, have got the benefit while those who were meritorious and were selected for direct recruitment or promoted earlier have been kept in a lower scale of pay.
Such an action has already been held to be violative of Article 14 in SM Ilyas v. Indian Council of Agricultural Research, AIR 1993 SC 384 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
199.
Their Lordships have been pleased to inter alias hold that "it does not stand to reason that person having been appointed as Scientist on merit prior to the person who became Scientist later on should get less salary than his junior ....." Similarly, N. K. Sodhi, J in Balbir Singh Rathee's case (supra) has taken a view that the impugned instructions are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In view of the fact that the matter has already been considered in Balbir Singh Rathee's case, further examination of the matter is not necessary.
14.
In view of the above, it is held that the impugned instructions in so far as these provide for the grant of the higher scale of pay only on the basis of the completion of 25 years of service and not seniority are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
To that extent, the instructions are illegal and unconstitutional.
As a result, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of the higher scale of pay with effect from the date it was granted to her junior viz. January 1, 1986.
Her pay shall be re-fixed accordingly.
Even her pension, gratuity and other retiral benefits shall be computed on the basis that she had been placed in the scale of Rs. 4500-7300 on January 1, 1986.
The respondent shall make the necessary payment within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, the payment is not made within three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to payment of interest @ 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of payment.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.