G R Majithia and V K Jhanji, JJ.
- The petitioner has sought a mandate to respondents No. 1 and 2 to appoint her on the post of Scientific Engineer (Group 'B') as she had been selected by respondent No. 4, the Haryana Public Service Commission, and quash the order contained in letter No. 66/14/91-79 SI, dated January 10, 1991, by which one post of Scientific Engineer (Group-B) was taken out of the purview of Haryana Public Service Commission, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  Haryana Public Service Commission (the Commission, for short) invited applications for recruitment to two posts of Scientific Engineer (Group-F) in the Science & Technology Department, Haryana, in the year 1989.
Pursuant to the advertisement, 11 applications, including that of the petitioner, and Ravi Parkash-respondent No. 3, were received in the Commission's office.
The Commission summoned these candidates for interview and after interviewing them selected the petitioner and Shri Rajvir Singh.
It recommended Sh. Rajvir Singh and the petitioner for appointment to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Department of Science & Technology, vide letter No. RG9/85/6507, dated October 26, 1990.
Appointment letter was issued to Shri Rajvir Singh, but not to the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3 was working against one of the posts of Scientific Engineer (Group-B) on ad hoc basis.
He moved this Court through a writ Petition for a direction to the State of Haryana for regularisation of his services in the light of the judgment rendered in the case popularly known as Piara Singh's case (1988(4) SLR 736) and this Court by its order dated October 31, 1990 disposed of the writ petition with a direction to the State Government to dispose of the representation of the petitioner within six months and ordered that status quo in service be maintained.
The representation of respondent No. 3 was processed by the Government of Haryana and even the advice of Deputy Legal Remembrances-cum-Deputy Secretary, Haryana was sought, who advised the Department that the recommendations made by the Public Service Commission were valid for a particular duration, anless the time is extended by the State Government and the recommendee had no right for an offer of appointment.
He, however, advised that one of the posts of Scientific Engineer (Group B) could not be taken out of the purview of the Public Service Commission and there was no valid ground for refusal to offer of appointment to the petitioner.
The facts as found established on records in unmistakable terms suggest that the State of Haryana and the Department of Science and Technology have not acted fairly.
The Commission had advertised two posts of Scientific Engineers (Group B) and the petitioner's name was placed at serial No. 2 of the merit list.
Respondent No. 3 applied for one of such posts.
His claim was duly considered by the Commission, but he was not selected.
The obvious inference is that the candidates who were not selected by the Commission for appointment were not found fit.
The petitioner has averred in para No. 6 of the writ petition that respondent No. 3 applied for the post of Scientific Engineer (Group-B) and competed along with her, but he was not found fit for selection by the Commission.
It will be useful to reproduce the relevant averments made in paragraph 6 of the petition :-  "xxx xxx The respondent No. 3 also applied in pursuance to Annexure P-1 and competed along with the petitioner for the abovesaid two posts but he was not found fit and was not selected for appointment to the post of Scientific Engineer."
In the corresponding reply to paragraph 6, respondents No. 1 and 2 have stated thus -  "It is further stated that the contention of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 was not fit is not admitted."
The reply to this paragraph obviously suggests that the State of Haryana and the Director, Science and Technology Department, did not want to admit even the undisputed facts.
The persons who have not been selected are obviously rejected by the Commission, but respondents No. 1 and 2 do not want to admit this fact probably for reasons which are unjustified.
At the time of hearing of this petition, none of the parties' counsel was in a position to furnish to us the order passed by this Court in the writ petition filed by respondent No. 3.
It is averred by the State of Haryana that respondent No. 3 filed the writ petition in this Court on October 22, 1990, while the Commission sent its recommendations to the State Government on October 26, 1990 and it was received by them on October 31, 1990.
We fail to understand why the State of Haryana did not think it proper to bring to the notice of the High Court in the earlier writ petition that the petitioner (respondent No. 3 in this petition) had applied for one of the advertised posts.
His claim was duly considered by the Commission and rejected and that he was trying to acquire right to the post by back-door entry by moving this Court that his services should be regularised in terms of the judgment of this Court in Piara Singh's case.
At any rate, on the date when the written statement was filed in this Court, the judgment in Piara Singh's case had been overruled by the apex Court.
Still the State Government had thought it convenient to justify its action of delaying the offer of appointment to the petitioner on the ground that the representation of respondent No. 3 for appointment to the post of Scientific Engineer (Group B) on regular basis was under consideration.
Respondent No. 3 appears to have moved this Court after he had come to know that the Commission had not selected him for appointment.
When this writ petition came up for motion hearing on October 7, 1993, we restrained the state of Haryana and the Director, Science and Technology Department, Haryana from regularising the services of respondent No. 3.
The attempt of respondent No. 3 to get his services regularised did not succeed because of the restraint order.
We are constrained to observe that the State Government has acted in this case in a most unjust manner.
In fairness to the learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana, and counsel for respondent No. 3, their last submission be noted.
They submitted that although the petitioner was selected by the Commission for appointment to the post of Scientific Engineer (Group B), yet she had got no right to offer of appointment.
There is no dispute to the legal proposition as alleged by them.
But, in the instant case, we find that the State Government did not issue the appointment order to the petitioner for unjustified reasons and the issuance of the appointment order was delayed for some extraneous reasons.
There is absolutely no justification for respondents No. 1 and 2 to refuse the offer of appointment to the petitioner.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
We accordingly direct respondent No. 1 to issue the appointment letter to the petitioner within one month from today and her appointment will relate back to the date on which Shri Rajvir Singh, who was selected along with her, joined service.
The costs will be realisable jointly and severally from respondents No. 1 to 3.