Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Lower Division Clerk in the Haryana State Electricity Board, impugns the award of the Labour Court by which his challenge to the order of punishment was rejected and claims a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Board to restore his two increments stopped vide order dated August 18, 1981.
He also claims full wages for the period during which he remained under suspension viz. January 18, 1979 to November 18, 1979.
2.
The Board contests the petitioner's claim primarily on the ground that he had filed a civil February 25, 1983 for declaration that the suspension and stoppage of the annual increments of the plaintiff is illegal and ...... is entitled for damages, costs of the suit and two annual increments with' full back wages of suspension period ......".
This suit was dismissed by the Civil Court vide judgment dated December 22, 1984.
The petitioner's claim having been declined by the Civil Court and he having allowed the judgment and decree to attain finality, the Labour Court as well as this court cannot now interfere in the matter and grant the same reliefs to the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Des Raj Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner, has primarily contended that the Board had ordered the stoppage of the petitioner's two increments with cumulative effect without holding an enquiry and without following the procedure prescribed for the imposition of a major penalty.
He submits that this order was totally illegal.
The petitioner had challenged this order before the civil court.
Without going into the merits of the controversy or the issues arising in the case, the civil court had rejected the petitioner's claim on the untenable ground of res judicate and hold that since the petitioner had approached the Labour Court under section 33C(2) for the award of wages for the period of suspension, he cannot be permitted to now challenge the order of stoppage of two increments.
Learned counsel submits; that these orders being illegal and the petitioner's claim having not been decided on merits, the impugned action cannot be sustained.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. OP Sharma learned counsel for respondent No. 2 submits that the decree of the civil court having attained finality, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
5.
Even if, it is assumed that the order passed by the Board as well as the judgment and decree passed by the civil court were wrong, the fact remains that the petitioner's claim for setting aside the order of punishment as also for the payment of the full wages for the period of suspension was rejected by the civil court.
In case, the petitioner had challenged the judgment and decree of the civil court in appeal, it is possible that the decision may have been reversed.
However, the fact remains that the petitioner did not file any appeal against the judgment and decree of the civil court.
The suit having been dismissed, he allowed the decree to attain finality.
Possibly, under wrong advice, the petitioner resorted to proceedings before the Labour Court.
Once the civil court had declared the petitioner's claim, the Labour Court could not have acted as an appellate authority and determined the validity of the judgment delivered by the civil court.
consequently, it had no alternative but to reject the claim of the petitioner.
Same is the position even before this court.
In the exercise of writ jurisdiction the decree passed by the civil court which has attained finality cannot be reversed by assuming powers of the appellate court under the code of civil procedure.
According the challenge of the petitioner to the order of punishment which has the seal of approval from the civil court cannot be sustained by this court.
Nor is there any merit in the petitioner's challenge to the order passed by the labour court.
The decree of the civil court is an insurmountable stumbling block which could have been removed only by resort to the remedy of appeal before the appropriate court.
The petitioner took no steps in that direction.
In such a situation, he cannot be helped.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner is a law graduate.
It only makes the matter worse for him.
He was not an illiterate person.
In fact, it appears that the petitioner had initiated various proceedings in different courts.
There is no merit in this petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.