SK Jain, J - The plaintiff-appellant filed Civil Suit No. 273-I of 1986 seeking a decree of declaration to the effect that the adverse remarks recorded vide order No. 14211/Conf.A-4 dated 9111984 with regard to his integrity and the order dated 11121985 thereby rejecting his representation were illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, null and void against the principle of natural justice, non-est and in-operative against his rights.
2.
The plaintiff who was working as Inspector of Police, Ferozepur, was conveyed adverse remarks with regard to his integrity for the period with effect from 141983 to 3091983 vide order dated 9111984.
Aggrieved against the same, he made a representation to the Director General of Police, which was rejected vide order dated 11121985.
The plaintiff filed the said suit challenging the communication of the said adverse remarks and the order rejecting his representation thereto inter alia on the ground :-  (i) that the procedure adopted by the reporting authority in recording the adverse remarks was illegal and against the government instructions; (ii) that since the plaintiff had appeared as a witness against the reporting officer in an enquiry held against him, the Reporting Officer was inimical to him; (iii) that no day-to-day account of the work of the plaintiff was kept by the reporting authority and the reports were recorded at the feg end of the year arbitrarily and in an illegal manner; (iv) that objective and overall assessment of the plaintiff's work and conduct was not made and report was recorded without taking into consideration, the good work done by the plaintiff; (v) that the adverse remarks were recorded on the allegations that he had spoiled investigation of three murder cases.
But on an enquiry he was found innocent.
Thus, these remarks were based on conjectures and surmises; (vi) that the adverse remarks were recorded without any evidence or material on the record; (vii) that the remarks were self contradictory; (viii) that the remarks were vague and not based on any instance; (ix) that order dated 941985 rejecting his representation was not speaking one; and (x) that two reports have been recorded for the same period.
The suit was contested inter alia on the grounds :-  (i) that the suit was not maintainable; (ii) that the adverse remarks were recorded keeping in view of the work and conduct of the plaintiff during the relevant period; (iii) that the plaintiff had appeared as a witness in enquiry against the reporting officer Mr. Bhullar on 30121983 whereas the adverse remarks pertained to the period with effect from 141983 to 3091983; (iv) that the adverse remarks were based on the objective and subjective satisfaction of the reporting officer and on the actual dealings and reputation of the plaintiff; (v) that no notice under Section 80 CPC was served upon the defendant before filing of the suit; (vi) that the suit was bad on account of non-joinder of necessary parties; and (vii) that the DGP had rejected his representation on merits and his revision against the order of DGP was dismissed on merits, there has been no violation of rules and instructions.
The parties fought the litigation on the following issues :-  1.
Whether the order No. 14211/Conf.
A-4 dated 9111984 recording adverse remarks of the working of the plaintiff and rejecting his representation by the Director-General of Police is illegal, null and void etc. and is not binding upon the plaintiff ?
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
3.
Whether the suit is liable to be dismissed for want of notice under Section 80 CPC ?
4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
The trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff vide his judgment and decree dated 481987.
3.
The plaintiff preferred Civil Appeal No. 9 of 1987 against the above said judgment and decree of the trial Court but the same was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Ferozepur, vide his judgment and decree dated 521990.
4.
It is that judgment and decree of the first appellate Court which has been appealed against by the plaintiff and which requires my examination of its sustainability.
5.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, the evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
6.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant contended that the adverse remarks, in the instant case, with respect to the integrity of the plaintiff were not recorded in accordance with the instructions of the Government in this behalf.
Since those instructions are binding, any remarks recorded in contravention thereof were illegal.
Besides, the adverse remarks, in this case, affected the civil rights of the plaintiff and, therefore, he was entitled to approach the civil Court to seek redressal.
7.
On the other hand, learned Assistant Advocate General, appearing for the State has contended that recording annual confidential reports is an administrative act, therefore, the plaintiff had no cause of action to file the present suit.
Moreover, if the civil Courts entertained such like suits, argued the learned counsel, the administration would be paralysed.
The giving of remarks in the annual confidential reports is a matter of subjective satisfaction of the officers concerned and that it being so, it could not be agitated in the civil Court.
8.
I have considered the rival arguments.
The recording of annual confidential reports is, in essence, subjective and administrative.
A Division Bench of this Court in Puran Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1981(1) Services Law Reporter, 338, held that recording of the confidential report is in the sheer public interest and in a large governmental organisation, the same would be imperative, and equally, its confidential nature must also be maintained to a certain extent.
Once that is so, either on the basis of a larger public policy or usually in compliance with the Government instructions on the point, the superior officer are enjoined and indeed duty bound to put down their subjective assessment of the public servants conducted in the shape of a confidential report.
Therefore, it may well be said that such authority has both a right and a duty to record the annual confidential report unless for some specific and weighty reasons the chooses to defer the same.
The Supreme Court also in RL Butail v. Union of India, 1970 Services Law Reporter 926 observed that the entry in the confidential reports is made under the Office Order of 1961, by way of an annual assessment of the work done by the Government servant and not by way of a penalty under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
True it is that such remarks would be taken into consideration when a question such as that of promotion arises and when comparative merits of persons eligible for promotion are considered.
But then?
whenever a Government servant is aggrieved by an adverse entry he has an opportunity of making a representation.
Such a representation would be considered by an appropriate authority, who if satisfied, would either amend, correct or even expunge a wrong entry, so that it is not as if an aggrieved Government servant is without remedy.
Making of an adverse entry is thus not equivalent to imposition of a penalty which would necessitate an enquiry of the giving of a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the concerned Government servant.
9.
In Union of India v. ME Reddy and another, 1979 (2) Services Law Reporter 792, it was observed by the Supreme Court that a superior officer may make certain remarks while assessing the work and conduct of the subordinate officer based on his personal supervision or contact.
Some of these remarks may be purely innocuous, or may be connected with general reputation of honesty or integrity that a particular officer enjoys.
It will indeed be difficult, if not impossible, to prove by positive evidence that a particular officer is dishonest but those who have had the opportunity to watch the performance of the said officer in close quarters are in a position to know the nature and character not only of his performance but also of the reputation that he enjoys.
10.
It is next contended by the learned counsel for the appellant-plaintiff that since there was violation of the instructions in regard to the recording of the remarks in the annual confidential reports, the plaintiff's suit was liable to be decreed on that account.
He has placed great reliance on (i) MM Valand v. The State of Gujarat, 1978 (1) Services Law Reporter 489; (ii) BR Kulkarni v. Government of Gujarat, 1978(2) S.L.R.
682, and (iii) TN Sankarasundram v. Director of S & P Madras, 1983(2) Services Law Reporter 183.
11.
No doubt, it was held in the above said decisions that the Government is bound by its own instructions, which may be executive in character.
If the adverse reports are recorded in violation of the executive instructions, they suffer from serious infirmity.
There may not be much dispute so far as this proposition of law is concerned, but at the same time, there is no gainsaying that the civil Court could not substitute its own remarks in place of that of the reporting officer.
At the most, the authority concerned may be directed by the Court to record remarks in accordance with law which may or may not be possible after the lapse of time spent in Courts.
Otherwise also, all the cases cited at the bar relate to the final action taken against the public servants by way of compulsory retirement, stoppage of promotion etc. on the basis of adverse entries made in the character rolls and the Courts have ignored the adverse entries which had not confirmed to the instructions on the subject and decided the cases accordingly, but none is a case which relates to the expunction of the adverse remarks simpliciter.
Rather, in TNSankarasundram's case (supra), the petitioner filed the writ petition earlier for expunction of certain adverse remarks made against him in his confidential file and the same was dismissed as not maintainable.
In BR Kulkarni's case (supra) the Gujarat High Court had not gone into the question of maintainability.
A Division Bench of this Court in Baldev Kapoor v. Union of India, 1980(2) SLR 309 has had to say as under regarding the instructions :-  "These instructions are only meant for the guidance of the authorities concerned.
They do not have any statutory force and their violation or non-compliance does not render the decision illegal."
In S.S.S.
Venkatrao v. State of Orissa, 1974 (2) Services Law Reporter 899, it has been held as under :-  "The Government in maintaining the character roll is exercising administrative function in which it is to act justly and fairly.
That is not a quasi-judicial function though certain elements in the exercise of both the functions are similar.
The Government servant is not entitled to establish his case in any other manner except by way of making a representation against the adverse entry.
Excepting this, no other principle of natural justice is available.
It is not open to the Government servant to justify his stand by giving evidence.
Behind him the Government as a benevolent master is to act bona-fide in testing ex-parte the correctness of the statements made in the representation."
12.
After taking into consideration all the above judgments, a Division Bench of this Court in RSA No. 1580 of 1983 State of Punjab v. Janak Raj Jain, 1987 Recent Laws 40 as held as under :-  "Thus, we are of the opinion that the recording of the annual confidential reports is a matter of subjective satisfaction of the officers concerned and in the very nature of things, the correctness thereof could not be gone into a civil Court.
The proper remedy for the person aggrieved would be to file a representation against the adverse remarks."
13.
As a sequel to the above discussion, it is unhesitatingly held that the correctness of the annual confidential reports could not be gone into in a Civil Court because in the very nature of the things, the recording of such reports is a matter of subjective satisfaction of the officers concerned.
14.
Though, the suit of the plaintiff has to fail on this score alone as not maintainable, but since the appeal has been heard at length, I proceed to examine the case on merits also.
15.
Main thrust of the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the Reporting Officer Mr. GS Bhullar, who was posted as Senior Superintendent of Police, Ferozepur, was inimical towards the appellant and he had recorded adverse remarks Ex.P-1 against him with prejudiced mind and malafide intention.
In order to support his argument, he has pressed into service Enquiry Report Ex. P-6 of Shri LR Bhagat and has submitted that since the appellant had deposed against Mr. GS Bhullar before the Enquiry Officer, therefore, he had recorded adverse remarks Ex.P-1 against him.
This argument is devoid of force.
The adverse remarks pertained to the period with effect from 141983 to 3091983 whereas the report Ex. P-6 of the Enquiry Officer is dated 1111984.
The appellant must have deposed before the Enquiry Office prior to this date.
Therefore, it cannot be said that Mr. GS Bhullar entertained grudge, ill-will or prejudice against the appellant while recording the adverse remarks Ex.P-1 for the period with effect from 141983 to 3091983.
16.
Learned counsel for the appellant has cited at the bar State of Punjab and another v. Dr. Ram Kishan Chopra, 1977(2) SLR 809 and has argued that the representation of the appellant has been rejected by the Director General of Police, without application of mind and he had passed a non-speaking order Ex.P-2, communicated vide letter Ex.P.3.
I have carefully gone through the said judgment and can possibly have no quarrel with the proposition of law laid down therein.
But perusal of order Ex.P.2 rejecting the representation of the appellant shows that the Director General of Police, had passed this order after carefully examining the representation alongwith relevant papers and having come to the conclusion that no patent error of fact and malafide intention on the part of the Reporting Authority had been established.
17.
In these circumstances, the plaintiff could not make a grievance that there was no applicability of mind while considering or rejecting his representation.
18.
Besides, what has been stated above, it is worth mentioning here that the appellant had filed Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 4176-C of 1983 under Order 41 Rule 27 read with Section 151 CPC for placing on record photostat copy of the judgment dated 3051989 passed by a Single Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5108 of 1987 filed by the appellant, thereby, allowing the writ petition.
In reply, certified copy of the judgment dated 181991 passed in LPA No. 1748 of 1989 thereby setting aside the above said judgment of the learned Single Judge was placed on the record on behalf of the State.
19.
From the judgment dated 181991 passed in LPA No. 1748 of 1989, it is revealed that a number of adverse entries, including some of the doubtful integrity, were recorded against the appellant subsequent to his promotion as Inspector in 1982.
Against these adverse entries, he filed representations which were rejected.
He also filed Civil Suits wherein he failed.
A photo copy of the judgment dated 2.4.1990 passed in SLP Nos. 12106 and 12107 of 1989, "Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab and others" was placed before me by the learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
From the said judgment, it is revealed that these LPAs were filed by the present appellant against the following judgments of this Court :-  (i) Judgment dated 1021989 passed in R.S.A.
No. 2082 of 1988; and (ii) Judgment dated 15.3.1989 passed in C.W.P.
No. 3309 of 1989.
20.
It was not denied at the bar by the learned counsel for the appellant that adverse entries recorded by Mr. Bhullar against the appellant, though for another period, was challenged by the appellant by way of civil suit which failed.
Civil Appeal was also dismissed and, therefore, R.S.A.
No. 2082 of 1988 was filed but the same was dismissed in limine on 1021989 on the ground that Civil suit in relation to the adverse remarks made against an employee was not maintainable.
It is further clear that against the said Judgment, S.L.P.
No. 12106 of 1989 was dismissed by the Supreme Court vide above said order dated 2.4.1990.
21.
As a result of the above discussion, this Regular Second Appeal fails and is dismissed.
The judgments and decrees of the Courts below are upheld.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.