N K Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of a bunch of six Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 30 to 35 of 1992 which involve common questions of law and fact.
2.
The responds were working as Drivers, Conductors, Carpenters, Assistant Clerks and Electricians with Punjab Roadways when the State of Punjab took a policy decision to transfer some of its buses to the Municipal Corporations of Amritsar, Jalandhar and Ludhiana.
These buses were to be plied and operated by the respective corporations.
Consequently, some of the staff which was necessary to operate the buses had also to be transferred to the corporations along with the vehicles.
Options were invited from the employees but only few opted for their transfer.
The State Government, therefore, decided to send the employees on the principle of last come first go.
The employees including some of the respondents herein represented against their transfers on the ground that the terms and conditions of the employees with the corporations were less favourable than their existing terms with the State of Punjab.
Some of them filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4350 of 1980 (Ajmer Lal and others v. State of Punjab) challenging the orders of the Director, State Transport, Punjab, transferring their services to the corporations which was allowed by the learned single Judge of this Court on May 17, 1980 and it was held that the action of the State Government was illegal and beyond its jurisdiction.
Another similar writ petition No. 5746 of 1982 (Avtar Singh Inspector v. State of Punjab and others) came up before a Division Bench and was allowed at the motion stage as the same was covered by the ratio of the decision in Ajmer Lal's case (supra).
The State of Punjab went up in appeal to the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra) which was disposed of with the following observations :-  "There are 73 employees who are concerned in this case.
They were originally the employees of the Punjab Roadways.
They are now working as drivers, fitters, mechanics, Inspectors, Clerks, Carpenters etc. under Jullundur Municipal Corporation.
Having regard to the facts of this case, we feel that the Punjab Roadways should be directed to take back these employees as and when the vacancies become available in the Punjab Roadways in the categories in which these 73 employees belong.
In other words if a vacancy in the category of drivers arises in the Punjab Roadways a driver amongst these 73 employees shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways.
Similarly, if a post of Clerk falls vacant in the Punjab Roadways an employee, who is working as a Clerk amongst these 73 employees, shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways and so on.
If when the vacancy of a driver or a clerk etc. arises in the Punjab Roadways and there are two or more employees answering the said description amongst these 73 employees the senior most amongst them shall be reabsorbed in the vacancy concerned.
The entire period of service of the employees who are reabsorbed as per this order shall be treated as part of the qualifying service in the Punjab roadways for purposes of pension.
Such employees obviously are not entitled to any payment from the provident fund account.
This process shall continue until all the 73 employees are taken back into the service of the Punjab Roadways.
On such retransfer to the Punjab Roadways the employees concerned shall be assigned the seniority which they originally held before their transfer to the corporation.
If any of the employees concerned has either already ceased to be or ceases to be in the service of the corporation before it is possible to reabsorb him in the service of the Punjab Roadways he shall not have any right to be treated as the employee of the Punjab Roadway.
This order shall not however be treated as a precedent.
"This order is passed in substitution of the order passing by the High Court.
We also make it clear that no other employee who is transferred to the service of any of the corporations under the Scheme of transfer shall be entitled to prefer any claim on the basis of this order since nearly a decade has already passed from the date of the transfer of the employee to the corporation concerned.
The civil appeal is disposed of accordingly.
No costs."
The respondent in these appeals except those in LPA 32 of 1992 had filed their writ petitions in the years 1981 and 1982 and those were admitted to hearing.
The respondents in L.P.A. No. 32 of 1992, however, filed the writ petition in the year 1989 after the Supreme Court had decided the appeal in Avtar Singh's case (supra).
All these writ petitions came up for hearing before the learned single Judge on February, 7 1991 and were disposed of by a common order in the same terms and with the same directions as were given by the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra).
The State of Punjab has filed the present appeals challenging this order of the learned single Judge.
3.
Having heard counsel for the parties at length, we are of the view that all these appeals except LPA No. 32 of 1992 have no merit and deserve to be dismissed.
Even though the Apex Court while disposing of the appeal in Avtar Singh's case (supra) observed that its order would not be treated as a precedent, yet we are of the view that since the respondents in all these cases filed their writ petitions almost around the same time when Avtar Singh and others filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5746 of 1982 equity demands that their petitions which were then pending in this court and had been filed in the same circumstances asking for the same relief should be disposed of in the same terms.
The learned single Judge was, therefore, justified in giving them the same relief.
4.
As regards respondents in LPA No. 32 of 1992 are concerned, their writ petition must fail on the short ground that they approached this Court in the year 1989 after the decision of the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra) and when the scheme of transfer had already operated for almost a decade.
Their petition should have been dismissed on the ground of laches.
In the result, Letters Patent Appeals Nos. 30, 31, 33, 34 and 35 of 1992 are dismissed and the order of the learned single Judge is upheld.
Letters Patent Appeal No. 32 of 1992 (State of Punjab and Ors. v. Shamsher Singh and others) is, however, allowed and civil writ petition No. 9186 of 1989 dismissed as belated.
The parties are left to bear their own costs throughout.