VK Bali, J - Challenge herein is to the promotion of Dr. Adarsh Kumar to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology.
Obviously, therefore, order sought to be quashed is dated 2331991 whereby Dr. Adarsh Kumar respondent No. 3 was promoted to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology.
On the vacation of the said post by respondent No. 3, petitioner further claims that he be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology.
The said relief had to be asked through amendment brought about in the petition which was initially for considering and appointing the petitioner to the post under contention and not respondent No. 3, who is it further stated in the amended petition, was promoted without considering the case of petitioner despite orders passed by the Motion Bench on that behalf.
2.
Brief facts on which the relief aforesaid rests, reveal that the petitioner worked on the post of Senior Lecturer Cardiology in Medical College, Patiala with effect from 1931987.
When respondent No. 3 was going to be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology, the next higher post, he filed the present petition.
As mentioned above, when despite orders passed by this Court to consider him as well, for the post under contention he was not considered and respondent No. 3 was promoted on the basis of his being senior, petition was amended asking for the reliefs as indicated above.
The case of petitioner is that respondent No. 3 does not possess the qualifications clothing him with the right of promotion to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology as spelled out from the relevant Rules.
The conditions of service of the members of the Punjab Medical Education Service are governed by the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I) Rules, 1978.
Rule 2 deals with the definition.
Section 2(d) defines 'Service' as Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I).
Section 2(e) defines 'Department' as speciality listed in Appendix 'A'.
The number and character of posts are, as per Rule 4 which are shown in Appendix 'B' of the Rules.
Rule 7 deals with age and qualifications.
The relevant part of the same reads thus :-  "7(2) No person shall be recruited to the service by direct appointment, promotion or by transfer unless he possesses the qualifications and teaching experience as is specified in Appendix 'C'."
Whereas Appendix 'A' deals with the number of Departments.
Appendix 'B' shows the number of posts sanctioned in every department.
Appendix 'C' gives the qualifications required for appointment of a particular post in any of the departments.
The Rules of 1978 were amended by the Punjab Medical Education Service Class I (1st Amendment) Rules, 1985.
Rule 4 of the Rules of 1985 reads thus :-  "4.
In the said Rules, in Appendix 'A', for item 24, the following items shall be substituted, namely :-  (i) "24.
Radio Diagnosis.
24-A Radio Therapy.
(ii) after item 26, the following items shall be added, namely :-  27.
Cardiology 28.
Cardio-Therasic Surgery.
29.
Neurology.
30.
Nephrology."
3.
The qualifications required for being promoted to the post of Assistant Professor, Cardiology as given in Appendix 'C' are as follows :-  Name of post Qualifications Teaching experience required.
(3) Assistant Professor of (i) Surgery, Medicine Obstertics and Gynaegcology, Paediatrics, TB Skin and VD Orthopaedics Anaestheisa, Ear, Nose and Throat.
M.DMS.Ph.D FRCSMRCP in the speciality concerned, should have teaching experience of a minimum period of three years in the speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer of Lecturer after post graduation in Medical College.
(ii) Cardiology Neurology,Nephrology Gastro-Entrology, Endocropology and Clinical Haematology.
DM, should have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post graduation in the Medical College."
4.
It is pleaded that the Department of Cardiology having been separated from the Department of Medicines, one has necessarily to have an experience of minimum period of three years in Cardiology as Senior Lecturer and the experience gained by one in the Department of Medicines cannot clothe him with the requisite minimum experience as envisaged in Appendix 'C' attached to the Rules and inasmuch as respondent No. 3 was all through in the Department of Medicines, experience gained by him in the said department, cannot be counted as experience in the speciality of Cardiology and that being so, he was not entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology.
With a view to strengthen all what has been stated above, it is further pleaded that the provisional gradation list of doctors/Professors of teaching department, corrected upto 171989 was circulated by the respondent-department.
In the said gradation list, it is mentioned that respondent No. 3 is working as Assistant Professor (Ad hoc) in the Medicine Department since 1371988 at serial No. 14.
On the other hand, the name of petitioner is mentioned at serial No. 1 of the list of Senior Lecturer in the Cardiology Department.
He is shown to be working on the said post since 1931987 and it is, thus, obvious that the Department of Medicines is wholly detached from the Department of Cardiology.
5.
Petitioner joined as Medical Officer in PCMS through Punjab Public Service Commission on 431980.
He completed his MD in December, 1980.
He joined as Registrar (Medicine) on 1211984 and worked on the said post till 28111986 when he was selected and appointed on the post of Senior Lecturer Medicine.
Within few months, he gave an option and was shifted on the post of Senior Lecturer Cardiology on 1931987.
He cleared the probation period on the post of Senior Lecturer, Cardiology on 1931989 and in the manner aforesaid completed three years' service on the post of Senior Lecturer Cardiology on 1831990.
He has done degree of DM Cardiology from the PGI from January 1988 to December 1989.
On the other hand, respondent No. 3 was always working in the Department of Medicine.
His service particulars as spelled out from the application made by him when he sought promotion to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) are that he was Registrar in Medicine, Medical College, Amritsar from 31.12.1981 to 31121984.
From 911985 to 1271988, he remained as Senior Lecturer (Medicine), at Medical College, Amritsar and from 1371988 he was Assistant Professor (Medicine), at Medical College Amritsar and from January 1989, he was doing DM Course in Cardiology at PGI Chandigarh as a sponsored candidate from the Punjab Government.
From these service particulars, it is stated that respondent No. 3 does not possess even one day's experience on the post of Senior Lecturer Cardiology and, therefore, is wholly ineligible to be appointed on the post under contention.
Petitioner was entitled to be promoted from the date the post fell vacant at Amritsar but he was not being promoted on account of the fact that the post was kept reserved for a Scheduled Caste candidate.
It is in the wake of these circumstances that he filed the petition which came up for motion hearing on 6.3.1991 when the following order was passed :-  "Notice of motion for 1741991.
Meanwhile, petitioner should also be considered provisionally for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology in Government Medical College, Amritsar, considering the seat to be unreserved."
6.
It is pleaded that with a view to get out of the order aforesaid, the seat which was kept reserved was then filled up by treating it as unreserved and respondent No. 3 was promoted vide order dated 2331991 and while doing so, the case of petitioner was never considered along with respondent No. 3 for promotion.
Earlier, however, when his case was put up for promotion, the same was rejected by the Advisor to the Governor on 16.2.1991.
Thereafter the file was again put up and a favourable opinion was procured from the Advisor on 2231991.
In the said advice, it is clearly mentioned that respondent No. 3 ought to be promoted because he is senior to the petitioner.
Further respondent No. 3 is a Scheduled Caste.
Even though the High Court has said that this vacancy should be filled up by treating it unreserved, even then on the basis of seniority, respondent No. 3 should be appointed.
It is further mentioned in the advice that as respondent No. 3 had experience as Assistant Professor (Medicine) in the parent department and he has also done DM Cardiology, therefore, he be appointed in view of his seniority and posted against the first vacancy.
7.
On the facts as have been noticed above, Mr. SS Nijjar, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner contends that respondent No. 3 does not fulfil the necessary condition of experience to be appointed on the post of Assistant Professor, Cardiology as he never worked on the post of Senior Lecturer, Cardiology whereas it is necessary to have three years' experience on the post of Senior Lecturer.
When the petitioner applied for the same post, respondent No. 2 refused to issue experience certificate to him on the ground that he was shifted to cardiology department where he joined on 1931987 as Senior Lecturer, Cardiology.
It was further mentioned by respondent No. 2 that Cardiology is a separate department and as such experience in Cardiology is not countable towards medicine.
Not only that the petitioner was refused the post on the ground that he had not put in three years' teaching experience in the Cardiology Department, one Mr. Prabodh Kumar Mittal was not given teaching experience in the Medicine Department by counting his experience on the post of Senior Lecturer, Gastro-Antrology as he was working under Professor and Head of Department.
In similar circumstances, Dr. Bakshish Singh was not given the experience in the Medicine Department because it was held that the Department of Nephrology and Cardiology are independent and separate departments.
Respondent No. 3, it is argued, has, however, been favoured and his appointment to the post under contention besides being against statutory Rules is also against the practice of the respondent-department is not giving experience of speciality of one department towards the department of another speciality.
The learned counsel further argues that the petitioner being the only person eligible at the time when the post fell vacant was kept away even from the zone of consideration, thus, denying him his due simply with a view to await arrival of respondent No. 3 after doing his DM Cardiology and then to immediately appoint him.
8.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed.
Two separate written statements, one by Mr. VK Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary to Government of Punjab and the other by respondent No. 3 Adarsh Kumar have been filed.
The defence projected, however, in both the written statements is the same.
Inasmuch as written statement filed by respondent No. 3 is more elaborate and some additional points have also been mentioned, it shall be more appropriate to refer to the written statement filed by him.
By way of preliminary objections, it is pleaded that he as also petitioner have been promoted as Assistant Professor (Cardiology) and the petitioner has accepted his promotion and joined the post and as such the writ petition needs to be dismissed as having become infructuous.
It is further stated that he is not only eligible and entitled for promotion as Assistant Professor (Cardiology) against a reserved point meant for Scheduled Castes but otherwise also he is senior to the petitioner and fully qualified and has distinguished record of service and excellent academic career.
He has compared his service particulars with the petitioner in the following manner :-  Petitioner Answering Respondent 1.
PCMs 4th March, 1980 1.
PCMs 31st January, 1979.
2.
Registrar 12th January, 1984 2.
Registrar 31st December, 1981.
3.
Sr.
Lecturer (Medicine) 28th November, 1986 3.
Sr.
Lecturer (Medicine) 9th January, 1985.
4.
Sr.
Lecturer (Cardiology) 19th March, 1987 4.
Assistant Professor (Medicine) 13th July, 1988.
5.
DM (Cardiology) From January 88 to December, 1989 5.
DM (Cardiology) January 89 to December, 90.
From the service particulars given above, it is stated that he is senior to petitioner as he joined the PCMS prior to the petitioner, was appointed as Registrar as well as Senior Lecturer much before the petitioner.
Earlier, Cardiology was a part of Department of Medicine but later on Department of Medicine was bifurcated and Super-Speciality of Cardiology was created.
As per Rules/Instructions issued by the Medical Council of India, once a department is bifurcated, the experience in the parent department counts towards the Super-Speciality for a period of five years.
In this way, the experience that he gained in the parent department of Medicine has to be counted towards the Super-Speciality in Cardiology.
Teaching experience gained by him while doing DM in Cardiology in the PGI Chandigarh has also to be counted for the purpose of experience in Cardiology.
This benefit has also been extended to the petitioner.
Petitioner was also adjusted as Senior Lecturer in Cardiology from Senior Lecturer Medicine, when he did not have a single day experience in Cardiology.
The period of DM course in Cardiology is being counted as experience for the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology in the case of petitioner as well.
In fact without counting this two years period of DM course as experience in Cardiology in the case of petitioner, he does not have more than one year experience in Cardiology for the post of Assistant Professor.
Petitioner has absolutely no case and cannot claim promotion as Assistant Professor (Cardiology) in preference to him.
He alone is eligible both on the ground of qualifications and experience for the post under contention.
While further detailing his experience, he pleads that two years' teaching experience in Cardiology which he earned while doing DM Course in Cardiology from January 1989 to December 1990 has to be counted.
Further, as per Medical Council of India Rules, from 911985 to 2351986 when he was working as Senior Lecturer (Medicine) and the Department of Cardiology was bifurcated at Medical College, Patiala on 2351986 (as per Medical Council of India Rules), experience in parent department (Medicine) is to be counted towards the Super-Speciality (Cardiology) for a period upto five years and all the State Medical Colleges have a joint gradation list (emphasis supplied).
In this manner, he pleads that he has total experience of 3 years 4 months and 14 days in Cardiology after post- graduation.
He has already worked as Assistant Professor (Medicine) on ad hoc basis with effect from 1371988.
Later on, he was selected as Assistant Professor (Medicine) by way of direct appointment by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
He was sponsored by the State of Punjab to the PGI for doing DM in the Super Speciality of Cardiology and he did two years Post Graduate Course in DM Cardiology.
As per terms and conditions at the time of joining DM Course and also as per seniority, qualification and experience he was promoted as Assistant Professor (Cardiology) at Medical College, Amritsar.
The post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) against which he was selected has now been offered to some other candidate.
He further pleads that it is a second vacancy and is reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes because he is the only available candidate and hence cannot be filled from amongst the candidates belonging to general category.
Further, even if the post is treated unreserved, he alone has a prior right of appointment on the ground of seniority over and above the petitioner.
While dealing the case on merits, he once again reiterated the stand reflected in the preliminary objections i.e. seniority over and above the petitioner.
It is further pleaded that it was decided by the State of Punjab vide its policy circular letter dated 451974 that there will be reservation to the extent of 14% for the members of Scheduled Castes for the post to be filled by promotion within class I and II service.
The vacancies falling at serial Nos. 1, 7, 15 and so on have been reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
It has also been decided by the State of Punjab that where a cadre strength consists of less than five posts, then the second vacancy should be reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
The first vacancy of Assistant Professor (Cardiology) was filled by promotion from general category and the second vacancy has to be treated to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and he being the only available candidate from the category of Scheduled Castes in the whole State is eligible and entitled for promotion.
While getting sponsored, he had executed a security bond of Rs. 50,000/- indemnifying therein that after completing the DM Cardiology course, he will work as Assistant Professor (Cardiology).
While dealing with two departments i.e. Medicine and Cardiology, he pleads that earlier Cardiology was included in the Department of Medicine.
However, later on Department of Medicine was bifurcated and a Department of Super-Speciality in Cardiology was created.
The Department of Medicine was bifurcated on 2351986 in the Medical College, Patiala.
As per instructions mentioned above, once a parent department is bifurcated, the experience gained in the parent department is to be counted towards the Super-Speciality for a maximum period of five years.
By counting the experience that he gained in the department of Medicine, he states that he has acquired qualifications for the post under contention.
This method, he says, was adopted in case of Dr. Gurpreet Singh, Assistant Professor who was appointed as Assistant Professor (Cardiology) in spite of the fact that he had not worked even for a single day as Senior Lecturer in Cardiology.
Again Dr. Gurpreet Singh was promoted as Professor Cardiology by counting his experience in the parent department of Medicine as he did not complete the requisite experience in Cardiology as Assistant Professor.
Similarly Dr. SPS Bagga was appointed as Assistant Professor Cardio-Theoracic Surgery in spite of the fact that he was not having even a single day experience in the said speciality.
The experience gained by him in the parent department was counted towards the Super Speciality of Cardiac Surgery.
9.
Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel defending the case on behalf of respondent No. 3 has argued in tune with the pleadings mentioned above.
The stress is on seniority, seat being reserved for Scheduled Caste candidate and experience gained by respondent No. 3 in the Department of Medicine to be counted towards experience in Cardiology as per instructions referred to above.
10.
The petitioner has chosen to file replication to the written statement filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 as also respondent No. 3.
While dealing with the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, it is pleaded that respondent No. 3 filed a civil suit in the Court of Senior Sub Judge Amritsar which was for his appointment to the post of Assistant Professor (Cardiology).
His cause was opposed by the Government and in the written statement that was filed, it was mentioned that respondent No. 3 does not answer the qualifications provided under the Rules.
Para 5 of written statement that was filed before the Senior Sub Judge reads thus :-  "Admitted.
But that does not provide of promotion without possessing requisite qualifications and teaching experience in the speciality as required under the Rules.
In accordance with the provisions contained in 3(ii) of Appendix 'C' of Punjab Medical Education Services (Class-I) Rules, 1978 (amended on 2091985), the following qualification and teaching experience is pre-requisite for appointment/promotion as Assistant Professor Cardiology :-  Name of the Post, Qualification, Teaching experience required.
Assistant Professor Cardiology, DM, Should have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post-graduation in the Medical College.
The teaching experience in possession of the plaintiff does not entitle him to claim the promotion/adjustment as Assistant Professor, Cardiology."
11.
It is, thus, stated that respondent No. 1 cannot now be permitted to take a contrary stand and to say that respondent No. 3 fulfils necessary qualifications for being appointed by promotion on the post of Assistant Professor, Cardiology.
While dealing with the bifurcation of department at Amritsar where respondent No. 3 was working, it is pleaded that the Department of Medicine was bifurcated at Amritsar into Departments of Cardiology and Medicine in the year 1983.
Thereafter options were invited from the members of the parent department to opt for the Cardiology Department.
A copy of this letter has been placed on the record as Annexure P18.
In consequence thereof, one Shri Ved Gupta, Professor Medicine opted and was appointed as Professor Cardiology at Medical College, Amritsar.
In the year 1986, again options were invited.
A copy of this letter, too, has been placed on the records as Annexure P18/A.
In pursuance of letter Annexure P18, Dr. Gurpreet Singh, Assistant Professor (Medicine) at Patiala was transferred and appointed as Assistant Professor Cardiology.
The petitioner joined the post of Senior Lecturer Medicine at Patiala on 28111986 and was appointed as Senior Lecturer, Cardiology on 1931987.
Respondent No. 3 was working as Senior Lecturer (Medicine) at Amritsar since 911985 whereas petitioner was working as Senior Lecturer Cardiology since 1931987.
Respondent No. 3 continued working as Senior Lecturer (Medicine) at Amritsar.
Even though Department of Medicine was bifurcated in 1983 yet respondent No. 3 took advantage of promotion to the next higher post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) with effect from 1371988.
It is, thus, obvious that from 1983 till 1988, for a period of five years, he continued to work as Registrar, Senior Lecturer and Assistant Professor in the Department of Medicines.
Petitioner, on the other hand, voluntarily opted and was appointed as Senior Lecturer (Cardiology) on 1931987.
Having, thus, opted to remain in the Department of Medicines for a period of five years even after bifurcation, respondent No. 3 cannot be permitted to lay any claim to the post of Assistant Professor (Cardiology).
The other contents of the written statement filed by respondent No. 3 have been denied.
Since by and large it is reiteration of petition there is no need to deal with the remaining part of replication.
12.
Respondent No. 3 filed an affidavit during the course of arguments stating therein that all the State Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab have joint cadre and seniority under the same Directorate i.e. Director of Research and Medical Education Punjab Chandigarh.
Whenever any appointment is made in any of the Departments of these State Medical Colleges, it is made from amongst all the available Medical teachers of these colleges.
The posts are transferable and the teaching staff can be posted in any of these Medical Colleges.
If a Department is separated/bifurcated from different cut off dates in these State Medical Colleges, the Medical teachers working in these Medical Colleges can get the benefit of bifurcation/creation of that Department and this benefit is not confined to only those Medical teachers where the Department has actually been bifurcated.
Further, as per Rules and instructions issued by the Medical Council of India, once a department is bifurcated, the experience acquired in the original Department will count towards the appointments in either of the bifurcated Departments for a maximum period of five years from the date of bifurcation.
Adarsh Kumar respondent has been given the benefit of the said instruction while counting experience of three years by taking a cut off date i.e. 2351986 when the Department of Cardiology was created in the Medical College, Patiala from the Department of Medicines.
He further states that it is not only he who was given this benefit but others, too, were accorded the same treatment.
While dealing with others, he gave example of Dr. Udham Singh, Dr. Surinder Paul Singh Bagga and Dr. Paramjit Kaur.
13.
Petitioner has filed reply to this affidavit as well controverting the pleadings made therein and explained the cases of those who were given the benefit of bifurcation of department and has also given some examples where this benefit was not given.
14.
Pleadings are voluminous, not because the facts are intricate or complicated but for the basic reason that the parties have indulged in repeating and reiterating one fact many a time.
Culled out, however, from the voluminous pleadings of the parties, the short point in asking the Court to issue a writ of quo warranto to directing respondent No. 3 to vacate his seat of Assistant Professor (Cardiology), all that has been pleaded is that Adarsh Kumar does not have teaching experience of three years in the speciality concerned i.e. Cardiology, as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post-graduation in the Medical College.
The defence projected is only two- fold.
One, that the experience gained by respondent No. 3 when he was working on the post of Senior Lecturer in Medicine has to count towards experience in the Speciality of Cardiology as per instructions issued by the Medical Council of India and the second that the post under contention has necessarily to go to a person belonging to Scheduled Caste.
Even though Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 has stressed merit of respondent No. 3 as also seniority for protecting the promotion of Dr. Adarsh Kumar yet the same would be of no consequence if he does not answer the pre- requisite qualifications prescribed under the statutory Rules.
Rule 7(2) of the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class 1) Rules enjoins that no person shall be recruited to the service by direct appointment, promotion or by transfer unless he possesses qualifications and teaching experience as is specified in Appendix 'C'.
Admittedly, Appendix 'C' is part and parcel of the rules.
Assistant Professor Cardiology, Meurology, Mephrology, Gastro- Entrology, Endocronology and Clinical Haematology must have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post-graduation in the Medical College.
Going by the Service particulars of respondent No. 3 in the manner he himself depicts, it shall be seen that he came into PCMS on 3111979.
He became Registrar on 31.12.1981.
He was promoted to the post of Senior Lecturer (Medicine) on 911985 and was further promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) on 1371988.
He did his DM course in Cardiology from January 1989 to December 1990 and in the beginning of January 1991, he came in the Department of Cardiology for the first time.
It is clear from the records of the case that the post of Assistant Professor (Cardiology) fell vacant in 1990 or in the beginning of 1991.
Respondent No. 3 Dr. Adarsh Kumar was actually appointed on the said post on 2331991.
It is, thus, clear that even if he had joined the department of Cardiology immediately after doing DM (Cardiology) in December 1990, by the time he came to be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Cardiology), he had, at the most worked in the speciality of Cardiology for a period of about three months and obviously when the post fell vacant, he did not have even one day experience in the concerned department.
As mentioned above, the defence is based upon seniority and merit as in all relevant posts i.e.
Lecturer, Registrar or Senior Lecturer, it is Adarsh Kumar respondent who came to be appointed and promoted as the case may be, prior in point of time to that of the petitioner.
The defence projected is also of the seat being reserved for a Scheduled Caste person.
These two defences deserve to be rejected straightway on the ground that howsoever meritorious respondent Adarsh Kumar may be and howsoever senior he might be from the petitioner and even if the post is meant for a person belonging to Scheduled Caste, he could not occupy the same till such time he had acquired the necessary qualifications and experience.
If it is to be held that respondent Adarsh Kumar cannot take the advantage of the teaching experience that he had in the Department of Medicine on account of bifurcation or on account of instructions issued by the Medical Council of India then merit, seniority or reservation would be of no meaning and consequence.
Appointments or promotions against the Rules cannot be made.
Minimum basic educational qualifications and experience cannot be relaxed unless there be any such power under the Rules itself and admittedly there is no such power with any one to relax either of them.
15.
Examining now the crucial question and in fact the only one which has been thoroughly debated before this Court that respondent Adarsh Kumar has the requisite experience on account of bifurcation of departments, this Court after hearing the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length is convinced that respondent Adarsh Kumar was not eligible for the post under contention.
It may sound unfortunate as the respondent had admittedly been promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) in July 1988 but he preferred to do DM in the PGI for which reason the said post was occupied by somebody else and he did forgo the promotion with a view to obtain promotion in the Department of Cardiology but if he does not qualify for the post under contention, the Court can only sympathise with him.
The array of facts unmistakably manifest that at Amritsar where respondent Adarsh Kumar was working on the post of Senior Lecturer, the Department of Medicine was bifurcated into two separate departments, one of Medicine and the other of Cardiology way back in 1983, to be precise on 8121983.
Options were invited from the members of the parent department i.e. the Department of Medicine to go in Cardiology.
It is clearly reflected in Annexure P 18.
One Shri Ved Gupta, Professor Medicine opted and was appointed as Professor Cardiology at Medical College Amritsar.
In the year 1986, once again options were invited.
One Dr. Gurpreet Singh, Assistant Professor (Medicine) at Patiala was transferred and appointed as Assistant Professor Cardiology.
Respondent, however, evinced no interest in opting to go in the Department of Cardiology at this stage i.e. either in 1983 or in 1986 and rather preferred to carry on working in the Department of Medicine, so much so, he was promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) on 1371988.
It appears from the records of the case that it is only in the year 1989 or at the end of the year 1988 that he thought of doing DM in Cardiology and then shifting to the said department.
All that learned counsel appearing for him has argued is that since the Department of Medicine was bifurcated at Patiala, on 28111986, for a period of five years and thereafter experience gained by one in the said department must necessarily count in the bifurcated department as well.
The recommendations of the Medical Council of India which sometimes have been styled to be Rules and sometimes as instructions for counting experience of one in the parent department for a maximum period of five years read as under :-  "Where the departments have been bifurcated, the teaching experience acquired in the original department will count towards appointments in either of the bifurcated departments for a maximum period of 5 years from the time of bifurcation."
16.
Whereas the department of Medicine was bifurcated at Amritsar in the year 1983 where respondent Adarsh Kumar was all through working, it was bifurcated in Patiala in 1986.
It is, thus, argued that respondent Adarsh Kumar can count his experience that he spent in the Department of Medicine towards the experience in the bifurcated department i.e. Cardiology.
This is being argued in spite of the fact that Department of Medicine was bifurcated in the year 1983 at Amritsar and even though options were called twice in the year 1983 as also 1986, respondent Adarsh Kumar carried on working in the Department of Medicine and was even promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) in the year 1988.
He, for the first time, chose to do DM in Cardiology in the year 1989.
It is clear that the recommendations of the Medical Council of India for counting experience in the parent department into the bifurcated department came into being for the reason that it was not possible to promote anyone as obviously, in the bifurcated department no one could have had experience and if immediate appointments or promotions were to be made, it would have created a lot of difficulty.
It was for this precise reason, it appears to this Court that a maximum period of five years was granted to count experience of the parent department even though the appointment or promotion was in the speciality or super-speciality of a newly created department.
For about a period of five years anyone could have opted to go into the bifurcated department or could have gained necessary experience for his promotion to the next higher rank.
If this was the intention of making recommendations relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent which to this Court seems to be the only intention then respondent Adarsh Kumar cannot take benefit of bifurcation of the Department of Medicine into two i.e. Medicine and Cardiology at Patiala where he was never posted.
He was working at Amritsar and continued to be posted there.
Occasion came in his way twice but he chose to carry on in the Department of Medicine and even got promotion to the next higher rank of Assistant Professor (Medicine).
He cannot, thus, on any ground count maximum period of five years from the time the bifurcation took place at Patiala.
That the posts in the three Medical Colleges in the Punjab are transferable is of no consequence whatsoever, as in fact and in reality respondent Adarsh Kumar continued to work at Amritsar where the Department of Medicine was bifurcated in the year 1983.
Further that this advantage was given to others as per case of respondent Adarsh Kumar and was not given to others inclusive of petitioner as per his case is again of no meaning and consequence.
By such precedents, which are on both sides, it cannot be argued that respondent Adarsh Kumar has necessary three years teaching experience after his post-graduation in the concerned speciality i.e. Cardiology.
Further, the legality or propriety of the orders extending this benefit to the one who was actually granted as per case of respondent was never tested and for that reason as well, nothing can hinge on such precedents.
Viewed from any angle, thus, the promotion of respondent Adarsh Kumar is not in accordance with statutory Rules.
Assuming that Adarsh Kumar had two years teaching experience while doing DM which is, however, hotly disputed and such experience, it appears, cannot be counted as teaching experience after doing post-graduation, even then Adarsh Kumar did not have the requisite three years experience in the speciality concerned.
This Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1864 of 1987 Dr. Baljinder Pal Singh v. The State of Punjab etc., held that teaching experience of three years is necessary.
Dr. Gurdev Singh Mann had worked in the Department of Cardiology only from 111985 to 2331987.
Even though he had experience of about two years or so and his appointment was only as a stop-gap arrangement, the same was not held to be good and a direction was issued to make regular promotion only from amongst the eligible and qualified doctors in accordance with relevant Rules.
Till such time regular appointment was to be made, ad hoc arrangement was, however, not disturbed.
The Supreme Court in "The District Collector & Chairman Vizianagaram (Social Welfare Residential School Society) Vizianagaram and another v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi," 1990(4) Services Law Reporter 237 held that it amounts to a fraud on public to appoint person with inferior qualifications in such circumstances unless it is stated that qualifications are relaxable.
No Court should be a party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.
17.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, however, relies upon a decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in "Dr. Anil Kumar Vij and another v. State of Punjab and others," 1992(3) Recent Services Judgments 538.
Respondent No. 4 in the said case was appointed as Assistant Professor (Medicine) some time in January 1991 and was working since then.
Inasmuch as his experience to occupy the post under contention was short, his appointment/promotion was challenged.
While dealing with the case, the Division Bench held that inasmuch as the respondent possessed all the basic academic qualifications prescribed by the Rules and at the most lacked the required experience by only two months which impediment stands removed because of his having gained experience in the same speciality and on a higher post, his appointment was not set aside.
In the present case, however, respondent Adarsh Kumar had either not worked at all or at the most worked only for a period of two months in the Department of Cardiology when he came to be appointed or promoted.
That apart the vacancy became available far prior to the appointment of respondent Adarsh Kumar.
It had to be filled in but the process was admittedly not gone into and it appears to this Court that arrival of respondent Adarsh Kumar was being awaited.
Meanwhile petitioner, who fulfilled the qualifications and had the requisite experience to his credit at the time when the post fell vacant or immediately thereafter was not being considered.
In the circumstances if the promotion of respondent No. 3 is protected, it will cause incalculable harm to the petitioner and would give lever to the Government to await their chosen best and in the process ignore the legitimate claim of others.
In the circumstances, it cannot be argued that since by now respondent Adarsh Kumar must have equipped himself with three years teaching experience in the Department of Cardiology and, therefore, his promotion should be protected.
18.
As is evident from the facts of the case even petitioner has since been promoted as Assistant Professor (Cardiology), though during the pendency of writ petition.
That, however, does not render the cause of petitioner infructuous as in the changed circumstances, he prays that his case for promotion to the post under contention he considered when the same fell vacant and if he is promoted, obviously his date of appointment will date back, thus, giving him seniority from the said date.
19.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the confirmed view that the order of promotion of respondent No. 3 dated 2331991 is illegal and non est, hence liable to be quashed and that the ends of justice require that a direction be issued to respondents to consider the case of petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor (Cardiology) with effect from the date the same fell vacant or when he acquired three years' experience.
Respondent No. 3 shall be entitled to occupy the post of Assistant Professor in his parent Department of Medicine to which he belongs, if there be a vacant seat or when the same falls vacant but his seniority will date back to the date of his promotion.
However, if respondent No. 3 be not interested in the said post he can only be accommodated on the post of Assistant Professor Cardiology when he fulfils the qualifications spelled out in the Rules and in particular teaching experience of three years.
I issue the necessary directions accordingly.
The respondents are consequently directed to do the needful within a period of two months.
The writ petition stands allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.