AL Bahri, J - The defendant-State of Punjab has come up in this second appeal against the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, dated November 26, 1987.
While accepting the appeal of Prem Bhandari, the plaintiff, the suit filed by him was decreed.
The trial Court, however, on December 20, 1986, had dismissed the suit.
2.
Prem Bhandari, the plaintiff, was employed as a Beldar.
His services were terminated vide order dated August 19, 1980 (Exhibit P-2).
This order was challenged by Prem Bhandari by raising an industrial dispute.
However, the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, vide his Award dated August 1, 1984 held that the reference was not maintainable as the respondent therein (the department of Thein Dam Project) was not an industry.
This led the plaintiff to challenge the order of termination of his services by the present suit, inter alia, on the ground that the order amounted to punishment as no notice or enquiry was held against the alleged misconduct on the basis of which the order was passed.
In the written statement, the defendants took up several pleas including the plea of limitation as well as that the plaintiff was working as work-charged employee.
He was asked to do the duties of Beldar.
On his refusal to do so, the order was passed.
The said order did not amount to punishment.
In the replication the plaintiff reiterated the stand as taken up in the plaint.
The trial proceeded on the following issues :  1) Whether the order dated 1981980 of defendant No. 3 terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, void and not binding on the plaintiff ?
OPP  2) Whether the suit is barred by time ?
OPD  3) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form?
OPD  4) Relief.
3.
The trial Court held issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was held in favour of the plaintiff and issue No. 3 was held against the defendant and the suit was held to be maintainable.
In fact this issue was not pressed.
The lower appellate Court has reversed the findings of the trial Court on issue No. 1 and held the order of terminating the services of the plaintiff to be illegal and thus decreed the suit holding that the plaintiff would be entitled to full back-wages and continuity of service.
4.
Shri R K Joshi, Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the appellant, first of all argued that the suit filed by Prem Bhandari plaintiff was barred by time and was liable to be dismissed on that ground.
This contention is otherwise devoid of merit.
No point was taken in the grounds of appeal in this respect.
Since it was purely a question of law that he was permitted to argue.
In support of his contention reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh, Ashok Kumar, 1991(3) SCT 93 (SC) : A.I.R. 1991 Supreme Court 2219, holding therein that to challenge orders of termination or wrongful dismissal, the limitation would be governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act which provides a period of 3 years and in such cases the plaintiff must approach the Court within the time prescribed and if the time as prescribed by the statute expires no such declaration as sought for can be granted.
As far as position of law is concerned there is no dispute that Article 113 of the Limitation Act would be applicable to the case in hand, however, present is a case where the plaintiff bona fide was taking resort to the proceedings in another Court i.e. the Labour Court and the time spent in the Labour Court in prosecuting such proceedings on a reference with respect to validity of the order of termination is to be excluded while calculating the period of limitation with the aid of Section 14 of the Limitation Act.
The impugned order was passed on August 20, 1980.
The matter was taken to the Labour Court on September 26, 1980 and the reference was disposed of vide order dated August 1, 1984, which was published in the gazette on September 28, 1984.
Excluding the aforesaid period spent before the Labour Court as above the present suit filed on January 17, 1985 is obviously within time.
Finding of the trial Court in this respect was correctly recorded.
5.
Finding of the lower appellate Court on issue No. 1 is also challenged by the appellant, inter alia asserting that the plaintiff was appointed on work charged basis and as such the appointment was purely temporary.
Services could be terminated without any reason and without any notice.
This contention as such cannot be accepted in view of the peculiar facts of the case.
If the order terminating the services of the petitioner did not disclose any reason, it could be argued that it was not an order of punishment, however, present is a case where reasons were recorded in the order of termination.
Thus the order itself is to be seen in the light of the reasons recorded therein to hold as to whether it would amount to imposing punishment by terminating services or it is a simple order of termination without attaching any stigma or blame.
Exhibit P-21 the order of termination reads as under :-  "As you have declined to do the duties of a Beldar, your services are no longer required by this office w.e.f.
20880."
Refusal on the part of an employee to do the work deputed amounts to misconduct.
With such like orders in his hands such an employee would be debarred from seeking any other employment under the Government.
That being the position, it cannot be said that no stigma is attached to such an order or that the same should be treated as a simple order of discharge.
Even if the strict rule of holding disciplinary enquiry as contemplated in the service rules or under the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution is not attracted, the least what was expected to be done before passing such an order was to inform the employee of the fault and the material to be used against him and to afford an opportunity of explaining the same.
It is only thereafter that it could be said that the decision arrived at was fair and just.
Such a matter was under consideration of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Tek Chand v. The State of HP and others, 1986 (3) SLR 230.
That was also a case of daily-rated workman.
Observing that though no regular departmental enquiry was required, the least that was required to be done was :  (a) to inform him of the proposed action, (2) to disclose to him the material sought to be relied against him,  (3) to afford him a reasonable opportunity to correct or controvert such material and to place his view-point; and  (4) to arrive at a fair and just decision supported by reasons.
The lower appellate Court thus correctly came to the conclusion that order Exhibit P-21 terminating services of the plaintiff was not legal and valid and thus the plaintiff was entitled to back-wages and continuity of service.
6.
Even in the suit, no evidence was led on behalf of the defendant-appellant that Prem Bhandari was deputed to do the job of Beldar and he refused to do so.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.