Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Municipal Committee, Sirsa is aggrieved by the award dated August 2, 1991 given by the Labour Court, Hissar.
By this award, the Committee has been directed to reinstate the workman.
He has also been held entitled to get back-wages at the rate of 50 per cent "from the date of termination to August 1, 1991 and full wages from the date of this award of today."
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The respondent was employed as a Mali (Gardener) on April 2, 1987.
His services were terminated on June 21, 1988.
Claiming that the provisions of Section 25-F had not been complied with and therefore, the retrenchment was vitiated, the workman challenged the action of the committee and sought a reference to the Labour Court.
The reference was made on behalf of the petitioner-Committee, the plea taken was that "the applicant was employed on daily wages as work charge labour only for the period upto completion of work and temporarily, and he was paid remuneration on daily wages.
On the completion of the construction work the object of his being employed as work charge labour was accomplished."
After considering the matter, the Labour Court has found that the workman had worked for more than 240 days during the twelve calendar months preceding the date of his termination.
Consequently, the Committee was bound to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F It having failed to do so, the termination of the workman's services as illegal.
It has further found that he had been working as Labourer during the intervening period at the rate of Rs. 20-30 per day.
After considering the matter, it held that the workman entitled to 50 per cent of the back-wages upto August 1, 1991 and full wages thereafter.
3.
Mr. JK Sibal, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that on account of a fire during the agitation against the Mandal Commission's report, the record of the petitioner-Committee relating to the workman had been destroyed.
As a result, the petitioner was not in a position to produce the actual record.
He, however, contends that the appointment having been made only for a fixed term, the award given by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
He also submits that the workman having remained gainfully employed during the pendency of the proceedings, no ground for granting him the back wages was made out.
The claim has been controverted by Mr. KS Keer, learned counsel for the respondent-workman.
4.
As for the first contention, it deserves notice that the onus of proving the validity of the order of termination of the services of the workman was on the petitioner.
It had to adduce all relevant evidence in this behalf.
After considering the evidence that was produced by the petitioner, the Labour Court has recorded a clear finding of fact that the workman had worked for 240 days in twelve calendar months immediately preceding the date of the order of termination.
Nothing has been produced before me to show that the finding is perverse or untenable.
Consequently, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner cannot be accepted.
5.
As for the payment of back-wages, the learned Labour Court has restricted the claim to 50 per cent till August 1, 1991.
This is so because the workman had admitted that he had been working as a Labourer during the intervening period.
This award of the Labour Court having not been challenged by the workman in any manner whatsoever has to be sustained.
For the subsequent period Mr. Keer submits that the workman is entitled to full wages.
In this connection, it deserves mention that the workman had appeared even before this Court on November 11, 1992 in support of his application for payment of wages under Section 17-B At that time, he had admitted that he had set up a small tea-stall near the bus-stop and was working there.
He had admitted that he was earning Rs. 15 to 20 per day.
Consequently, it is apparent that the situation had remained unchanged and that the workman had been gainfully employed during the pendency of the proceedings even in this Court.
6.
Mr. Keer, however, relies on the observations of the Rajasthan High Court in Management, Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. v. Judges, Labour Court, 1992(1) L.L.J.
494, to contend that mere carrying on of an activity to make both ends meet will not disentitle the workman to get the back-wages.
7.
This was a decision on an application under Section 17-B It was held that "what is required under the provisions of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act is that the workman had not been employed in any establishment.... if he is carrying on some work to make his both ends meet and fill the belly of his family, it will not disentitle him to get the payment as provided under Section 17-B of the Act."
It is thus apparent that it was on account of the provisions of Section 17-B that the order was passed by the learned judge.
However, this case is not an authority for the proposition that a workman is entitled to the payment of back-wags even if he has been working and earning some amount of money.
Whenever the services of a workman are terminated illegally, the Court orders the management to pay back-wages in order to compensate him for the loss actually suffered by him.
In a case where the workman has remained gainfully employed, the compensation has to be reduced by the amount actually earned by him.
In the present case, it is apparent that the workman was running a small tea-stall at the bus stop.
He was admittedly earning about Rs. 15 to 20 per day.
In such a situation, even for the period subsequent to August 1, 1991, payment of 50 per cent back-wages would be adequate.
8.
In view of the above, the award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the workman shall be entitled to the grant of half the back-wages till his reinstatement.
The petitioner will reinstate him as soon as he reports for duty.
9.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.