V K Bali, J - Har Krishan Lal and Dwarka Nath through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek a writ in the nature of mandamus so as to direct the Respondents to place them in the higher grade of Rs. 570-1080 with effect from 111978 and Rs. 1500-2640 with effect from 111986.
2.
Brief facts from which relief indicated above stems reveal that petitioners joined the Irrigation department as Patwaris in the year 1954 and 1974 respectively.
Thereafter they were confirmed on the said post on 131960 and 1.11.1974 respectively.
Both of them were promoted as Assistant Revenue Clerks on 2591974 and 1.3.1980 respectively.
It is pleaded that the Assistant Revenue Clerks are promoted from the posts of Patwaris.
There are two avenues of promotion to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk, firstly, from an apprentice Irrigation Booking Clerk now designated as Irrigation Patwaris and secondly the Irrigation Booking Clerks/Irrigation Patwaris who earn 100% bonus during their Patwar period are promoted as Assistant Revenue Clerks normally after completing 20 years of service.
Promotion is governed as per Rule 10 of the P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch), Revenue Clerks State Service Class-III Rules, 1956.
Rule 10(1) of the aforesaid Rules reads as follows :-  10(1) Appointments to the various grades of Service shall be made, with due regard to the directions contained in Appendix B to these rules-  (a) in the case of Head Revenue Clerk by promotion from the grade of Revenue Clerks;  (b) in the case of Revenue Clerks, by promotion from the grade of Assistant Revenue Clerks;  (c) in the case of Assistant Revenue Clerks -  (i) by promotion from amongst Patwaris provided they are educationally qualified and otherwise suitable; or  (ii) by transfer of persons officiating in permanent posts or holdings temporary posts in the Department; or  (iii) by direct recruitment.
(2) Appointment of Assistant Revenue Clerks shall be made in the following manner :  (a) Departmental candidates... 40 per cent;  (b) Direct candidates ...60 per cent;  (3) Notwithstanding anything in the above rules, appointment to the service shall be made purely by selection and no official shall be entitled to such appointment as of right."
3.
Before the First Pay Commission Report in the year 1968, the Assistant Revenue Clerks were drawing much higher pay than the Patwaris.
The Chart prepared with regard to pay scales of Assistant Revenue Clerks and Patwaris before and after the Pay Commission upto 31.1.1968 as reproduced in paragraph 4 of the petition reveals that all through the Assistant Revenue Clerks were in a far better pay scale.
Obviously, the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk was a promotional post which naturally carried higher pay scale than that of Patwari.
However, after the Pay Commission Report, the pay scale of both the posts i.e. Assistant Revenue Clerks and Patwaris came to be in the same bracket.
This was not to the liking of the petitioners, and, therefore, they made repeated representations to the department and prayed for removing anomalies in their pay scale and that of Patwaris.
The petitioners also approached the Second Pay Commission when the same was constituted and once again prayed for removal of anomalies in their pay scales.
It is pleaded that the Department recommended to the Pay Commission that the petitioners be paid better pay scales.
However, when the final report of the Second Pay Commission was released, the Assistant Revenue Clerks were again equated with the Patwari and were given same pay scale of Rs. 400-660/510-800 (Selection grade for 20% of posts).
It is pleaded that the duties of Assistant Revenue Clerks are much more than the Patwaris, and they are discharging higher responsibilities.
An Assistant Revenue Clerk is not only an Assistant of Ziledar in disposal of all the revenue cases, but also has to conduct certain revenue cases independently like warrabandis, Tawan cases and demand statements etc.
They have also to check 40% Khataunis of the each Canal Patwari of his section, and about 14/15 Canal Patwaris are working under one Assistant Revenue Clerk.
The Assistant Revenue Clerk audits one complete Halqua of a Canal Patwari in each crop.
Besides, that the Assistant Revenue Clerk has also to supervise the work of Patwaris whose irrigation is found short or defective.
When all requests and entreaties of petitioners for grant of higher pay scale brought no tangible results, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2783 of 1983 in this Court which was allowed by a Division Bench on 1691987.
A direction was issued to the respondents to refer the question of the pay scale of Assistant Revenue Clerks and the Patwaris to the new Pay Commission which was appointed by the Government to rationalise their pay scales.
The operative part of judgment runs thus :  "In para 5 of the written statement filed by the Administrative Officer, Irrigation Branch, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been stated that the Chief Engineer brought the anomaly in the pay scales of the Patwaris and the Assistant Revenue Clerks to the notice of the Government and recommended that the latter be placed in the pay scale of Rs.480-880, but the Government declined the recommendation and only allowed selection grade of Rs. 510-800 to 25% posts of the Assistant Revenue Clerks.
It was also not in dispute in the written statement that the appointment to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk is made by promotion from amongst the Patwaris.
From the provisions of Rule 10 of the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Revenue Clerks State Service, Class-III Rules, 1956, it is evident that the Patwaris on promotion are appointed as Assistant Revenue Clerks.
The anomaly is, therefore, writ large because it would be highly irrational to place a junior post and the higher post in the same scale of pay.
We are, therefore, unable to understand as to why the Government rejected the representation of petitioner and declined to remove the anomaly in the pay scales of the Patwaris and the Assistant Revenue Clerks.
It has been brought to our notice by the learned counsel for the parties that a new Pay Commission has already been appointed and is seized of the matter.
This petition, is therefore, allowed and the Government is directed to refer the question of the pay scales of the Patwaris and the Assistant Revenue Clerks to the Pay Commission so as to rationalise their pay scales in the light of the observations made above.
No costs."
4.
The petitioners, as per the judgment noticed above, made a representation on 11111987 that their grades be revised.
On 2011989, the Third Pay Commission submitted its report by revising the pay scales of Assistant Revenue Clerks who were getting the pay scale of Rs. 400-660 to Rs. 950-1800 with special pay of Rs. 30/- prospectively but the pay scale of Irrigation Booking Clerks (Canal Patwaris), who were in the grade of Rs. 400-660 was also revised to Rs. 950-1980 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay, again higher than that of Assistant Revenue Clerks.
The petitioners further aver that the pay scale of the Assistant Revenue Clerks has not been revised so as to increase it, i.e., more than Canal Patwaris and the respondents have wilfully disobeyed the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2783 of 1983 and did not refer this matter to the Third Pay Commission.
5.
The petitioners thereafter moved a contempt petition bearing No. 1127 of 1989 in this Court and in reply to the said petition, the respondents admitted that as the matter remained under correspondence between the Chief Engineer and the Government, the case of the petitioners could not be referred to the Third Pay Commission which had submitted its final report on 2811989.
It is only after the submission of the report by the Third Pay Commission that respondent No. 1 referred the matter to the Anomaly Committee and recommended pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640 with effect from 111986 to the Assistant Revenue Clerks.
During the pendency of the contempt petition, the Anomaly Committee could not decide the matter and the contempt matter came for hearing on 1111991 in which the following order was passed :  "Present :- A.S. Sandhu, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr. SS Saron, AAG, Punjab for the respondents.
ORDER Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am prima facie of the view that the directions contained in this Court's order dated 16th September, 1987 (Annexure P-1) asking the Government to refer the matter to the Pay Commission, in existence at that time, have completely been frustrated by either non-action or inadequate action on the part of the respondents.
It appears that the Government has at on stage referred the matter to the Pay Commission and it was only the Chief Engineer, who forwarded a copy of the letter dated 24th February, 1990 (Copy Annexure R-2) to the Secretary to Pay Commission, Punjab, for information and necessary action.
Even at the subsequent steps when the matter was referred to the Anomaly Committee, it was taken in a very casual manner.
I am informed that even the Anomaly Committee has not decided the matter in question and is no more functioning.
In the light of this factual position - while I find it difficult to reconcile with this indifferent attitude of the Government, I deem it appropriate to direct it now to decide the matter, referred to in our order dated 16th September, 1987, within a period of two months from today and place a copy of the final order passed by it in that regard on the records of the case.
The rest of the matter would be taken up after the decision of the Government."
6.
In compliance with the directions given in the contempt petition, respondent No. 1 filed an additional affidavit on 1431991 appending a notification dated 1131991 and contending that the Government had complied with the directions given by this Court and have granted separate pay scales to the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks i.e. Rs. 1020-1800 and Rs. 1000-1080 to Canal Patwari.
It is pleaded that there is hardly and compliance of the orders of this Court as the pay scales of both the categories were once again practically kept the same.
The matter came up for final decision in this Court on 12.4.1991 and while disposing of the matter, it was observed that the grievances of the petitioner could be heard under writ jurisdiction and not under Contempt Petition as it was essentially a case of challenging notification dated 1131991.
7.
The facts that have been fully detailed above, thus, left the petitioner with no choice but to file the present petition for the relief as mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment.
They have challenged notification dated 1131991, Annexure P-5 by basically pleading that even though the case of the petitioners for higher pay scale was established not only on account of the facts that they were holding a promotional post but on account of inter-parties decision rendered by this Court yet vide impugned notification, there was hardly any change between the pay scales of Patwaris and that of Assistant Revenue Clerks.
The Assistant Revenue Clerks vide the notification in question were given promotional increment which they were getting according to the Government instructions, Annexure P-1.
That being so, it is stated that there is hardly any compliance with the orders passed by this Court and, therefore, notification Annexure P-5 was merely an eyewash.
In accordance with para No. 3 of the notification, the Patwaris were given the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 (with a start of Rs. 1,000/- with effect from 111986 and higher grade of Rs. 1025-1800 was granted to the Assistant Revenue Clerk.
Vide notification Annexure P-5, the Government omitted Rs. 50/- as special allowance to the Patwaris already granted to them by revising their pay scales vide notification dated 2011989 which would make it clear that the Patwaris are still getting higher pay scale according to the previous notification dated 2011989.
The action of the Government is, thus, styled to be wholly illegal, unjust against the principles of natural justice and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
The cause of the petitioners has been opposed and in the written statement filed by Shri Ram Chand, Chief Engineer on behalf of the Punjab State and other respondents, it has been pleaded that the representation of the petitioners were considered by the Pay Anomalies Committee but it did not make any recommendation to the Government.
Accordingly the Government had maintained the same pay scale of Rs. 400-660 for the Assistant Revenue Clerks and had allowed selection grade of Rs. 510-800 for 20% posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks vide item No. 130 of Finance Department letter dated 18.2.1981.
It has, however, been admitted that the duties of Assistant Revenue Clerks carry higher responsibilities than those of Canal Patwaris.
The Government vide notification dated 1131991 had allowed promotional increments on promotion from Patwaris to the Assistant Revenue Clerks with effect from 111978 in relaxation of the Rules and with effect from 111986, a higher pay scale of Rs 1025-1800 was allowed to the Assistant Revenue Clerks.
The other facts of the case as have been reproduced above have been admitted but it has been further stated that the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2783 of 1983 has been implemented in letter and spirit and the pay scales of Assistant Revenue Clerks have been revised in the light of decision rendered in the case aforesaid.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that grave injustice has been caused to the petitioners.
Even though it has been admitted at all ends that the duties of Assistant Revenue Clerks are far more than that of Patwaris and they are discharging higher responsibilities and so much so that the post of petitioners is a promotional post from that of Patwaris yet all through i.e. from the date of First Pay Commission report came into being, they have been denied their legitimate rights.
A person on promotion has legitimate aspirations of getting a higher pay scale and these aspirations were translated into reality all through till 1968 when the pay scale of Assistant Revenue Clerk was admittedly higher than that of Patwari but for wholly untenable reasons, the pay of petitioners holding the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks came to be equated with those of Patwaris, which, as referred to above, are posts lower than Assistant Revenue Clerks.
Various representations made by the petitioners fell on deaf cars.
The inaction of the respondents in granting legitimate cause of the petitioners brought them in this Court way back in the year 1983.
Their cause was found to be meritorious by specially noticing that the anomaly was writ large because it would be highly irrational to place a junior post and a higher post in the same scale of pay.
The Court observed that it was not able to understand as to why the Government rejected the representation of the petitioners and declined to remove the anomaly in the pay scale of the Patwaris and the Assistant Revenue Clerks.
Inasmuch as a new Pay Commission was already appointed and was seized to the matter, the Government was directed to refer the question of the pay scales of the Patwaris and the Assistant Revenue Clerks to the Pay Commission so as to rationalise their pay scales.
It was made clear that the rationalisation would be done in the light of the observations made in the judgment.
The petitioners after being successful in their cause had yet to move from pillar to post earlier by making repeated representations and thereafter by coming to this Court in contempt petitions.
During the pendency of one contempt petition, the Government came with the notification which has been challenged in this writ petition.
It appears that the notification was issued simply with a view to stall contempt proceedings and ultimate action that might have been taken against some high -ups, as the pay of the petitioners increased only notionally.
Whereas Patwari were in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 (with a start of Rs. 1,000/-) with effect from 111986 the petitioners were only granted pay scale of Rs. 1025-1800.
Only Special Allowance of Rs. 50/- given to the Patwaris was omitted.
The legitimate cause of the petitioners was, thus, first prolonged and in the ultimate analysis, thwarted.
There was no justification in not removing anomaly and not granting higher pay scale to the petitioners than that of the Patwaris.
Their action has, thus, to be held to be wholly illegal, unjust, against the principles of natural justice and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
A person holding a promotional post cannot be denied higher pay scale particularly when the said category was all through getting a higher pay scale, denial whereof would constitute unreasonable classification.
10.
For the reasons stated above, a direction is issued to the respondents to grant the petitioners a pay scale immediately higher than that which is being paid to the Patwaris.
The petitioners have claimed pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 with effect from 111978 and Rs. 1500-2640 with effect from 111986.
They cannot, however, be allowed a higher pay scale with effect from 111976 as the claim from the said date even if raked through in a Civil Court would have been barred by limitation.
They filed the first writ petition in the year 1983.
Inasmuch as the earlier petition was filed in the year 1983, they would be entitled to the same from the year 1980, whatever pay scales were admissible to the Patwaris during those days, the petitioners would be entitled to immediate higher pay scales from the said date.
They shall also be entitled to immediate higher pay scale from the date of the same were revised in the case of Patwaris.
11.
This writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above with costs quantified at Rs. 3,000/-.
The petitioners would be paid the arrears to be calculated in view of the observations made above within a period of three months from today.
Petition allowed.