RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner was appointed as Technician Grade-II in the PGI on 751981 and the following appointment letter was issued :-  "You are offered the post of Technician Grade-II at the rate of Rs. 560/- per month in the Scale of Rs. 425-15-500-15-560-20-700-25-800 with initial start of Rs. 560/- plus usual allowances as are sanctioned by the Central Government for the same category of staff stationed at Chandigarh from time to time on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or from the date you actually take over this appointment or till your overage and relaxation of qualifications are approved by the Governing Body of the Institute, whichever is earlier, on the following terms and conditions."
2.
His services were terminated vide order dated 27.4.1984 w.e.f.
30.4.1984 as per the terms and conditions of his appointment.
The petitioner challenged his termination by raising a industrial dispute which was referred to Labour Court, Chandigarh for adjudication.
The reference of dispute was in the following terms :-  "Whether the services of Shri Mohinder Singh Sohanpal were terminated illegally by the Management of Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.
If so to what effect and to what relief he is entitled to, if any."
3.
The respondent- PGI took the stand that the petitioner was not a workman and further since the Governing Body had not approved the proposal regarding the relaxation of age of the petitioner, his services had been terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
4.
The Labour Court after appreciating the evidence held that the petitioner was a workman.
However, Labour Court held that the petitioner's services had been terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment, inasmuch as the Governing Body of the PGI had not approved the proposal regarding relaxation of age of the petitioner and therefore came to the conclusion that the termination of services was legal and valid.
It still further held that since the workman had worked for more than 240 days, the management should have complied with the provisions of Section 25-F at the time of his termination.
Since, the Management had failed to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F and the petitioner was awarded compensation of Rs. 4000/-.
Aggrieved by the said Award, the petitioner came up in this writ petition.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that according to the terms and conditions of the appointment letter, the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis for six months or till his case of relaxation of coverage was approved by the Governing Body, whichever was earlier.
According to him the petitioner had continued for almost three years without issuance of any fresh letter of appointment and therefore having worked for more than 240 days, the services could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Since the termination of services was in violation of Section 25-F, the petitioner was entitled to reinstatment with full back wages.
6.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The appointment letter, which has been reproduced above, shows that the appointment was inordinate inasmuch as the continuation of the petitioner in service was dependent upon the approval of the Governing Body regarding relaxation of age in favour of the petitioner.
According to the terms and conditions of the appointment letter, the petitioner could at the most continue for a period of six months in absence of any decision one way or the other by the Governing Body.
Admittedly, there is no letter or any communication to the petitioner that after a period of six months, he could still continue.
Of course, the petitioner has continue, but the question that arises is, has he continued on the basis of a valid order of appointment?
The answer has to be in the negative.
Though, PGI has not come up to challenge the Award, I am of the view that the question of violation of Section 25-F in the circumstances of the case did not arise, as the termination of the services of the petitioner was in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that since the respondent-PGI had not challenged the finding of the Labour Court regarding the violation of Section 25-F of the Act, the said finding cannot be interfered with by this Court.
I am afraid I cannot agree with the learned counsel.
This Court on the basis of facts, as emerge out of the pleadings of the parties and after applying the law to those facts can come to a different finding than the one recorded by the Labour Court.
Even assuming for the sake of arguments that the finding of the Labour Court that there is violation of Section 25-F of the Act, is correct, then on circumstances of this case, I am of the view that compensation awarded by the Labour Court would meet the ends of justice, inasmuch as by reinstating the petitioner, the initial order of appointment, which was inordinate, inasmuch as it was subject to the approval of the Governing Body, would become a valid order and the Court would be taking up the role of the Governing Body to give approval.
The learned counsel cited Apex Court judgment in Narotam Chopra v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, (1950-1988) (1) RSJ.
678, to contend that if there is violation of Section 25-F of the Act, the termination is void ab-initio and there should be reinstatement with full back wages.
This case is distinguishable inasmuch as in that case there was nothing wrong with the appointment order.
In the present case, as noticed above, the petitioner's appointment was conditional, i.e. it was subject to the approval of the Governing Body.
The Governing Body did not approve the appointment.
Further, there was no extension in the service of the petitioner after six months.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.