KP Bhandari, J - This appeal came up for hearing before me on 18121991.
I partly allowed to appeal it was mentioned in the order that detailed orders shall follow.
Now I proceed to give reasons in support of my judgment.
2.
Harbel Singh, appellant, was serving as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways.
His services were terminated by order of the General Manager dated 1121987.
He filed a declaratory suit in the Court of Sub Judge Class III, Ferozepur.
Subordinate Judge decreed the suit and granted necessary declaration.
Aggrieved against the said judgment and decree, the State filed an appeal in the Court of District Judge, Ferozepur.
The appeal came up for hearing before Additional District Judge who accepted the appeal and reversed the judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate Judge and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff with costs.
3.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, the appellant has come up in this regular second appeal.
4.
The Subordinate Judge has recorded a firm finding of fact that the enquiry file shows that on 521987, Bus No. 1624 was checked and five passengers were found without tickets.
A report was made to the authorities by the checking staff that the plaintiff/appellant had collected Rs. 2/- per head from the passengers without tickets and embezzled a sum of Rs. 16/-.
On the basis of this report, the General Manager Roadways passed the following order:  "He be removed from service as services no longer required."
However, the order served on the appellate does not show that the order of termination was passed on the basis of the enquiry report against him.
The Subordinate Judge, on the facts of the case, recorded following finding of issue No. 1 :  " .... Where the impugned order on the face of it appears to be innocuous but the order of termination is challenged as casting stigma on the service career, the Court can lift and veil and order to find out the real basis of the impugned order.
As stated above Sarvshri Sukhdev Singh and Satish Kumar, Inspectors, had made a report against the plaintiff about the embezzlement of Rs. 16/-.
The report is at page 17 of the enquiry file Ex. P-1.
On the basis of this report the General Manager had made an endorsement that the plaintiff be removed from service as service no longer required at page 19 of Ex. P1.
It is a clear case where the services of the plaintiff were terminated by way of punishment.
It is not disputed that no charge-sheet was ever issued to the plaintiff and no enquiry was held against him."
The District Judge has not disagreed with this finding that the order of termination was passed on the basis of the report of two Inspectors regarding embezzlement of Rs. 16/-.
The Additional District Judge was impressed by the fact that in the formal order issued to the plaintiff, no words of 'stigma' was attached.
The Additional District Judge relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as The State of UP v. Ram Chandra Trivedi, AIR 1976 SC 2547.
In this case, the Additional District Judge has not applied his mind to the legal problem before him carefully.
He did not appreciate that in Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) SLR 278 : AIR 1986 (SC) 1626 cites before him.
It is clearly laid down that even if there is no word 'stigma' in the order but in fact, the order of termination has been passed on ground of misconduct, the action would be considered by way of punishment and the provisions of Articles 311 of the Constitution of India will have to be complied with.
When several cases of the Supreme Court are cited before the Court, it is the duty of the Court to examine cases carefully, the judgment of the Additional District Judge is very casual.
He has not tried to read the judgment in detail.
This judgment shows that his understanding of the legal important questions is very poor.
2.
A Bench of seven judges of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192 has held that it has never been held by the courts that for determinating whether the order of termination is by way of punishment, the Court has just to see the form of the order.
Chief Justice may, speaking for the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court observed as follows:  "No abstract proposition can be laid down that where the services of a probationer are terminated without saying anything more in the order of termination than that the services are terminated.
It can never amount to a punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case.
If a probationer is discharged on the ground of misconduct, or inefficiency for similar reasons without his getting reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his discharged it may in a given case amount to removal from service within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It was further observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the said judgment :  "The order of termination of the services of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal is clearly by way of punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The High Court not only denied Ishwar Chand Agarwal the protection under Article 311 but also denied itself the dignified control over the subordinate judiciary.
The form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment.
Even an innocuously worded order terminating the service may in the facts and circumstances of the case establish that an enquiry into allegations of serious and grave character of misconduct involving stigma has been made in infraction of the provisions of Article 311.
In such a case, the simplicity of the form of the order will not give any sanctity.
That is exactly what has happened in the case of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal.
The order of termination is illegal and must be set aside."
On the facts of the present case, it is the admitted position that the order of termination has been passed on the report of the two Inspectors.
According to the report, there was an allegation against the appellant that he had embezzled Rs. 16/-.
The General Manager passed the order of this report and removed the appellant from service.
The expression `removed' in the order clearly shows that the General Manager wanted to punish him.
He does not say that the order is simple order of termination.
Moreover, he has based his order on the report of the Inspector which casts a stigma on the appellant.
In this view of the matter, there can be no manner of doubt that the order has been passed on the basis of the report of the two inspectors which imputed the allegations of misconduct against the appellant and his services have been terminated on that basis.
Surely, in this situation, the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution will be applicable.
Admittedly, in the present case no enquiry was held as the appellant was denied reasonable opportunity of defending himself as laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
In view of the above discussion this appeal is accepted with no order as to costs.
The judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge is set aside and that of the Subordinate judge is restored with the modification that the appellant shall not be entitled to any back wages.
A statement has been made in Court by the appellant that he shall not claim any back wages if he is reinstated.
However, it is clarified that this back service shall count towards increments, seniority pension and other like benefits.
Appeal allowed.