SS Sodhi, J - Diploma holders and those with degrees in Engineering constitute the two warring factions in the controversy raised in this bunch of Letters Patent Appeals and Writ Petitions, with regard to promotion from Class-II to Class-I, that is, from the post of Assistant Engineers to Executive Engineers and beyond, in the three branches of the Haryana Public Works Department, namely, Irrigation, Building and Roads and Public Health, in terms of Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964; the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1960 and the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961 respectively (hereinafter referred to as the Irrigation Branch, B&R Branch or Public Health Branch Rules, as the case may be).
The relevant rules governing the matter being pari materia and similar in content, is what renders it appropriate to deal herewith all the legal issues raised, even though the factual context may differ from case to case.
2.
The posts of Assistant Engineers (whether called by that name or Sub Divisional Engineers) in all the three branches, namely, Irrigation, B&R and Public Health are as per their rules manned by degree or diploma-holders.
Until recently, however, only degree-holders were treated as eligible for promotion to the posts of Executive Engineers and beyond.
Such being the manner in which the Government construed the relevant rules to provide.
This, of course, changed after the judgment of the Supreme Court in AS Parma v. State of Haryana, 1984(1) SLR 454 : AIR 1986 (SC) 1183 where in dealing with rules 6(a) and (b) of the B&R Branch Rules (which as mentioned earlier are similar to the corresponding rules of the Irrigation and Public Health Branch Rules), it was held that for filling up of 50% posts in Class-I by promotion from Class-II, Diploma holders too, were qualified for such appointment.
While concluding, the Court, however, went on to observe, "It is indisputable that if the government wishes to appoint only holders of degree to Class-I service, it may do so by promulgating appropriate rules."
3.
Provoked, perhaps by what was said in the concluding portion of the judgment in AS Parmar's case (supra) and the undertaking given by the Additional Solicitor General to the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 149 of 1981 (Ashok Gulati v. State of Haryana) on February 24, 1984, to the effect that the State Government would consider the cases of all eligible persons, including the petitioners for regular appointment to Class-I in accordance with the rules and complete the process within four months, the government, by notification, just two days before the expiry of the said period of four months, proceeded to amend the Irrigation Branch Rules with retrospective effect from the date of the coming into force of these rules, as originally enacted, so as to provide thereby a degree in Engineering as an essential qualification for promotion from Class II to Class I, In other words, Assistant Engineers, who were Diploma holders, ceased to be eligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and beyond.
Similar notifications amending the B & R and the Public Health Branch Rules too, soon followed.
4.
The Notifications amending the relevant rules with retrospective effect were issued as under :-  Rules Date of Notification Amendment with effect fr Irrigation Branch 22.6.1984 10.7.19 B & R Branch 14.1.1985 18.3.19 Public Health Branch 26/2091986 261961.
The Constitutional validity of the amendment made in the Irrigation Branch Rules, prescribing a Degree in Engineering as an essential requirement for promotion to Class-I, was assailed before the Supreme Court in TR Kapur v. State of Haryana, 1986(4) SLR 155.
The Court held this amendment to be ultra vires as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and invalid also for non-compliance with the provisions of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act 1966 on the ground that it altered the conditions of service of diploma-holders to their disadvantage without the prior approval of the Central Government.
5.
Later, following Kapur's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court in BM v. State of Haryana, 1987(5) SLR 531, held a similar amendment in the B & R Branch Rules too as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, restoring thereby the eligibility of Diploma-holders for promotion to Class-I.
6.
A similar issue with regard to the amendment in the Public Health Branch Rules, now confronts us in Letters Patent Appeal 164 of 1991 (CP Taneja v. State of Haryana, 1993(4) S.C.T.
586) again rendering thereby Diploma-holders ineligible for promotion to Class-I.
7.
In the context of the rationale of the judicial precedents in TR Kapur and BM Sharma's cases (supra) no exception can indeed be taken to the view of the learned single Judge holding the impugned amendment ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
As regards the other ground of invalidity imputed to it, namely, non-compliance with the provisions of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, more will have to be said later.
8.
The said Letters Patent Appeal arises from Civil Writ Petition 3188 of 1988.
RK Dilbagi, the petitioners, there, hold Diplomas in Engineering and during the Emergency they served in the military as Emergency Commissioned Officers and had more than five years experience as such.
They, thus, fulfilled the essential qualifications for the post of Assistant Engineer, as advertised by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
A Degree in Engineering being the other or alternative qualification.
The petitioners applied for and were in due course selected and appointed Assistant Engineers in December 1969, and in 1976 they were also promoted as Executive Engineers.
9.
By virtue of having served as Emergency Commissioned Officers during the Emergency, the petitioners were in terms of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, also entitled to the benefit of military service towards seniority.
As a consequence of this benefit being extended to them, they were all given deemed dates of appointment as Assistant Engineers with effect from different dated in 1965 and as Executive Engineers in 1972.
10.
In the context of the benefit of military service towards seniority too having been granted to the petitioners, and the amendment in the Public Health Branch Rules being declared invalid, the learned Single Judge held the petitioners entitled to promotion to the higher post of Superintending Engineer with all consequential benefits.
11.
Faced with this situation, Mr. KK Jagia, counsel for the appellants, CP Taneja (respondents in the writ petition) sought of back upon the provisions of Rule 3(iii) of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 which reads as under :  "In case a person who has tendered Military Service does not possess the minimum qualification prescribed for any service or post, he shall be deemed to possess these qualifications if the appointing authority certifies that such a person has acquired by experience or otherwise qualifications equivalent to those prescribed for that service or post."
12.
The argument being that as the petitioners were not degree-holders, their qualifications for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer could be treated as equivalent to those prescribed, only if the appointing authority had so certified and as this had not been done, they lacked the essential qualification for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer.
13.
The contention raised though attractive on the face of it, cannot, however, stand scrutiny.
At the very outset, it deserves note that no particular form or manner has been prescribed for the Appointing Authority to certify qualifications possessed by one, who has rendered military service, as being equivalent to those laid for the post in question.
A matter of material significance, in the context here is the categoric stand of the State Government itself that Diploma-holders, who had been given the benefit of military service are equated with Degree-holders.
This was so stated in the return filed on behalf to the respondent-State in Civil Writ Petition 16836 of 1991.
Not only this, otherwise too it will be seen that the Appointing Authority has consistently treated the petitioners as possessing the requisite qualifications, not only of the post of Assistant Engineer, but also Executive Engineer, a post to which they were promoted as far back as 1976 and now with the deemed dates of 1972.
14.
Further it is pertinent to note that there is no mention of any limitation even having been placed, with regard to the recognition of the qualifications possessed by the petitioners, in the sense that it was never said that they were equated with a Degree in Engineering only for the post of Assistant Engineer or Executive Engineer but not for any higher post.
This being the situation and with the passage of time, the equivalence of the qualifications possessed by the petitioners with those of Degree-holders clearly stands established, rather its virtually their vested right now.
In other words, it cannot now be heard to be said that they are ineligible to be consistent for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer on the ground that they were not degree-holders and thus lacked the requisite qualifications for this post.
15.
The point to consider now is the relief to be granted to the petitioners.
It will be recalled, as mentioned earlier to the petitioners were appointed as Executive Engineers as far back as 1976 (and now have the deemed date of 1972).
After having rendered 7 years service as Executive Engineer they became eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer.
They, thus at any rate, became so entitled in 1983, if not in 1979 (going by the deemed date of their promotion as Executive Engineers).
They did not, however, choose to move the Court for seeking this relief until 1988, and that too after over two years of the judgment of the Supreme Court in TR Kapur's case (supra) holding the amendment in the Irrigation Branch Rules to be ultra vires.
In this situation, as was said by the Supreme Court in TR Kapoor v. State of Haryana, 1989(4) SLR 312, the petitioners cannot but be taken to have acquiesced in the interpretation of the Rules as put upon them by the State Government all along, by remaining complacent for such a long period of time.
They cannot, therefore, now turn round and say that notwithstanding their inaction, they should be granted promotion on the basis of their deemed dates of promotion as Executive Engineer.
What is more, in the meanwhile, there is every likelihood that some officers, with Degrees in Engineering may have been promoted.
It would clearly be wrong and unjust, after such passage of time, to disturb the settled position in the service.
Taking into account, therefore, these factors, we direct that the petitioners be considered for promotion as Superintending Engineers and they be given all consequential benefits as would have been available to them, had they been so considered with reference only to vacancies existing on and after the date of the filing of the present writ petition.
This Letter Patent Appeal is, consequently, disposed of in these terms.
16.
A matter which stands on the same footing, as CP Taneja's case (supra), even though it arises with regard to B & R Branch Rules, is Civil Writ Petition 16836 of 1991 (SC Girotara v. State of Haryana).
Here too the petitioner is a Diploma-holder in Engineering and during the Emergency had served in the Army as an Emergency Commissioned Officer.
On his discharge from the Army he was appointed Assistant Engineer in 1969 and was promoted as Executive Engineer on May 11, 1976, The appointment of the petitioner as such was subsequently approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission with effect from December 10, 1975.
In this case too the petitioner was entitled and was given the benefit of military service towards seniority in terms of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
He thereby became senior to some Degree-holders, who had been appointed as Executive Engineers after him.
To such Executive Engineers being Sarvshri RK Jain and KK Singal, who were promoted as Superintending Engineer on March 3, 1987.
It is the claim of the petitioner that he was entitled to be considered and appointed as Superintending Engineer with effect from this date; he being senior to the two promoted on that date.
It is said that later three more officers, junior to the petitioner, had also been promoted as Superintending Engineers on October 12, 1991.
17.
In view of the conclusions arrived at In CP Taneja's case (supra), there can be no manner of doubt that even though the petitioner was not a Degree-holder, but being a diploma-holder with more than five years' experience as Emergency Commissioned Officer, and having been granted the benefit of Military service, towards seniority too he was clearly eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer, and was thus, entitled to be considered with effect from the same date as his juniors were so considered.
This writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of with the direction to the respondents to consider the petitioner for promotion as Superintending Engineer with effect from March 3, 1987, when his juniors were so appointed and to grant him all consequential benefits.
18.
We move on now to the other aspect of the legality of the impugned amendment in the Public Health Branch Rules, namely, its prospective application.
This emerges as the main issue in Letters Patent Appeal 286 of 1991 arising out of Civil Writ Petition 13123 of 1989.
19.
There too the writ petitioners Roshan Lal Talwar and others were Diploma-holders, while the respondents Sarvinder Singh and others had Degree in Engineering.
The petitioners had been appointed Sub Divisional Engineers by promotion in 1970, whereas the appointment of the respondents to Class II was by direct recruitment in 1972 and 1975.
The petitioners were thus senior to the respondents.
20.
In view, however, of the impugned amendment in the Public Health Branch Rules, making a degree in Engineering an essential qualification for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, the respondents were promoted to this post on October 18, 1989, whilst such promotion was denied to the petitioners, they being mere diploma-holders.
It is in the context of this order of 18th October, 1989 that the question arises whether the impugned amendment if enforced prospectively only, was valid.
21.
It is beyond the pale of controversy that in so far as vacancies existing prior to the date of the impugned amendment are concerned, they would undoubtedly have to be filled in accordance with the unamended Rules.
It is how the subsequent vacancies are to be filled, whether with reference to the amended or the unamended Rules is what now arises for consideration.
22.
It would be recalled that the Supreme Court in the earlier TR Kapur's case (supra) had held he impugned amendment in the Irrigation Branch Rules to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, as also void for non-compliance with the provisions of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966.
As regard the former, a reading of this judgment would show that it was in the context of the impugned amendment being with retrospective effect, that it was found to be contrary to Articles 14 and 16.
In other words, the issue of validity of the amendment in its prospective aspect still remains open.
23.
The law is now well settled as pointed out by the Supreme Court in P. Murugesan v. State Of Tamilnadu, (1993) 2 SC Cases 340 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
416 that the rule making authority is competent to prescribe a complete or partial bar on promotion for a particular category of employees based upon their educational qualifications.
The relevant observations being, "We cannot fail to take note of the fact that right from 1974 i.e. since the decision of a Constitution Bench in Tarloki Nath Khosla, (1974) 1 SCC 19, this Court has been holding uniformly that even where direct recruits and promotees are integrated into a common class, they could for purposes of promotion to the higher cadre be classified on the basis of educational qualification.
24.
The other judicial precedent which warrants notice is K Jagadeesan v Union of India, JT 1990(1) SC 247.
There for promotion to the post of Director (ME) the requisite qualification was 35 years service in the grade of Mechanical Engineer (Senior).
The appellant became eligible for promotion in 1978, but he could not be promoted as there were persons senior to him in his grade, who were promoted to that post.
In January 1984 a notification was issued amending the said Rules Whereby a Degree in Engineering was prescribed as an essential qualification for promotion to the post of Director (ME).
This was challenged on the ground that it adversely affected the appellant's conditions of service relating to promotion and that it amounted to giving retrospective effect to this rule and as no such retrospective rule could be framed under Article 309 of the Constitution; it was void.
Reliance in support was sought to be placed upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the earlier TR Kapur's case, (supra).
It was held that the ratio of TR Kapur's case (supra) was not applicable as there was no question of the appellant being reverted from any post held by him and that all that it affected was the mere chances of the petitioner for promotion, which was not a condition of service.
It was also held that there was no retrospective effect that had been given to the said amended rule.
25.
Going by this line of reasoning, the impugned amendment, in so far as its prospective application is concerned, cannot in any manner be held to be violative of Articles 14 and 16.
26.
Be that as it may, the invalidity of the impugned amendment as declared in TR Kapur's case (supra) for non-compliance with the provisions of section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966, still stands to block grant of the relief sought by the writ petitioners.
27.
Confronted with this situation, the present appellants Sarvinder Singh and others referred to the letter of the Central Government of February, 1968 (Annexure R-9/2) which, it is pointed out, had not been brought to the notice of the Supreme Court in TR Kapur's case (supra).
This letter reads as under :  "I am directed to refer to the proviso to sub-section (6) of Section 82 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, which lays down that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to any person referred to in sub-section (1) of sub-section (2) of the section, shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval to the Central Government.
The question of protection be afforded in the matter of various service conditions to personnel affected by the Punjab Re-organisation Act has been considered and it has been decided that the protection of service conditions, as laid down in this Ministry's letter No. 5/6/57-SR (S) dated the 27th March, 1957, in connection with the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 (copy enclosed) should be made available to the personnel affected by the Punjab Re-organisation Act also.
2.
I am to request that appropriate instructions may be issued accordingly to all concerned.
3.
The receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged."
28.
What deserves note is that reference here to a earlier letter of the Central Government of March 27, 1957 with regard to the States Re-organisation Act, 1956.
The provision of Section 115(7) of the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 are similar to those of section 82 (6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966.
The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court had occasion to consider the provisions of the 1956 Act and the letter, of the Central Government referred to in the letter of February 1968 (Annexure R 9/2) in Mohammad Shujat Ali and others v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 1631, wherein it was observed:  "In our opinion, in the setting in which the proviso to Section 115(7) is placed, the expression previous approval would include a general approval to the variation in the conditions of service within certain limits, indicated by the Union Government.
It has to be remembered that Article 309 of the Constitution gives, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, full powers to a State Government to make Rules.
The proviso to Section 115(7) limits that powers, but that limitation is removable by the Central Government by giving its previous approval.
In this context, we think that it could not have been the intention of Parliament that Service Rules made by State would be scrutinised in the minutes detail by the Central Government.
Conditions vary from state to state and the detail must be filled by each State according to its requirements.
The broad purpose underlying the proviso to Section 115(7) of the Act was to ensure that the conditions of service should not be changed except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
In other words, before embarking on varying the conditions of service, the State Governments should obtains the concurrence of the Central Government.
In the memorandum mentioned above, the Central Government, after examining various aspects, came to the conclusion that it would to be appropriate to provide for any protection in the matter of travelling allowance, disciplinary control, classification, appeal, conduct probation and departmental promotion.
In our opinion, this amounted to previous approval within the proviso to Section 115(7).
It may be mentioned that by this memorandum the State Governments were required to send copies of all new rules to the Central Government for its information.
Therefore, in our opinion, there is no force in the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner and we hold that the rules were validly made."
It will be seen that the Supreme Court held the letter of the Central Government of March 27, 1957 to be a blanket prior approval of the Central Government with regard to the matters enumerated therein and, consequently, in those matters conditions of service, even to the detriment of persons appointed prior to the Re-organisation could be changed and the prior approval of the Central Government to such change would be assumed.
29.
A similar view was taken by the Supreme Court in JK Vasavada v. Chandrakanta Chiman Lal Bhavsar, 1975(2) SLR 522 : AIR 1975 (SC) 2089, where after Re-organisation the passing of an examination was prescribed as a qualification for promotion.
This was held to be valid in view of the said letter of the Central Government of March 27,1957, which was construed as prior approval of the Central Government in terms of Sections 115(7) of the States Re-organisation Act, 1956.
30.
It was thus contended on behalf of the appellants that the amendment in the Public Health Rules prescribing a Degree in Engineering as an essential qualification for promotion to Class-I suffered from no constitutional or other legal infirmity.
Preference for the view of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Shujat Ali and JK Vasavada cases (supra) over that in TR Kapur's case (supra) where, as pointed out earlier, the attention of the Supreme Court had not been drawn to the letter of the Central Government of February 1968 (Annexure R-9/2), was strongly urged.
In other words, it was said that had this letter been placed before the Supreme Court, in that case, no invalidity would have been attributed to the impugned amendment, with reference to Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
31.
There may appear to be considerable substance in the contention raised but what confronts us is the biding judicial precedent of TR Kapur's case (supra).
What we have before us is not a choice of following one view of the Supreme Court in preference to another, rather what we are, in fact, being asked to do, would virtually amount to disregarding a judgment of the Supreme Court directly applicable to the point in issue, which we are, with respect, not empowered to do.
We are clearly bound by the Judgment in the earlier TR Kapur's case (supra) and in terms thereof we cannot but hold the impugned amendment to be invalid for non-compliance with section 82(6) of the Re- organisation Act, 1966.
This being so, the writ petitioners must clearly be held entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineers under the unamended rules with effect from the date when their juniors were so promoted i.e. October 18, 1989 and to be entitled to all consequential benefits.
This Letters Patent Appeal has thus to be disposed of in these terms.
32.
The other matter concerned Diploma-holders, who have been given the benefit of I military service towards seniority, is Letters Patent Appeal 246 of 1991 (D.R.
Mehta v. State of Haryana) arising out of Civil Writ Petition 1277 of 1988.
33.
The petitioners there were Degree-holders, who were appointed to Class-II Service in the Public Health Branch and later promoted as Executive Engineers in the year 1974 and 1975.
The respondents RK Dilbaghi and others were, on the other hand, Diploma-holders, who after their appointment to Class II had taken up military service during the Emergency, as Emergency Commissioned Officers.
On their return from military service the respondents were appointed to the post Executive Engineers in 1969-70.
Later by the order of the Haryana Government of December 26, 1986, (Annexure P-10), they were also given the benefit of military service towards seniority.
As a consequence thereof, they were given deemed dates of promotion as Executive Engineers from a couple of years earlier it is this order, giving them prior deemed dates of promotion that constitutes the main and primary challenge in this writ petition.
It was sought to be impugned on the ground that it adversely affected the vested interests of the petitioners and it had been passed without any opportunity of hearing being afforded to them.
34.
In dealing with this matter reference must at the very outset, be made to the order passed by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition C-5379-81 and 12756-5692 of 1985 on November 14, 1986, which reads as under :  "In the counter affidavit, in paragraph 6, it is stated "The State Government has already taken tentative decision to allow to the petitioners the benefit of military service rendered by them upto the termination of emergency i.e. 1011968.
The revised seniority list has been circulated subject to representations by the affected officers".
Our judgment after review entitled these officers to set credit for the period of military service rendered by them upto the termination of Emergency.
The tentative decision of the Government is, therefore, in accord with our decision.
We understand that the final seniority list after hearing the objections has also been prepared.
Nothing more needs to be done.
If any one is entitled to any consequential benefit as a result of the revised seniority list, they will submit their claims to the Government, who we hope will consider their representations.
If any of these persons, continue to have grievance, they will approach the High Court for appropriate relief."
It is pertinent to note that Shri HB Munjal, one of the petitioners in the present writ petition was a respondent in the said writ petitions before the Supreme Court.
After this decision of the Supreme Court, the writ petitioners cannot now be heard to complain against the benefit of military service having been given to the respondents, particularly, where it was also in pursuance of the order passed by the Supreme Court.
35.
Further it deserves note that a tentative seniority list was circulated on August 18, 1986, (after giving benefit of military service to the respondents).
The petitioners submitted representations against this seniority list.
An opportunity of hearing was afforded to them and it was thereafter that a final seniority list was issued.
Such being the circumstances, the learned single Judge rightly held that no fault could be found with the impugned order of December 26, 1986 (Annexure P-1).
Not without relevance is the further fact that there is no suggestion even that the respondents are not entitled to the benefit of military service or that the benefit granted to them was, in any manner, contrary to law.
36.
An attempt was next made to question the initial appointment of the respondents as Sub Divisional Engineers.
It will be recalled that they had been so appointed as far back as 1969, whereas the present writ petition was filed only in 1988.
Delay and laches on the part of the petitioners clearly bars them from questioning the appointment of the respondents at this belated stage.
37.
A plea was also sought to be raised that the respondents were not entitled to further promotion as Superintending Engineers, in view of the amendment made in the Public Health Branch Rules - the very amendment that has already been held to be ultra vires in CP Taneja's case (supra).
38.
Such being the circumstances, the judgment of the learned single Judge dismissing the writ petition, cannot but be upheld and affirmed.
39.
Wholly untenable is the grievance of the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition 3614 of 1991 (Ram Niwas Malik v. State of Haryana), it being directed against the consideration of the claim for promotion of the respondents to the post of Superintending Engineer.
The petitioner here is a Degree-holder, who was appointed as Assistant Engineer of April 1, 1970 and later promoted as Executive Engineer in May 1976, and then on February 21, 1990, he was further promoted as Superintending Engineer.
Respondents 2 to 5 are Diploma holders, who, it appears, had been appointed as Assistant Engineer and Executive Engineer prior to the appointment as such, of the petitioner.
According to the petitioner, after the decision or the learned single Judge in CP Taneja's case (supra), the respondent-State had initiated action for promotion of respondents 2 to 5 as Superintending Engineers, it was thus his prayer, that directions be issued restraining the respondent-State from disturbing his inter se seniority with respondents 2 to 5 in Class I.
This is, indeed, an unacceptable contention.
The matter of promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer of the persons concerned is being considered in accordance with our judgment in these matter, upholding the view of the learned single Judge, as indicated earlier.
No occasion is thus provided for granting to the petitioner the relief claimed.
This Writ petition is consequently hereby dismissed.
40.
We turn next to the two Letters Patent Appeals 15 of 1991 (Sal Pal Sikka v. Prithvi Raj Grover, Cross-Objections 8 of 1991 and 142 of 1991 (State of Haryana v. Prithvi Raj Grover) both arising from Civil Writ Petition 7966 of 1987 (Prithvi Raj Grover v. State of Haryana).
The matter here pertains to the Buildings and Road Branch Rules.
41.
The petitioner, Prithvi Raj Grover, after obtaining a Diploma in Mechanical Engineering, joined service on January 8, 1963 as Sectional Officer in the Punjab PWD (B&R) Branch.
On Reorganisation of the State of Punjab, he was allocated to the State of Haryana where on June 19, 1971, he was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer and thereby appointed to the Haryana Service of Engineers Class II Service.
Sarvshri Ishwar Kumar Madan and Sat Pal Sikka joined Class-II Service as Assistant Engineers on subsequent dates, namely, on June 9, 1973 and June 21, 1973.
Both these persons had degrees in Engineering and, it appears, that on this account they were promoted as Executive Engineers on October 5,1978, while the petitioner continued in Class-II Service.
Later, in 1980 when another vacancy arose, one OP Bahl was promoted and when Ishwar Kumar Madan was reverted, another person, Harbans Lal was so promoted.
42.
A reference to the record shows that by the time the two vacancies of Executive Engineers arose in 1978, which as mentioned earlier were filled by Sarvshri Ishwar Kumar Madan and Sat Pal Sikka, the seniority list had not yet been finalised.
The petitioner, on his part, has made a representation on May 28, 1978 seeking the fixation of inter se seniority of Sub Divisional Engineers (Mechanical) for confirmation and promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
This representation was, however, declined in December 1978 (Annexure RIV).
It was only in the year 1987 that the revised final seniority list was eventually issued.
The relief that the petitioner now seeks is that he be considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
the date when persons junior to him were so promoted, a relief which cannot indeed be denied to him, particularly having regard to the judgment of the Supreme Court in AS Parmar's case (supra), where as mentioned earlier, it was held that Diploma holders too were entitled to promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
There is then the later judgment of this Court in BM Sharma's case (supra) holding the impugned amendment prescribing a degree in Engineering as an essential qualification for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer to be ultra vires.
Such being the circumstances, we hereby endorse and uphold the judgment of the learned single Judge and consequently dismiss these appeals.
43.
Finally, we come to the two writ petitions pertaining to the Irrigation Branch Rules, these being Civil Writ Petition 8721 and 8722 of 1992 (SL Sarwalia and BK Sangwan v. State of Haryana).
44.
Both the writ petitioners are degree-holders, while the respondents are diploma holders.
The petitioners were appointed as Assistant Engineers in July 1971.
They seek to challenge the respondents' being considered for promotion to the posts of Executive Engineers on the ground that by the amendment made in Irrigation Branch Rules in June 1984, a Degree in Engineering has now been prescribed as an essential qualification for promotion to this post and, therefore, the respondents were not eligible for such appointment.
45.
Here again what stands in the way of the petitioners as degree holders, in the earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in TR Kapur's case (supra).
No doubt as discussed earlier, the invalidity of the impugned amendment in the rules as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 has to be so construed only with regard to its retrospective effect and not its prospective application, but its legal infirmity with reference to section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 still persists.
This being so, the petitioners cannot claim any relief on the basis of the impugned amendment.
46.
Even though it has now been rendered merely academic, the contention raised by the counsel for the respondents may be noticed.
The proposition sought to be canvassed being that by the mere acquisition of eligibility, a vested right accrued to the respondents for consideration for promotion.
The impugned amendment it was argued having come after they have become eligible under the existing rules, it must be held to operate against them with retrospective effect and was, thus, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
This is, indeed, an untenable substantively appointed to the post and could contention.
A complete answer to this is provided by K Jagdeesan's case (supra) where it will be recalled, the impugned amendment, which came after the petitioner there had become eligible for promotion was upheld and it was further observed that it was not and nor could it be treated as retrospective.
47.
In the situation being what it is, what has to be seen are the unamended provisions of the Irrigation Branch Rules.
In terms thereof, as held in AS Parmar's case (supra), Diploma holders too are eligible for appointment to Class I posts.
No occasion, thus, arises for granting to the petitioners the relief claimed.
Both the writ petitions are, consequently, hereby dismissed.
48.
All the Letter Patents Appeals and the writ petitions are disposed of in the manner indicated.
In the circumstances, however, there will be no order as to costs.