Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The 35 petitioners are lecturers in different Government Colleges.
They are aggrieved by the action of the State in declaring respondent No. 4, Mr.
US Bhardwaj, as senior to them.
The action is being primarily challenged on two grounds.
Firstly, it is claimed that the services of respondent No. 4 who was serving in BM College, Hodel (hereinafter referred to as 'the college') had been terminated by the College on March 15, 1978.
Consequently, he was not in the service of the College at the time it was taken over by the Government i.e. on December 26, 1979 as also at the time when the staff was absorbed in government service on February 20, 1980.
On this premises, it is claimed that the induction of the respondent in government service is void ab initio.
It is further claimed that the designation of the said respondent as a Senior Lecturer vide order dated March 13,1990 and the consequential grant of seniority vide order dated March 27, 1990, whereby he has been raised from Sr. No. 877-B to 90-J is wholly illegal.
A few facts may be noticed,  2.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed as a Senior Lecturer in English at the College on July 21, 1973, vide order dated March 15, 1978, the services of respondent No. 4 were terminated.
He submitted an appeal to the Kurukshetra University to which the college was affiliated Vide order dated August 8, 1978 the University conveyed its inability to appoint an arbitration Committee in the appeal against the termination submitted by respondent No. 4.
Thereafter, on December 26, 1979, the Secretary to Government Haryana conveyed the sanction of the Govt. Haryana to the taking over by the Government of BM College Hodel to the director of Public Instructions, It was inter alia observed in this order that "any such members of the staff of the College as are considered suitable for absorption in Govt. service by the Haryana Public Service Commission shall be taken, who shall be treated as new entrants.
The college was actually taken over w.e.f.
February 20, 1980.
By order dated February 20, 1980 the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana ordered the appointment of 15 teachers "Out of the list of staff supplied by the management.
The name of respondent No. 4 was not mentioned in this order.
3.
It appears that respondent No. 4 along with two other teachers submitted a representation to the Chief Minister, Haryana on January 28, 1979.
A perusal of the Official record indicates that the representation was submitted to the Chief Minister at Hodel on January 27, 1979.
According to the note on the file, the case had to be got examined and submitted to the Chief Minister within a fortnight.
It appears that the Assistant District Attorney gave his opinion regarding the case on August, 14, 1980.
He opined that injustice had been caused to Mr. Bhardwaj and if considered proper the matter may be recommended to the Government for his immediate appointment.
It appears that the proposal of the Assistant District Attorney was approved by the Deputy Director as also the Director on the same day.
Thereafter, vide order dated November 27, 1980, respondent No. 4 was appointed as a Lecturer in Govt. College, Faridabad on purely ad hoc basis for a period of six months.
On October 21, 1986 the Govt. ordered the appointment of the said respondent along with two others as Lecturers in officiating capacity w.e.f.
February 20, 1980 in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission.
By this order, it was further directed that Mr. Bhardwaj will not claim any arrears of salary etc. for the period from February 20, 1980 to December 2,1980 when he had joined at Govt. College, Faridabad.
It is averred that respondent No. 4 submitted a representation dated December 26, 1987 claiming adjustment as a Senior Lecturer as had been done in the cases of Mr. BR Gupta and Mr. RK Jain, in pursuance to the judgment of the Court.
When this representation was no decided, the said respondent filed C.W.P.
No. 13568 of 1989 in the High Court.
This writ petition was disposed of by the Motion Bench with the following order on October 25, 1989 :-  "Contends that the claim of the petitioner as reflected in Annexures P. 4 and P. 6 is not being decided in the light of the judgment of this Court in RSA No. 2455 of 1987 (State of Haryana v. Bant Rai) decided on November 29, 1988.
In the light of the above noted factual position, we deem it appropriate to direct the respondent authorities to decide the representation of the petitioner in the light of the said judgment by passing a speaking order within a period of two months from the receipt of copy of this order.
This petition thus stands disposed of as indicated above."
4.
The petitioners apprehending as adverse decision by the Government submitted a representation dated February 5, 1980.
It is averred that without taking the representation into consideration, the Government vide orders dated March 13, 1990 ordered the adjustment of respondent No. 4 as a Senior- Lecturer.
Thereafter, vide order dated March 27, 1990 the Govt. declared him senior to more that 750 college Lecturers.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
This action has been challenged primarily on the grounds, noticed above.
5.
Two separate written statements have been filed.
In the written statements filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 3, it has been inter alia averred that respondent No. 4 was not "in service at the time of taking over the college and as such he was not taken into government service at that time.
The services of respondent No. 4 were terminated by the then Governing Body of BM College, Hodel, w.e.f.
1531978 due to indiscipline and misconduct.
Respondent No. 4 made an appeal against his termination to the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, which was rejected by the University being time-barred.
The respondent No. 4 made representations to the Govt. and after consideration, he was appointed as Lecturer vide order No...... dated 27111980 (copy attached Annexure R-2) with immediate effect in terms of Haryana Government letter dated 26121979 as a new intrant.
He joined the Government College, Faridabad on 2121980."
It has been further averred that it is in pursuance to the directions of the Division Bench in the order dated October 25, 1989, the respondent No. 4 was given seniority as Senior Lecturer at 90-J in place of old seniority at 877-B as Lecture.
It has been further mentioned that the case of respondent No. 4 was different as he was not in service on the date of the taking over of the college.
On representation of respondent No. 4, the Government "after considering the case decided to appoint him as Lecturer as a fresh entrant."
It is further mentioned that respondent No. 4 was given the benefit of seniority as Senior Lecturer keeping in view the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in R.S.A.
2455 of 1987.
This has been done subject to the decision of Special Leave Petition filed in RSA No. 2455 of 1987.
6.
A separate written statement has been filed by respondent No. 4.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner have concealed the material fact that the respondent had been appointed as a Senior Lecturer in the College on July 21, 1973 and was confirmed as such w.e.f.
July 21, 1973 in the grade of Rs. 400-800.
It has been further averred that the respondent had been appointed in Government Service vide order dated November 27, 1980 which clearly shows that he was previously working in the college.
It has also been averred by way of the preliminary objection that a joint petition filed after 11 years cannot be entertained.
On merits, it has been stated that at the time of the taking over the college of respondent's appeal against the illegal order of termination was pending before the Govt. As such the Government had not given fresh appointment to the respondent, but had taken over his service alongwith the other staff of the College.
The respondent maintains that the orders treating him as a Senior Lecturer and granting him seniority are legal and valid.
Both sides have filed replications and additional affidavits.
7.
I have heard Mr. Sudershan Goel for the petitioner and M/s. Jaswant Singh and IS Balhara for the respondents.
8.
The fact that may be noticed at the outset is that vide order dated January 8, 1992 the petition had been dismissed in default.
At the time learned counsel for the State and respondents 4 were present.
An application for restoration of the case was moved by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Vide order dated January 17, 1992, the petition was restored to its original number.
The case was then heard on January 23, 1992 and on subsequent dates.
During that time an additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the petitioners with CM application No. 1126 of 1992.
Reply thereto was filed by respondent No. 4 vide his affidavit dated February 19, 1992.
Initially, no objection to the restoration of the petition vide orders dated January 17, 1992 was raised.
At the time of final hearing Mr. IS Balhara had initially stated that the case could not have been restored without notice to the counsel for the respondents.
This objection was, however, immediately withdrawn by the learned counsel.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that respondent No. 4 was initially recruited as a Senior Lecturer in English.
This post carried a pay scale higher than that of Lecturer subsequently, however, a uniform pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 was fixed for all the posts of lecturers.
It is further evident from the record that the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Senior Lecturer was terminated by the College vide order dated March 15, 1978.
His appeal against this order was dismissed as time-barred by the University.
On his representation to the Government, respondent No. 4 was undoubtedly appointed as Lecturers w.e.f.
February 20, 1980 in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 but nothing has been produced on the record to show that the order of termination passed on March 15, 1978 had been set aside.
In fact Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned Counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 to 3, after consulting the dealing assistant from the office of the Director Higher Education (Mr. Ramesh Anand) conceded before me that the order of termination had never been set aside.
It is thus apparent that respondent No. 4 was not one of the members of the staff of the College on December 26, 1979 when the Government had decided to take over the College and to absorb the teachers in government service.
Thereafter, vide coder dated November 27,1980, the respondent was appointed as a Lecturer.
Subsequently, this appointment was made effective from February 20, 1980.
It is further clear from the record that respondent No. 4 had accepted this position and it was only on December 26, 1987 that he had represented to the Government for being treated as a Senior Lecturer on the basis of the decision of the Civil Court in the cases of Bant Rai Gupta and RK Jain.
The cases of these two teachers were distinguishable from that of respondent No. 4 inasmuch as their services had not been terminated at any stage.
In such a situation, the action of the Government in treating respondent No. 4 as a Senior Lecturer in the service of the Government was not correct.
He was not working as a Senior Lecturer at the time of the taking over of the College, and as such the question of his absorption in that capacity in the service of the College did not arise.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioners further contended that the action of the department in accepting the representation of respondent No. 4 after a lapse of seven years and declaring him senior to them without affording any opportunity to the petitioners was violative of the principles of natural justice.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners had no locus standi to dispute either the appointment or the grant of seniority to the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the respondents have also placed reliance on the decision of this Court in State of Haryana v. Bant Rai Gupta etc. (R.S.A.
No. 2455 of 1987) decided on November 29, 1988 to contend that the petitioners were not eligible to be heard.
11.
The principles of natural justice cannot be "cribbed, cabined or confined" within a "strait-Jacket".
The application and consequences have to be examined with reference to the facts each case.
Further the consistence view taken by this Court is that the seniority cannot be altered unless the persons, who are likely to be affected, have been afforded a due and a reasonable opportunity to put forth their view points.
It is no doubt correct that the Division Bench while deciding BR Gupta's case (supra) had dismissed the appeal of the States of Haryana and upheld the decree of the Civil Court by which the claim for a declaration that the plaintiffs (BR Gupta etc.) were entitled to continue as Senior Lecturers and also to remain in the same seniority list of senior lecturers ..." had been upheld.
It is also correct that the writ petition filed by certain lecturers, viz; C.W.P.
No. 2310 of 1987 (RK Sehgal & others v. State of Haryana) by which it had been prayed that the decree of the Civil Court could not be made effective over the writ petitioners was dismissed.
The claim of the writ petitioners was declined on the twin ground that the petition cannot possibly be treated as an appeal against the judgment of the Lower Appellate Court dated March 28,1987" and secondly on the ground that in view of the observations of their lordships of the Supreme Court in A Janardhana v. Union of India, (1983) 2 SCR 936, the petitioners "were not necessary parties to the litigations."
Such is not the case here.
Respondents No. 4 has not got a decree of any court in his favour.
The civil Court has not declared that respondent No. 4 was a Senior Lecturer on February 20, 1980 when the college was taken over.
It has also not been held that respondent No. 4 was entitled to be granted seniority amongst the senior lecturers.
Further, no order of termination had been passed against Bant Rai Gupta etc.
The two plaintiffs whose case was decided by this Court had apparently remained in continuous service of the College as Senior Lecturer upto the date of its being taken over by the Government.
As such, the factual position in the two cases is different, Further, the petitioner had admittedly not made a claim regarding seniority from the date of his appointment in the year 1980 till December 26, 1987.
Thereafter, he had approached the Court through C.W.P.
No. 13568 of 1989, which was disposed of, as already noticed, with the direction to the authorities, "to decide the representations of the petitioner in the light of the said judgment by passing a speaking order..." since this order had been passed without any notice to the respondents, the factum regarding the termination of the service of respondent No. 4 vide orders dated March 15, 1978 could also not be brought to the notice of the Court.
While complying with the directions of this Court the Government was duty bound to consider the effect of the order of termination.
This does not appear to have been done.
Still further, none of the persons who were likely to be affected having been afforded any opportunity, there was nobody who could have brought this fact to light.
As a result the impugned orders were passed.
Respondents No. 4 was declared to be a Senior Lecturer from the date of the taking over of the college and was also granted seniority.
Not only that the rights of the petitioners were affected but even the complete factual position was not considered and noticed by the respondent.
In the peculiar circumstances of this case, I am of the considered view that the respondents had acted in violation of the principles of natural justice.
If the petitioners had been afforded some opportunity, they could have brought the factual position to the notice of the authorities.
Further, it also appears that in spite of the submissions of the two representations specifically pointing out that the services of respondent No. 4 had been terminated prior to the taking over of the college.
The respondents mechanically accepted his claim.
Accordingly even if one were to ignore the claim of the petitioners regarding the violation of the principles of natural justice, the case of respondent No. 4 is not exactly similar to that of Bani Rai Gupta and no benefit on the analogy thereof could have been afforded to him.
He was appointed as a Lecturer in Government service vide order dated November, 27, 1980 with immediate effect" (emphasis supplied).
This appointment could at best be operative from November 27, 1980 in the cadre of Lecturers.
Thereafter, vide orders dated October 21, 1986, the appointments was made "as a Lecturer in officiating capacity (college Cadre) in the scale of Rs. 700-40-1100/50-1600 w.e.f.
20.2.1980..." consequently, even if the initial appointment is considered to be w..e.f. February 20, 1980 it was only in the cadre of lecturers and not that of senior Lecturers.
Even on facts, I am of the opinion that respondents No. 4 did not have a justifiable claim regarding seniority amongst the Senior Lecturers.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that he had kept quiet for seven years before submitting a representation to the Government.
12.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be mentioned that the preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of a joint petition is wholly without any merit.
All the petitioners have a common grievance and are aggrieved by the same orders.
In such a situation, they were not required to file separate petition.
Nor can I find the petitioners guilty of any misrepresentation.
It has been averred in the written statement what respondent No. 4 was taken into government service vide order dated November 27, 1980.
It has not been shown that the petitioners were actually aware of this order.
Further, the respondent having been appointed w.e.f.
February 20, 1980 through the orders issued in the year 1986, the petitioners cannot be accused of withholding any relevant information from the Court.
13.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders are set aside.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.