Mishra, J - WP No. 10116 of 1983 is directed against the order of  T.S.E.
case No. 44 of 1980 by the second respondent therein viz. the Assistant Commissioner of Labour II, Madras, under which order he has held that no appeal is maintainable under Section 41(1) of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act against the order of termination of service passed by the management of Southern Structurals Ltd the first respondent therein WP No. 17376 of 1991 is directed against the order of termination passed by the said respondent as well as to quash the service rules so far as clause 6(4) thereof is concerned.
2.
Relevant facts as set out in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petitions are as follows : Petitioner was employed as a Stores Officer in the service of the respondent-Southern Structurals Ltd, when according to him his service was unlawfully terminated by order dated 191980.
He had joined the service of the respondent in July, 1962 as Cashier-cum-Accounts Assistant and risen to the status of the Stores Officer by and by in July, 1974.
In March, 1975 he was transferred to Structural Engineers and Technicians Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd In July, 1977 he was recalled to the stores at Pattabiram.
In September 1979 he was transferred to the Data Collection and Statistics section of the Industrial Engineering Department, where he remained for a brief period of 13 days only after which he was recalled to the Accounts Department.
According to the petitioner he discovered during 1975 that the personal assistant to the then Managing Director of the company had in collusion with a typist at the Head Office been misappropriating the share capital of members.
This led to the disciplinary action against some of the guilty persons.
The Managing Director did not take this kindly and subjected the petitioner to a space of transfers, following by a charge memo in March, 1978, alleging that the petitioner was responsible for the missing of two plates from the stores.
On petitioner's explanation this charge was not followed up.
In December, 1979 a further memo emanated as if one forged round was missing from the stores.
The said charge was also not followed up on petitioner's explanation about the round having been consumed.
In May, 1980 another charge memo came up that colour coding of stock had not been carried out by the petitioner.
The petitioner answered this charge also.
However, the petitioner was transferred to Ramagundam project in Andhra Pradesh on 2281980 and asked to join duty on or before 2781980.
The petitioner represented to the General Manager and sought time to report for duty and also represented on 2881980 requesting for a month's time as his wife had undergone a major surgery from which she was yet to recover and to meet her medical expenses he was required to dispose of certain properties with respect to which certain execution proceedings was pending in Court.
The petitioner was served with another office memo to join at Ramagundam before 1091980.
This order the petitioner received on 4.9.1980.
However, before the petitioner could proceed he received another memo dated 191980 purported to be one month's notice of termination of service on the ground that he had disobeyed the transfer order dated 2281980.
The petitioner represented against the said termination.
This termination order was withdrawn on 891980.
The petitioner was also informed that the second transfer order also stood cancelled.
3.
While so according to the petitioner he was informed by letter dated 891980 that his representation against the transfer to Ramagundam was rejected and this was followed by a letter dated 1791980 containing a charge-sheet for certain alleged omissions.
Under this letter the petitioner was called upon to explain the charge within 48 hours.
The petitioner has stated :  "While so by letter dated 1791980 the respondent issued a charge sheet for alleged omission on my part and gave me 48 hours to explain why disciplinary action should not be taken against me.
The charges were vague and various office orders which I was unaware of were referred to.
The charges also related to acts in 1977, 1978 and 1979.
I sought substantiation of the same and requested for production of records.
But by order dated 3101980 vide the month's notice dated 191980 my services were terminated."
Petitioner filed an appeal under Section 41 of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act.
T.S.E.
Case No. 44 of 1980.
The said case was dismissed by order dated 2771983 on the sole ground that the respondent-company was exempted under GOMs.
No. 545 being an establishment under the Government of Tamil Nadu.
4.
WP No. 10116 of 1983 was admitted to hearing.
To avoid any technical objection that the order impugned in the said petition was one passed in appeal under Section 41(1) of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act and thus the termination order passed by the first respondent had not been questioned in the said writ petition the petitioner as advised filed WP No. 17376 of 1991.
Both petitions have been heard together and are being disposed of by a common order.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner conceded that in view of the order in GO Ms. No. 545, dated 10.2.1950 of the Government of Tamil Nadu since the respondent-company is a Government company the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act are not applicable and accordingly the appeal under Section 41(1) of the said Act was not competent.
He has thus given up any challenge to the validity or correctness of the order in T.S.E.
case No. 44 of 1980.
He has however contended that on the facts as aforementioned the order terminating the petitioner's services afflicted by malice in law is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
6.
In the counter affidavit filed in W.M.P.
No. 21051 of 1991 in WP No. 10116 of 1983 on behalf of the first respondent it is stated that the petitioner's services with the first respondent company was governed by the service rules of the first respondent company which were/are in the nature of contract of service.
It is further stated as follows :  "6.
The first respondent-company transferred the petitioner vide its letter dated 2281980 from its factory at Pattabiram to Ramagundam project where the first respondent-company was doing certain contract work.
But the petitioner by his letter dated 2881980 refused to obey the said transfer order of the first respondent company and stated that he would not be in a position to go to Ramagundam site immediately due to certain domestic problems and that he was willing to visit not only Ramagundam site but other sites also once in a while to organise the accounting billing work, collections etc. 7.
Since the first respondent company wanted to reorganise and restructure its accounts department by efficient persons and to weed out the inefficient ones and since no other suitable work was available for the petitioner the first respondent company terminated the services of the petitioner by giving one month's notice vide its letter dated 1st September, 1980.
8.
Though the first respondent company directed vide its letter dated 4.9.1980 to proceed to Ramagundam Super Thermal Power Project Ramagundam site before 10th September, 1980 to organise and take care of the complete accounting side in view of the notice of termination issued on 191980 the first respondent company cancelled the abovesaid order dated 4.9.1980 vide its office order dated 891980.
The chargesheet dated 1791980 issued by the first respondent company to the petitioner was only to find out the truth in the alleged charges against the petitioner.
The fact that the termination notice preceded the said charge sheet clearly shows that the petitioner's service were not terminated for any misconduct.
9.
As said above the petitioner's services were terminated by the first respondent company only for reasonable cause.
Against the said termination order the petitioner preferred an appeal bearing No. 44 of 1980 before the Deputy Commissioner of Labour Madras under Section 41 of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act.
The said appeal was dismissed by the second respondent as not maintainable in view of GO Ms. No. 545, dated 10.2.1950 which exempted all persons employed in any kind of work in factories and governed by the Factories Act, 1948 from all the provisions of the said Act.
Against the impugned order the petitioner preferred the above writ petition in the year 1983."
7.
In another return filed in WP No. 17376 of 1991 it is stated that  "the respondent company refute the allegation that the petitioner's service was terminated in an arbitrary and whimsical manner.
It is only for the reason of refusal by the petitioner to join duty at Ramagundam site his service was terminated after giving one month's notice for the same."
In this affidavit the first respondent has taken the stand that the Government of Tamil Nadu was holding 924% of share holding in the equity capital of the respondent but holding share capital by the Government of Tamil Nadu does not amount to having deep and pervasive control over the affairs of day to day management/ administration of the respondent and only in the capacity as shareholder the Government of Tamil Nadu is appointing Directors to the extent of its shareholding.
It is further stated : "Further the Article of Association of the respondent company does not require any prior permission from the Government of Tamil Nadu for running affairs of the company.
In fact neither the Memorandum of Association nor the Articles of Association of the respondent company provide for any power or control or right in favour of the Government of Tamil Nadu to issue any direction or to regulate or interfere with the business or affairs of the respondent company.
Even the Directors nominated by the Government of Tamil Nadu are completely free from Governmental control in discharge of their functions.
The respondent company is doing business/manufacturing activity in relation to cranes and structural works like any ordinary person would do and as such is not enjoying any monopoly status conferred by the Government or Corporations like Air India or Indian Airlines.
While the Government of Tamil Nadu has control over the respondent company to the extent mentioned above it cannot constitute deep and pervasive state control which is a pre-requisite for the respondent company to be construed as a State agency or instrumentality.
The functions of respondent company are not of any public importance nor are they related to Government functions.
Facts clearly indicate that the respondent company is not an instrumentality or agency of the Government .
"After taking the above stand in this counter-affidavit it is further stated : "Even though the respondent company might fall under the definition of establishment under State Government as per Section 4(1)(c) of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act for reasons mentioned above the respondent company does not fall under the category of `other authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The respondent is advised to submit that all establishments which may fall under the category of `Establishment under State Government' under Section 4(1)(c) of TNSE Act do not necessarily fall under the category of `other authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Either for the reason that the respondent-company might fall under the category of establishment under State Government or by reason of the averments made by the respondent in the counter statement before the authority under the TNSE Act, it is not possible to state that respondent company is falling under the heading `other authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India."
8.
The stand thus that the first respondent is neither an instrumentality nor an agency of the Government nor an authority under Article 12 of the Constitution of India would appear to be in conflict with the previous statements that the respondent has been making in the sense that to oust the jurisdiction of the appellate authority under the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act, it was maintained that the respondent company was a Government company and to oust the jurisdiction of this court was suggested that even though there has been an overwhelming shareholding in the hands of the State Government, the State Government has been appointing Directors and though only its nominees were managing the affairs of the company the Government never had that deep and pervasive control upon the affairs of the company which would convert it into an agency or instrumentality of the State Government.
Keeping this controversy in mind the court on 1321992 ordered as follows :  "My attention has been drawn to a counter statement filed on behalf of the respondent company before the Deputy Commissioner of Labour in which it is stated inter alia : "The respondent-company is a factory managed by the Government of Tamil Nadu and it is covered by the Factories Act, 1948, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 and not by the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act, 1947."
"The authorised capital of the respondent company is Rs. 350 lakhs and the paid up capital of the respondent company is Rs. 14885 lakhs divided into 6260 lakhs equity shares of Rs. 225 each amounting to Rs. 14085 lakhs and 2 lakhs 933% preference shares of Rs. 4 each amounting to Rs. 8,00,000 and out of the 6260 lakhs of equity shares the Government of Tamil Nadu owns 5780 lakhs equity shares which amounts to 924% of the total equity capital of the respondent company.
The Board of Directors of the respondent-company consists of eight directors out of which six directors are the nominees of the Government of Tamil Nadu.
The appointment of any Director on the Board of Directors of the respondent company has to be approved by the Government of Tamil Nadu.
The Government of Tamil Nadu has given counter guarantee to the extent of Rs. 535 lakhs in favour of the bankers of the respondent company in respect of the guarantees and various other credit facilities provided by the bankers to the respondent company.
All the facts stated above will go to prove that the entire control and management of the respondent company is with the Government of Tamil Nadu and hence even assuming without admitting that the respondent company is an establishment as defined under the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act, 1947 it is an establishment under the Government of Tamil Nadu and so the respondent company is exempted from the provisions of the said act according to Section 4(1)(c) of the said Act."
In an affidavit filed before this Court however in WP No. 17376 of 1991 an attempt is made to suggest that the entire control of the company is not that the State Government and for the reasons of its shares and other factors as stated it cannot be said that it is under the control of the State Government and it is a State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The counter-affidavit in the writ petition has a definite talent of facts to accept writ jurisdiction of this Court for the reason that fundamental rights of any person may not be enforced by a writ unless it is against a State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Before I make any order as to whether there is an attempt to mislead the court by a statement in the counter affidavit before this Court and thus any action is warranted it is necessary that all the records pertaining to the establishment and the control upon the affairs of the company by the State Government/any other person are called for and examined by the Court.
It is also necessary to know who besides the State Government held the shares of this company and whether those besides the Government holding the shares of the company are themselves a State under Article 12 of the Constitution or not.
There are many informations of this kind which are not disclosed in the counter affidavit filed before this Court.
Thus it is hereby ordered that the respondents shall produce before this Court all the relevant records showing how the company was created who controlled it and how it cannot be stated to be a Government Company who besides the State Government are members of the company (share holders) and who besides the Government of the State excised any control with respect to the affairs of the company.
All the relevant records pertaining to the above must be produced before this Court at the next hearing, put up next week.
No records however as directed under the above order have been produced.
A further affidavit has been filed on behalf of the first respondent stating inter alia that the aforementioned stand was taken due to the fact that in CV Raman v. The Management of Bank of India, Madras, (1985)2 M.L.J.
439, it was observed that there was a distinction between "an establishment under the Government" under Section 4(1)(c) of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act and an "authority" under Article 12 of Constitution of India "it was also observed that it cannot be gainsaid that the principle applicable to the determination of an `authority' under Article 12 of Constitution of India can bodily be imported in deciding the meaning of `establishment' under the Government under Section 4(1)(c) of Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act."
It is thereafter said,  "Because of this I presumed that in spite of the averments made by the respondent before the authority 41(1) of the TNSE Act about the extent of the control by the Government of Tamil Nadu over the respondent I may be able to convince this Hon'ble court that the respondent does not fall within the definition of `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India by reason of the abovesaid distinction."
After saying so it is said :  "I hereby unconditionally apologise without any reservation whatsoever for having made out the above submission that the respondent is not "state" under Article 12 of the Constitution of India."
It is not understandable why if there were/are materials that could justify the stand of the respondent company that it was not a State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India it should abstain from producing relevant records and materials and instead decide to file the affidavit aforementioned.
The court at this stage can proceed with the presumption that the first respondent is an instrumentality/agency of the State of Tamil Nadu.
9.
In a Full Bench judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Sri Konaseema Co-operative Central Bank Ltd v. N Seetharama Raju, A.I.R. 1990 AP 171, a detailed study had been made with reference to various pronouncements of the Supreme Court as to how a court should approach to determine whether a writ should issue to a certain authority or not.
The Full Bench summarised the rule as follows :  "From the above discussion the following propositions emerge : (i) If a particular co-operative society can be characterised as a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution (applying the tests evolved by the Supreme Court in that behalf it would also be an `authority' within the meaning and for the purpose of Article 226 of the Constitution.
In such a situation an order passed by a Society against its employee in violation of the bye-laws can be corrected by way of a writ petition.
This is not because the bye-laws have the force of law but on the ground that having framed the bye-laws prescribing the service conditions of its employees the society must follow them in the interest of fairness.
If it is left to the sweet will and pleasure of the society either to follow or not to follow the bye-laws it would be inherently arbitrary and may very likely give rise to discriminatory treatment.
A society which is `state' has to act in conformity with Article 14 and for that reason it will be made to follow the bye-laws.
(ii) Even if a society cannot be characterised as a `state' within a meaning of Article 12 even so a writ would lie against it to enforce a statutory public duty which an employee is entitled to enforce against the society.
In such a case it is unnecessary to go into the question whether the society is being treated as a (`person' or `an authority') within the meaning of Article 226 of the Constitution.
What is material is the nature of the statutory duty placed upon it and the court will enforce such statutory public duty.
(iii) The bye-laws made by a co-operative society registered under the A.P.
Co-operative Societies Act do not have the force of law.
They are in the nature of contract terms of contract between the society and its employees or between the society and its members as the case may be.
Hence where a society cannot be characterised as a `state' the service conditions of its employees through a writ petition.
However in the matter of termination of service of the employees of a co-operative society Section 47 of the AP Shops and Establishments Act provides a certain protection and since the said protection is based upon public policy it will be enforced in an appropriate case by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Ordinarily of course an employee has to follow the remedies provided by the AP Shops and Establishments Act, but in appropriate case, this court will interfere under Article 226 if the violation of a statutory public duty is established.
It is immaterial which act or rule casts such a statutory public duty.
(iv) Mandamus certiorari and prohibition are public law remedies.
They are not available to enforce private law rights.
Every act of a society which may be a `state' within the meaning of Article 12 does not necessarily belong to public law field.
A society which is a `state' may have its private law rights just like a Government.
A contractual obligation which is not statutory cannot be enforced by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Prior to entering into correct however Article 14 operates as explained by the Supreme Court in EE and C Ltd v. State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1975 SC 266 and Ramana Dayaram Shetty, A.I.R. 1979 S.C.
1628."
10.
In a series of judgments the Supreme Court has pointed out how the word `authority' in Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not restricted to the same meaning as the words `other authorities' should receive in the definition of the `state' in Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The former must receive a liberal meaning.
The latter is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights.
The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting the rights of the people should not be put into watertight compartment.
It should remain flexible to meet the requirements of various circumstances.
This analysis is found in one of the latest judgments of the Supreme Court in Chander Mohan Khanna v. NCERT, 1991(6) SLR 68 : 1991(1) SCT 106 (SC).
The Supreme Court has said :  "Article 12 should not be stretched so as to bring in every autonomous body which has some nexus with the Government within the sweep of the expression "State".
A wide enlargement of the meaning must be tampered by a wise limitation.
It must not be lost sight of that in the modern concept of welfare state, independent institution, corporation and agency are generally subject to State control.
The State control does not render such bodies as "State" under Article 12.
The State control however vast and pervasive is not determinative.
The financial contribution by the State is also not conclusive.
The combination of State aid coupled with an unusual degree of control over the management and policies of the body and rendering of an important public service being the obligatory functions of the State may largely point out that the body is "state".
If the Government operates behind a corporate veil, carrying out governmental activity and governmental functions of vital public importance there may be little difficulty in identifying the body as "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution."
11.
In view of the above statement of law to which no exception can be taken it is clear that an `authority' for the purpose of Article 226 of the Constitution of India need not be an authority under Article 12 of the Constitution of India and any other authority for the purpose of Article 121 of the Constitution of India may, in a given case, be an instrumentality or agency of the Government of the State.
It is not the look of the body concerned.
It is its character that will decide whether it is an authority for the purpose of Article 226 of the Constitution of India or an authority for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and whether its name or look is different on account of the veil or cloth.
The Court, in such cases, shall pierce the veil and notice the true character of the person concerned to determine whether it is an `authority' for the purpose of Article 226 of the Constitution of India or/and authority for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution.
An authority under Article 12 of the Constitution of India shall always be an authority for the purpose of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12.
On the facts that are available on the record it can safely be said that the petitioner has discharged the onus to prove that the respondent company is a Government company which is just an agency or instrumentality of the Government of the State of Tamil Nadu and the State is in complete control of all its affairs.
If the respondent company wanted to show otherwise it had to discharge a heavy onus and show by cogent material that notwithstanding the overwhelming share control and almost every Director of the company being a nominee of the State it retained its independence as a company and has not been under the deep and pervasive control of the Government of the State of Tamil Nadu.
13.
Coming to the facts there is almost no controversy or little controversy that there has been an enquiry of any kind conducted into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
While on the one hand certain charges were levelled against the petitioner on the other hand the respondent company decided to terminate his services on a ground which had ceased to be a ground for the reason of the order having been recalled and a further time granted to the petitioner to join his duties at Ramagundam.
14.
There are sufficient elements in the order of termination simpliciter to show that it had been contrived to avoid enquiry into the charges that had been levelled against the petitioner.
The impugned order terminating the petitioner's service for the reason that it used the alleged disobedience of the transfer order as the ground is stricken by arbitrariness and for the reason that instead of proceeding with the charges levelled against the petitioner the respondent company decided to terminate the petitioner's service on a ground non est, it is hit by malice in law.
For these reasons, there can be no hesitation in holding that the order of termination of the services of the petitioner issued by the first respondent is violative of Arts.
14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
15.
It is however stated that this Court should decline to interfere with the order of termination of the services of the petitioner because that order has been challenged only in the second Writ petition that had been filed in the year 1991 after a long and inordinate delay.
Taking this technical view of the matter will mean ignoring the fact that the petitioner did question the validity of the order of termination of services under the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act and when his appeal was rejected as not maintainable, moved this Court in WP No. 10116 of 1983.
This Court's power to interfere with the arbitrary and `without jurisdiction' order of the kind impugned by the petitioner herein in WP No. 10116 of 1983 cannot be questioned.
The Court must always see as to how any unconstitutional act can be avoided and how far the facts of the case require moulding the relief.
In the instant case, I am satisfied that the delay in filing WP No. 17376 of 1991 is excusable.
16.
For the reasons aforesaid WP No. 17376 of 1991 is allowed.
The impugned notice of termination dated 191980 culminating in the order of termination dated 3101980 of the respondent is quashed.
WP No. 10116 of 1983 is allowed to the extent that it impugned the order of the first respondent covered by WP No. 17376 of 1991.
As a consequence the petitioner shall be deemed to be reinstated and in continuous service as if there has been no termination of service at all.
On the facts of this case there shall however be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.