PN Nag, J - By this application, respondent No. 3, National Power Transmission Corporation Ltd (NPTC), have sought modification/variation of the order passed by this Court on 1481991, in terms of the undertaking given by the Attorney-General on behalf of the Government of India, and also on behalf of the NPTC The relevant extract is reproduced below :  We have heard the parties' counsel and the Attorney-General wishes to make a statement giving an undertaking on behalf of the National Power Transmission Corporation.
He states by way of undertaking as follows :  The services of the above employees shall not be deemed to be interrupted by National Power Transmission Corporation consequent on such transfer and absorption.
The terms and conditions of service applicable to these employees after transfer and absorption shall not, in any way, be less favourable than those applicable to them immediately before the transfer.
In the event of retrenchment of any employee who is a workman as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the National Power Transmission Corporation shall be legally liable to pay compensation on the basis of that his service is continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer.
That if the writ petitioners succeed in the writ petition, the entire position shall be reversed, as per directions, order and any interim order, and all interim orders as agreed to will be subject to the result of the writ petition.
That during the pendency of the writ petition, the National Power Transmission Corporation shall not recruit persons from any source other than the National Thermal Power Corporation without the permission of the Court.
We have heard the undertaking of the Attorney-General given on behalf of the Union of India and on behalf of National Power Transmission Corporation.
The words in the undertaking to the effect that transfer and absorption of employees of the National Thermal Power Corporation in the National Power Transmission Corporation shall, however, be the matter of final adjudication of the writ petition, and be subject thereto.
Liberty is given to both the parties to mention the matter in case of difficulty and in case of any changed situation.
No action be taken unilaterally affecting the rights of the parties and the questions which are subject-matter of this writ petition without permission of this Court.
If the assets of the National Thermal Power Corporation are to be transferred to the National Power Transmission Corporation, then prior to taking such action, the Court be approached.
2.
The above orders were passed on the interim application filed by the petitioner, whereby the petitioners had sought an order from this Court restraining the respondents from effecting transfer and absorption of the respondents employees into the new company.
3.
In the writ petition, the petitioner which is an Association of Corporate Executives of NTPC, has challenged the action of the respondents of transfer of employees from the services of respondent No. 2, i.e., National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) to respondent No. 3, National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd (NTPC).
It appears that 2509 employees have already been transferred to the new company i.e. NPTC w.e.f 1681991.
The challenge to such transfer substantially has been made on the ground that they have been arbitrarily transferred to the new Corporation, without their consent and their services in fact have been terminated arbitrarily without affording them an opportunity.
4.
In the aforementioned order of this Court dated 1481991, one of the undertakings given by the learned Attorney-General in Court is that, "during the pendency of the writ petition, the National Power Transmission Corporation shall not recruit persons from any source other than the National Thermal Power Corporation without the permission of the Court."
Respondent No. 3 has been set up by the Government of India, with its main object to promote and develop efficient power transmission system and National Grid System in the country so that the electric power could be transmitted from various Power Generating Stations to Load Despatch Centres situated in different parts of the country with economy, safety and reliability and that the surplus power in any area could flow to the power deficit areas in the country, as surplus electric power cannot be stored even for a minute and it must not be wasted when there is crying need for it for the industrial development and agricultural growth in the country.
At present various transmission lines are owned by the Generating Companies/Organisations, namely, National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd (NTPC), Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd (NPC), National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd (NHPC), North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd (NEEPCO), Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd (THDC), Nayveli Lignite Corporation Ltd (NLC), Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) and Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB), described in para 2 of the application.
With a view for carrying out its business and objects, and as per the policy of the Government, respondent No. 3 wants to take over the staff associated with the transmission lines of different Corporations, aforementioned.
However, respondent No. 3 has experienced some difficulty in taking over the staff because of the aforesaid undertaking given by the Attorney-General i.e. during the pendency of the writ petition, the National Power Transmission Corporation shall not recruit persons from any source other than.
The National Thermal Power Corporation without the permission of the Court, as transfer of the aforementioned Corporations to respondent No. 3 along with their employees might be construed as recruitment of such employees by respondent No. 3 and, therefore, might result in breach of undertaking.
That is why this application has been moved for clarification that the word "recruitment" used in the undertaking should not be construed to mean and include transfer of employees of various Corporations, referred to above, so as to prohibit such transfers to respondent No. 3.
5.
The learned Attorney-General who appeared for respondent No. 3 and the Union of India, submitted that there was no injunction order passed by this Court, nor was there any undertaking given by him to the effect that respondent No. 3, could not take over various Corporations mentioned in para 2 of the application along with their staff by transfer.
In fact, transfer does not amount to recruitment, but at any rate, in case if it is construed as recruitment, in that situation in the national and the public interest, they should be permitted to take over such employees by transfer, as necessarily by taking over such Corporation, such experienced employees who are working in the transmission wings of various Corporations, will inevitably have also to be transferred to NTPC Moreover, respondent No. 2 has also shown their inability to transfer any further employees to respondent No. 3.
6.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned Attorney- General.
At this stage, we may refer in the additional affidavit filed by Mr. RK Narayan, Chairman and Managing Director, National Power Transmission Corporation, on behalf of respondent No. 3.
It has been clearly stated in paras 5, 6 and 8, which are reproduced as under :  That for carrying out its business and objects and as per the policy of the Government, the NPTC has to take over the staff associated with the transmission lines of different organisations.
The Government is keen that NPTC should take over the transmission lines of NHPC, NEEPCO and THDC with effect from 1101991 along with the associated staff of transmission network which is estimated as under :  Organisation No. of employees (Approx)  1.
National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC), 2000  2.
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO), 1000  3.
Tehri Hydroelectric Development Corporation Ltd (THDC), 50  The category/discipline-wise break-up of the employees is given in Annexure III.
It will neither be possible nor appropriate to take over the transmission lines of the above organisation without the associated employees engaged by these organisations on their transmission network; since otherwise all of them would become surplus with those organisations and will have to be retrenched.
At the same time NPTC will not be able to carry out the work of operation, maintenance and construction of the transmission lines in different parts of the country without those persons who are already working and have acquired sufficient experience on the job.
Their continuance on the job is absolutely essential for avoiding interruption in power supply which will have serious repercussion on national economy.
Moreover, such experienced technicians are not available from NTPC, as all the employees of NTPC engaged on its transmission network have already been taken order by NPTC w.e.f 1681991.
It is not possible for the NPTC to recruit the requisite number of persons from NTPC.
Requisitions were sent to NTPC vide letters dated 2381991, 27.8.1991 and 991991.
A reply dated 1391991 was received from Director (Personnel) NTPC wherein he stated that NTPC is not in a position to transfer any further personnel from NTPC to NPTC.
The reply along with one of the Requisitions are enclosed as Annexure-IV.
On the other hand the employees of the aforesaid organisations have already given their willingness to serve NPTC and in case of NEEPCO, Gauhati High Court has already vacated the Stay Order on 6.6.1991 against the transfer of NEEPCO transmission lines and their employees to NPTC, extract from the order has been quoted in para 4 of the C.M.P.
Hence, it is imperative that the employees engaged by these organisations must be transferred to NPTC, as a composite part of the transmission wings of such organisations which would he taken over as a running business.
That NPTC would not be able to carry on its business and implement the policy decision of the Government and the National Grid cannot be established unless the NPTC is able to take over the transmission lines along with the associated staff of all the eight organisations, mentioned in para 2 of CMP dated 1991991.
Grave and irreparable damage will be done to NPTC and the public interest will suffer seriously if NPTC is not able to take over the employees of such organisations.
Further, it will be highly injurious to the interest of such employees, if they are not taken over by NPTC along with the transmission lines and thereby become surplus and are retrenched.
The NPTC will not be able to get the experienced technicians from NTPC to man such Transmission lines.
The objective of National Grid without taking over of Transmission Lines and associated staff will be frustrated and the national interest will suffer tremendously and irreparably.
7.
In the face of this detailed affidavit, we have no doubt in our mind that in case the employees of transmission wing of various Corporations referred to in para 2 of the application, are not allowed to be taken over by respondent No3, it will be highly injurious not only to the interest of such employees, but it would be highly detrimental to the public interest as respondent No. 3 would not be able to carry on its business and implement the policy decision of the Government, and the very object of formation of such a Corporation would be frustrated.
8.
Dr. Rajiv Dhawan, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently opposed this application.
In the first instance, he submitted very strongly and time and again, that the petitioners have been, and are sought to be transferred by the respondents from respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3 without their consent and arbitrarily, without affording them opportunity.
The respondents have no fight to unilaterally change the terms and conditions of the petitioners, and by forcing their transfer to respondent No. 3, respondents, in fact, are terminating the services of the petitioners.
Whether the action of the respondents of transferring the employees from respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3 amounts to arbitrary termination of their services, or such a transfer is illegal, the matter has already been admitted, and is ordered to be heard by DB  9.
Further, the interim order, which is sought to be modified by respondent No. 3, was also passed by us after hearing the petitioners, and this order we have already made it clear that transfer and absorption of the employees of the National Thermal Power Corporation in the National Power Transmission Corporation shall, however, be the matter of final adjudication of the writ petition, and be subject thereto.
In other words, the proper safeguard for the protection of the interests of the petitioners has already been provided for, and in case the petitioners succeed, they will be reverted to their old position, and no hardship will be caused to them.
Furthermore, and in case respondent No. 3 is permitted to take over the employees of the various Corporations referred to in para 2 of the application, as prayed for, no further prejudice would be caused to the petitioners, if such an order is made subject to the decision of the writ petition.
10.
It was next contended by Dr. Dhawan that there is no urgency for respondent No. 3 to take over employees working with various Corporations, referred to in para 2 of the application, as work in certain Corporations has yet to start, for example in Tehri Hydroelectric Development Corporation Ltd no public or national interest would suffer.
11.
We are afraid, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot also prevail.
In this connection the position has already been explained in the additional affidavit of respondent No. 3.
12.
Respondent No. 3 is the better judge, as to what sort of persons and how many persons are required to man the Corporations to carry out the business and the objects of the Corporation as per the policy of the Government.
They have necessary expertise, data material with them.
When Mr. RK Narayan, Chairman and Managing Director has given an affidavit on behalf of respondent No. 3 that the staff working on the Transmission Lines of different Corporations, mentioned in para 2 of the application, will have to be taken over, we see no reason, at this stage, why such an affidavit should be disbelieved and why it should not be accepted.
This submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners also must fail.
13.
It is next contended by Dr. Dhawan, and he tried to demonstrate that the persons who have been transferred to respondent No. 3 from respondent No. 2, will get lesser emoluments than the persons recruited or taken over from other Corporations, as mentioned in para 2 of the application, as they were getting more emoluments in their Corporations.
Since there will be two sets of employees; one transferred from respondent No. 2, and the other from other Corporations, and there will be disparity in the emoluments paid to them there will be heart burning and injustice to the employees transferred from respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3, and it might affect the efficiency and smooth working of respondent No. 3.
14.
In this connection we may refer to the undertaking given by the learned Attorney-General, that the terms and conditions of service applicable to these employees after transfer and absorption shall not, in any way, be less favourable than those applicable to them immediately before the transfer.
In other words, the pay of all sorts of employees will be protected.
Even after protection of the pay if certain disparity in the emoluments of various sets of employees remains, we expect that keeping in view the principle of equal pay for equal work for the employees who are placed in the same circumstances and situation, and who discharge the same duties and responsibilities, and work in the same set of conditions, will be kept in view by the respondents, and such disparities, if any, would normally be rectified by them, by raising the salary and allowances of the lower paid employees to the level of the higher paid employees, but at any rate that stage has not yet come, and the employees transferred from respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3, in case they face the situation, they can always move the matter with respondent No. 3, or the court.
15.
Dr. Dhawan strongly relied upon 1973(1) SLR 946 (SC), The Manager, M/s. Pyarchand Kesarimal Porwal Bidi Factory v. Onkar Laxman Thenge and others and 1989(3) SLR 730 (SC); 1989(1) Speed Post Judgments 236 (SC) : 1989(2) SLWR 34 (SC), Jawaharlal Nehru University v. Dr. KS Jawatkar and others.
Both these judgments hold that there can be no transfer of an employee without his consent to another employer.
The matter of validity of the order dated 1481991 has to be finally adjudicated upon at the time of decision of this writ petition.
At the same time, it is necessary and desirable that the new Corporation must be able to function by taking into its fold employees from various organisations, whose transmission lines are to be taken over.
16.
In this view of the matter, at this interim stage we would permit modification of the order passed by us on 1481991.
We had given liberty to the respondents to move in the matter.
They have done so by this C.M.
4875 of 1991.
Accordingly, we do not decide in this matter, as to the circumstances in which undertaking given to the Court can be varied.
Prima facie, we are of the view that the undertakings given to Court bind those who give undertakings to Court.
The employees other than the employees of the National Thermal Power Corporation who are taken into the fold of the National Power Transmission Corporation would be taken into the later Corporation subject to the decision of this writ petition.
17.
In these facts and circumstances, we pass the following order :  (i) The employees other than the employees of the National Thermal Power Corporation who are taken into the fold of the National Power Transmission Corporation would be taken into the latter Corporation subject to the decision of this Writ Petition.
(ii) That respondent No. 3 is permitted, and free to take over the employees of transmission wings of North Eastern Electric Power Corporation, National Hydroelectric Power Corporation, Nayveli Lignite Corporation, Tehri Hydro Development Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation and Bhakra Beas Management Board, mentioned in para 2 of the application dated 1991991,  by transfer, along with the transmission lines of such Corporations.
(iii) In case after they are taken over by respondent, some employees happen to get higher emoluments than some employees doing equal work, those employees who are transferred from respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3 shall also get the same emoluments, and the shortfall in their emoluments shall be made up by the respondents by raising their emoluments equal to the emoluments drawn by the corresponding employees of the other Corporations taken over by respondent No. 3, during the pendency of the petition.
18.
C.M.
4875 of 1991 shall stand disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.