KP Bhandari, J - I allowed this appeal and decreed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant with costs vide judgment dated 16121991.
In the said order I had said that detailed reasons to follow.
Now, I proceed to give reasons in support of the judgment.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant was serving as a conductor with the Punjab Roadways.
The appellant was a temporary employee and his services were terminated by the General Manager on the basis of a complaint of embezzlement of Rs. 890 paise.
This is evident from the note sheet of the General Manager, Ex.P2.
As the order is based on the allegation of misconduct of Senior Subordinate Judge following the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in Jarnail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) S.L.R.
278, held that if services of a temporary employee are terminated on the ground of misconduct then provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution will have to be complied with because such an order is by way of punishment.
The Senior Subordinate Judge also followed the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in Anup Jaiswal v. Government of India, 1984(1) ALR 426.
In this view of the matter, the Senior Subordinate Judge decreed the suit of the plaintiff with costs holding that the termination order of the plaintiff is illegal and null and void.
He further held that the plaintiff shall be taken in the service of the transport department.
3.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid order of the Senior Subordinate Judge, the State of Punjab filed an appeal in the Court of District and Sessions Judge, Ferozepur.
The appeal came up for hearing before Sh. Charanjit Jawa, Additional District Judge, Ferozepur.
The Additional District Judge came to the conclusion on 1671991 that the order has been passed on the basis of the note P-2 of the General Manager.
The order is based on misconduct.
Additional District Judge held that as the order does not contain any stigma, the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution were not applicable.
The Additional District Judge did not follow the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) considered that if the order does not contain any stigma then the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are not applicable.
He took the view that the stigma must be in the order and the court cannot go behind the order.
He supported his view by relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in State of UP v. Ram Chander Trivedi, AIR 1976 SC 2547.
4.
The judgment of the Additional District Judge is very casual.
He did not try to understand the legal position expounded by the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh's case (supra).
This was a case of a work charged employee.
His services were terminated by a simple order but it was proved that the order was based upon adverse reflecting upon his honesty.
The Supreme Court held that the order of termination of service is by way of punishment.
5.
It has been laid down by the Constitution Bench of seven Judges of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192 that the form of the order is not conclusive.
It has never been laid down by the Supreme Court that the Court is only to see the final order.
The Court has to see that substance of the matter.
In this case there was no misconduct alleged in the order but from the circumstances it was clear that some enquiry was held against the officer and on that account his services were terminated.
Chief Justice AN Ray speaking for the Constitution Bench of seven Judges observed as follows :  "No abstract proposition can be laid down that where the services of a probationer are terminated without saying anything more in the order of termination than that the services are terminated it can never amount to a punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case.
If a probationer is discharged on the ground of misconduct, of inefficiency or for similar reason without a proper enquiry and without his getting a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his discharge it may in a given case amount to removal from service within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It was further observed by the Supreme Court :  "The order of termination of the services of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal is clearly by way of punishment in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The High Court not only denied Ishwar Chand Aggarwal the protection under Article 311 but also denied itself the dignified control over the subordinate judiciary.
The form not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment of the order is.
Even on innocuously worded order terminating the service may in the facts and circumstances of the case establish that an enquiry into allegations of serious and grave character of misconduct involving stigma has been made in infraction of the provisions of Article 311.
In such a case the simplicity of the form of the order will not give any sanctity.
That is exactly what has happened in the case of Ishwar Chand Aggarwal.
The order of termination is illegal and must be set aside."
In view of the above legal position, it is clear that form of the order is not conclusive.
The Court can always go behind the order to find out the real foundation of the order.
The Additional District Judge himself agreed with the Senior Subordinate Judge that the foundation of the order was Ex.P2 the note of the General Manager, according to which his services were terminated because of the misconduct levelled against him.
Once the foundation of the order is misconduct any termination of service based upon that will be by way of punishment and it will be obligatory on the State to hold enquiry as laid down in Article 311 of the Constitution.
6.
In this view of the matter, the judgment of the Additional District Judge cannot be sustained and is liable to be set aside.
I, therefore, accept this appeal with costs throughout and set aside the judgment of the Additional District Judge.
A statement was made at the Bar by the counsel for the appellant that his client will not claim any back wages and he may be reinstated.
The appellant will not be entitled to any back wages.
He be reinstated immediately and his services should be regularised However, his entire service will count towards seniority, pension and other allied benefits.
Appeal accepted.