NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiffs appeal against the judgment and decree of the Lower Appellate Court whereby the appeal filed by him against the judgment and decree of the trial Court was dismissed.
Briefly put :  2.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration on the allegations that he was appointed as Junior Draftsman by the Haryana State Electricity Board and was posted in Thermal Project at Panipat, He proceeded on casual leave for two days ie from 2.5.1984 which was sanctioned by the Superintending Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, Panipat.
It is further the case of the plaintiff that he applied for the extension of the leave due to adverse domestic circumstances, but the same was rejected.
He again requested for extension of leave on account of sudden death of his sister, but even this request was not acceded to, rather on the contrary, it was construed as a case of wilful absence from duty.
As it so happened that the plaintiffs wife had to undergo treatment for heart trouble and so requested for extension of leave, but to no effect.
Even the death of his uncle and father did not have any impact upon the defendants who were bent upon to terminate his services, Thus, with a pre-determination, the defendants proceeded to hold an enquiry, served him a show cause notice and finally passed an order of termination on 3061987.
The plaintiff has challenged this order on the ground that the same is illegal, arbitrary and against the principle of natural justice.
The plaintiff further prayed that he may be reinstated and also awarded the full back wages.
3.
The defendants put in appearance and controverted various allegations of the plaintiff.
It was admitted that the plaintiff was granted only two days leave and his subsequent prayer for extension of leave was rejected as he was a newly appointee and no leave was due to him.
Even his prayer for extraordinary leave without pay was not granted as the rules did not permit so.
The defendants further averred that Shri MP Mittal was appointed as an Enquiry Officer, who issued notice to the plaintiff to join enquiry, but he intentionally did not participate.
It is further stated by the defendants that the plaintiff was asked to appear before the competent authority, but he did not put in appearance.
However, explanation given by the plaintiff was considered by the competent authority, but the same was found to be of little value and thus rejected.
This way, the services of the plaintiff were terminated having absented from the duty without any reason or cause.
Consequently, the plaintiff was also not found entitled to any pay or allowances.
The defendants also raised the plea that this Court has got no jurisdiction to decide the present dispute.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the termination order dated 3061987 passed by defendant No. 2 is illegal, as alleged, if so, to what effect ?
OPP  2.
Whether the Civil Court has got no jurisdiction to entertain the present suit ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the plaintiff has got no cause of action against the defendant ?
OPD  4.
Whether the plaintiff has concealed the true and material facts from the Court and is not entitled for any discretionary relief ?
OPD  5.
Relief.
5.
To substantiate his allegations in the plaint, Jagdish Chander appeared as his own witness, tendered copy of terminated order dated 3061987, Exhibit- P1, copy of notice dated 181987 Exhibit P-2.
Postal receipt Exhibit-P3, copy of letter memo No. 3308 dated 1061989 issued from the office of the XEN, PTPP, HSEB, Panipat, Exhibit-P4 and copy of death certificate of Kamlesh Mark-X  6.
On the other hand, the defendants produced Shri NP Mittal, as DW1, Shri K.R.
Baveja as DW2 and tendered the copy of registered memo dated 871986 Exhibit-D1, copy of second memo No. 2722 dated 2871986, Exhibit-D2, copy of third registered memo No. 3308 dated 1091986 Exhibit-D3, acknowledgement Exhibit-D4 copy of memo No. 3378 dated 16.9.1986 JS Exhibit-D5, acknowledgement Exhibit-D6, copy of judgment dated 19.12.1986 JS of his enquiry officer Exhibit-D7, copy of fresh notification Exhibit-D8, copy of memo No. 877 dated 8.4.1986 Exhibit-D9, copy of registered AD Exhibit-D10 copy of show cause notice No. 189 dated 23.1.87 Ex. D11, copy of final show cause notice dated 2-3-1987, Exhibit-D13, copy of final show case notice to the plaintiff dated 19.3.1987 Exhibit-D14 and copy of office order No. 32 dated 3061987 Exhibit-D15.
7.
The trial Court after appraisal of the evidence led by the parties, came to the conclusion that the Superintending Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, was the appointing authority of the plaintiff and so the contention of the plaintiff that he has been punished by an authority lower in rank to his appointing authority, is not substantiated.
Accordingly, the order of termination dated 3061987 was held to be legal and issue No. 1 was decided in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff.
Issues No. 2 and 3 were not pressed by the defendants and so the same were decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
Under issue No. 4, it was held that there is no material on the record to show that the plaintiff had concealed the material fact from the Court and this issue was also decided against the defendants.
8.
In view of the finding of the trial Court under issue No. 1 the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
9.
The matter was once again agitated by the plaintiff before the lower Appellate Court.
The appellant once again highlighted the various compelling circumstances on account of which he could not join duty, i.e. sickness of his wife, death of his uncle, death of his younger sister and death of his father and so it was contended that his absence from duty ought to have been examined in the right prospective and condoned by the authorities.
Despite these, the defendants have got no reason forming an opinion that reasons assigned by him cannot be construed as sufficient grounds to condone such a lapse on his part.
This approach, besides, being wholly unjust clearly bring out pre- determination of the authorities before holding an enquiry and the subsequent punishment.
In addition to this, the counsel contended that the order of termination has been passed by an authority junior to his appointing authority and this way the order of termination is wholly vitiated.
Even otherwise, the order of termination dated 3061987 takes effect from 451984, which is thus, bad in law.
10.
The Lower Appellate Court, however, did not find any merit in the submissions made by the counsel for the appellant and came to the conclusion that since the Chief Engineer personally had heard him, so the contention of the appellant stands negatived.
The Lower Appellate Court further came to the conclusion that since the Chief Engineer after examining the explanation tendered by the appellant has remarked that "action may be taken" would prove that termination order had been passed by the Chief Engineer.
Similarly, the Court came to the conclusion that the order of termination dated 3061987, but to take effect from 451984, is legal.
Resultantly, the appeal too was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Panipat, on 28.1.1992.
11.
At the motion hearing, it was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the order of termination has not been passed by the competent authority and that the appellant's services were terminated vide order dated 3061987 w.e.f.
5.4.1984 and so the appeal was admitted.
12.
The learned counsel for the appellant has once again highlighted the above noted contentions.
Elaborating, the counsel urged that as per his appointment letter, the Chief Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, is the appointing authority.
The trial Court erred in law in holding that the Superintending Engineer is the appointing authority of the plaintiff.
The Lower Appellate Court by a novel process of reasoning came to the conclusion that since the Chief Engineer happened to remark that necessary action may please be taken, would imply that though termination order was passed by the Superintending Engineer, the same would be construed having been passed by the Chief Engineer.
The reasoning given by the Lower Appellate Court that such an order should be construed to have passed by the Chief Engineer in fact, is not the case of the defendants.
If we peruse the written statement, the stand of the defendants is highly vague.
All that is stated is that the order of termination has been passed by a competent authority.
13.
The learned counsel for the respondents when pressed to specifically state as to whether the Superintending Engineer or the Chief Engineer is the appointing authority of the plaintiff, came with the explanation that as per rules of the Haryana State Electricity Board, the Superintending Engineer is the appointing authority in respect of Junior Draftsman, but all the same admitted that in the present case, the appointment of the plaintiff was made by the Chief Engineer.
Despite this factual aspect, the learned counsel for the respondents, however, tried to defend the order of termination passed by the Superintending Engineer on the ground that since as per rules he was to be the appointing authority, the order passed by him in the circumstances mentioned above, should be construed as valid.
I do not find any merit in the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondents.
Admittedly, the plaintiff was appointed by the Chief Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, as per appointment letter dated 2831984, whereas the order of termination has been passed by the Superintending Engineer.
There is no dispute between the parties that the Superintending Engineer is junior in rank to the Chief Engineer.
The judgment of the Apex Court in Krishan Kumar v. Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer Central Railway and others, AIR 1979 Supreme Court, 1912 squarely applies to the facts of the present case, wherein it has been held that order of termination passed by an authority is violative of provisions of Article 311(i) of the Constitution of India, Thus, the subsequent authorisation made in favour of the authority passing the order of removal cannot confer upon him the power to remove.
I also do not find merit in specious reasoning recorded by the Additional District Judge by holding that since the Chief Engineer has ordered for necessary action to be taken such an order should be construed as having been passed by the Chief Engineer himself.
14.
In support of the impugned order of termination, the learned counsel for the Haryana State Electricity Board further urged that Article 311 of the Constitution of India, does not govern the employees of the Haryana State Electricity Board.
These employees are governed by their terms of appointment letter.
15.
This plea, of the learned counsel for the respondents is without any merit.
Somewhat identical plea was taken in the case of Bank of India v. Presiding Officer and others, 1991(2) Recent Services Judgments 32 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
455, wherein MR Agnihotri, J was pleased to observe as under :-  "It has been settled by now by Hon'ble the Supreme Court and a number of judicial pronouncements of the various High Courts, that for safeguarding the interests of the workmen and other employees of various corporate bodies and public undertakings against the arbitrary and illegal actions of the employer, the applicability of the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution is not necessary.
It is not Article 311 of the Constitution alone, which prohibits dismissal or removal of an employee by an authority subordinate to the appointing authority.
On the other hand, with the efflux of time and by age old recognised relationship of master and servant, it has become an integral part of Service Jurisprudence, that an authority subordinate to the appointing authority cannot dismiss an employee from its service.
Whether an employee is a civil servant or not is material for this purpose.
Provisions of the General Clauses Act, coupled with the principles of natural justice and Rules and Regulations, statutory of otherwise, are equally effective to protect the employees against indiscriminate exercise of jurisdiction by officers subordinate to the appointing authority.
In this regard, reference to the following judgments would be useful, Gadde Venkateswara Rao v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and others, AIR 1966 Supreme Court, 828; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Sh. Ram Partap Singh, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 2301; Gwalior District Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Ramesh Chandra Mangal and others, 1979(2) SLR 464; The Workman of M/s Hindustan Lever Ltd and others v. The Management of M/s Hindustan Lever Ltd, 1984(1), L.L.J 388; The Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited v. The Additional Registrar (Industrial) Cooperative Societies, Punjab, 1984(2) SLR 217; Chairman and Managing Director, National Insurance Co Ltd and others v. S Narayanankutty and others, 1985(3) SLR 91; Union of India and other v. Shri Babu Ram Lalta, AIR 1988 Supreme Court, 344, and M/s. Varansi Electric Supply Undertaking U.P.
State Electricity Board v. Industrial Tribunal, 1 U.P.
at Allahabad and others, 1990 Lab I.C.
1331."
16.
Resultantly, I accept the appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the Courts below, decree the suit of the plaintiff directing the defendants to take the plaintiff in service forthwith.
However, as regards the plaintiffs prayer for payment of all the arrears of salary and allowances, the same is granted from the date of the order of termination i.e. 3161987, till the disposal of this appeal only.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.