RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Some Up-Vaidyas, who were working as such in the Ayurvedic Department, Punjab, filed various writ petitions in this Court (CWP Nos. 2426, 2427 and 2727 of 1987) claiming the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents that they should be promoted as Vaidyas with effect from the dates their juniors were so promoted.
During the pendency of the writ petitions, an order was passed on 14th July, 1987 (Annexure P-1 to the writ petition) promoting the petitioners in those cases, as well as the petitioner in the present case, to the posts of Vaidyas.
This order of promotion was brought to the notice of the Bench hearings those writ petitions and the writ petitions were disposed of on 6th August, 1987.
It was noticed that the order of promotion, dated 14th July, 1987 did not take account of the effect of the promotions of the persons junior to the petitioners in those cases and did not effect the promotions of the petitioners from such dates when their juniors were promoted.
Consequently, a direction was given that if on the date on which the persons juniors to the petitioners were promoted, the petitioners' records and qualifications warrant promotions, then promotions given to those petitioners by the order dated 14th July, 1987 shall be given effect from such a date.
2.
In pursuance of the order of this Court, the petitioners in those cases were given retrospective date of promotion as Vaidyas with effect from 19th November, 1980.
The present petitioner who was not a petitioner in the earlier cases, was not given retrospective date of promotion, though all the petitioners in the earlier cases were admittedly junior to the petitioner as Up-Vaidyas.
The petitioner made representation that he should also be given promotion as Vaidya with effect from the date his juniors had been given promotion.
One Shri Suraj Bhan, who was a writ petitioner in CWP No. 2727 of 1987 filed a contempt petition in this Court with the allegation that the judgment in his case had not been complied with fully, inasmuch as he had not been assigned the same date of promotion as Vaidya when his junior was promoted.
According to him, his junior had been promoted with effect from 24th February, 1972 and not from 19th November, 1980, which was the date of promotion as Vaidya given to him by the respondents.
After considering the facts brought out by Shri Suraj Bhan, the respondents passed an order on 18th September, 1990 giving him deemed date of promotion as Vaidya with effect from 24th February, 1972 (the date when his junior had been promoted as such).
3.
This writ petition was failed in November, 1990, claiming that the petitioner should also be assigned the same date of promotion as Vaidya as that of Shri Suraj Bhan, who was junior to the petitioner as Up-Vaidya.
4.
This writ petition had earlier come up for hearing before a learned Single Judge and prima facie feeling that the claim of the petitioner was highly belated, the petitioner was given as opportunity to file an affidavit explaining the delay.
The petitioner has filed the affidavit, in which it has been explained that firstly cause of action accrued to the petitioner when persons junior to him were given deemed date of promotion as Vaidyas with effect from 19th November, 1980, vide order dated 12th February, 1988, whereafter petitioner made representation to the department to grant him due date of promotion as assigned to his juniors.
Before the representation was decided, Shri Suraj Bhan who was such junior to the petitioner as Up- Vaidya, was given the date of promotion as 24th February, 1972, vide order dated 18th September, 1990.
This gave further cause of action which led the petitioner to file the present writ petition to claim the relief of ante-dated promotion, as was given to Shri Suraj Bhan From the affidavit filed by the petitioner, I am of the view that there is no delay on his part to approach this Court.
5.
It is not denied on the part of the respondents, but rather it is admitted that the petitioner was senior as Up-Vaidya to those petitioners, including Shri Suraj Bhan, who had earlier filed writ petitions in this Court.
The stand taken in the written statement for denying the relief claimed by the petitioner is, that the orders of retrospective promotions in the cases of those Up-Vaidyas who were junior to the petitioner, were passed in compliance with the orders of this Court in the writ petitions filed by them.
Since there was no order of this Court qua the petitioner, therefore, he could not be granted the relief as claimed by him.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioners who had earlier come to this Court, were all promoted as Vaidyas alongwith the petitioner on 14th July, 1987.
According to him, once orders were passed by this Court to consider the cases of promotion of the Up-Vaidyas to the posts of Vaidyas qua the petitioners in those cases with effect from the dates their juniors were promoted, it was incumbent on the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner as well, inasmuch as, admittedly he was senior to those petitioners as Up-Vaidyas.
The submission was that the non-consideration of the petitioner's case for retrospective promotion when his juniors were being considered for such retrospective promotion, violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The learned counsel for the respondents made the same submissions as is the stand taken by the respondents in the written statement, which has already been noticed above.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parities, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Once the cases of promotion of the juniors to the petitioner were being considered for ante-dated promotion as Vaidyas, it was incumbent on the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner who was senior to those persons whose cases were being considered.
The observations of this Court in the cases of those Up-Vaidyas who had earlier filed writ petitions did not mean that the case of promotion of the person who was senior to those petitioners, was not to be considered for ante-dated promotion.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider and promote the petitioner with effect from the date when his junior Shri Suraj Bhan was promoted as Vaidya, i.e. with effect from 24th February, 1972.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is given the ante-dated promotion, he will be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
Let these directions be carried out within three months from the date of he receipt of the copy of this judgment.
I make no order as to costs.