SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns proceedings of the General Court Martial and the punishment imposed upon Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh arising from the incidents of June 10, 1984, at the Sikh Regimental Centre, Ramgarh, in Bihar, when it is said that there was unrest amongst the troops leading to the ransacking by them of the Centre, Kotes and magazine and later when the Commandant, the Deputy Commandant (Brig.
SC Puri and the respondent Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh) and others rushed there, they were fired upon, resulting in the death of Brig.
Puri and serious injuries to the respondent.
2.
A good record of service marks the service career of the respondent Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh until the unfortunate happenings at the Sikh Regimental Centre, Ramgarh, in June 1984.
After being commissioned in the Army as a Second Lieutenant in June, 1960, Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh was decorated with the 'Wound Medal' in 1965, and ten years later in 1975, he was declared fit for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, to which he was actually promoted on September 9, 1976.
Later, after being cleared for promotion to the rank of full Colonel, he was promoted as such in January, 1983.
Not only this, but on October 20, 1983, he was informed that he had been approved for promotion as Acting Brigadier.
3.
It was in January, 1983 that Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh was posted as Deputy Commandant at the Sikh Regimental Centre.
This is the post which he was holding when on June 10, 1984, he sustained serious injuries in the incident referred to earlier.
4.
Before proceeding further, it would be pertinent to note here that on September 29, 1984, the former Prime Minister of India, Smt. Indira Gandhi wrote a personal letter to Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh after she had learnt that he had been wounded, wherein she said :  "The nation is proud of youngmen like you who faced the grave dangers so bravely.
I hope and pray that God gives you strength and fortitude to bear the pain of the injuries you have sustained and that you recover speedily."
It appears that a Court of Injury was held regarding the happenings at the Sikh Regimental Centre, Ramgarh.
Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh participated in this inquiry, the proceedings of which were completed on November 2, 1984.
As a result of this inquiry, several soldiers and Junior Commissioned Officers were court-martialled.
As regards Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh, in the return filed on behalf of the Union of India and the other respondents in the writ petition, it has been said that the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Central Command, recorded the opinion that disciplinary action be taken against him too.
This, in turn, culminated in a provisional ban being imposed upon the posting and promotion of Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh by the order of February 20, 1985.
Next followed the order that Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh be court-martialled.
5.
Three charges figured in the charge-sheet filed against the respondent on February 3, 1987, these being :  "First Charge AN OMISSION Army Act Section 63 PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
in that he, at Ramgarh between 04 June and 10 June 84, while being Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre improperly omitted to curb the simmering discontentment and mutinous tendency amongst the troops, as reaction to operation "Blue Star" in Golden Temple Complex, Amritsar, which led to a mutiny on 10 June 84 in the said Centre.
"Second Charge AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL Army Act Section 63 TO GOOD ORDER AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
in that he, at Ramgarh, in view of Operation 'Blue Star' in Golden Temple Complex, Amritsar between 04 June and 10 June 84, while being the Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre, Improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures in the said Centre, as a consequence of which on 10 June 84, the Kotes, magazines and canteen of the centre were ransacked, prisoners rescued from the quarter-guard and the troops moved away from the Centre in commandeered vehicles.
Third Charge AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL Army Act Section 63 TO GOOD ORDER AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
in that, he, at Ramgarh, between 04 June and 10 June 84 while being the Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre, when directly approached by late sepoy Gurnam Singh of the said Centre with complaints against Army action in Punjab, improperly failed to take effective measures to prevent him from spreading rumours amongst the troops."
6.
According to the order pronounced on June 1, 1987, Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh was convicted of only the second charge and was sentenced in respect thereof to one year simple imprisonment and to be cashiered from service.
He was, however, acquitted of the two other charges.
The Chief of Army Staff, when the proceedings of the Court Martial came up to him for confirmation reduced the punishment to forfeiture of two years service for purposes of pension and promotion and severe reprimand.
7.
On February 20, 1988, Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh submitted a representation against the punishment imposed upon him and it was when nothing was heard in reply that he came to file the first of his two writ petitions in December, 1989 challenging both the proceedings before the Court Martial as also the punishment awarded.
By another writ petition he sought to challenge the denial of his promotion to the rank of Brigadier for which as mentioned earlier, he had been approved in 1983.
8.
The challenge sought to be launched in appeal here is to the findings of the learned Single Judge that the charge in respect of which Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh has been held to be guilty and punished was vague and further that there was no evidence in support thereof.
9.
A reading of the second charge framed against Lt. Col Jagdev Singh would show that the crux of it lies in the imputation that he "improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures in the said Centre."
It is pertinent to note that it was not spelt out how and in what manner he had improperly failed to ensure security measures or what is it that he was required or expected to do which he had not done.
10.
The circumstances of material significance in this context is the fact that at the very outset of the proceedings of the Court Martial against him, Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh filed an application for amendment of the charge saying therein that the charges should be so clear stating the very culpable act of omission and commission to enable the accused to defend himself.
A general statement as stated in the charges 2 and 3 that the accused failed to take security measures is not sufficient and against the basic rules pertaining to framing of the charges.
I, therefore, submit that the particular acts or omissions may be averred in the particulars of the charges to enable the accused to understand what he has to answer and where he has to defend."
The prosecuting counsel, in reply, stated that "the prosecution evidence would be led to prove as to what was expected of him and what he failed to do as required in the circumstances.
The application of Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh for better particulars of the charge was thus declined.
11.
On the face of it, no other conclusion is possible except that the second charge, as framed against Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh was vague and wholly lacking in material particulars.
Further, the Court Martial fell gravely in error in denying him such particulars even when a specific request in this behalf had been made before it in writing by Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh.
Prejudice on this account to Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh, thus, stands writ large and for this reason alone the proceedings of the Court Martial must stand vitiated and have, consequently to be quashed.
12.
The other aspect of the matter pertains to the evidence to support the charge found against Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh.
The impugned judgment of the learned single Judge would show that, after a very careful consideration of the relevant material on record and for very good and sound reasons recorded therein, the learned Single Judge came to hold not only that the charge against Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh was vague, but there was also no evidence in support thereof.
13.
Confronted with this finding, all that Mr. SK Pipat, counsel for the appellants, could say was that it was not within the jurisdiction of this Court to embark upon a reappraisal of the evidence before the Court Martial while dealing with the matter in proceedings under Articles 226 of the Constitution.
Appreciation of evidence is undoubtedly beyond the pale of this Court in writ proceedings, but on our persistent and pointed asking counsel was unable to point to any material or evidence to support the charge found against Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh.
We cannot, therefore, but concur with the further finding too of the learned single Judge that there is no evidence to sustain the charge against Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh.
14.
In the situation as it has now emerged, the appellants are directed to consider the case of Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh for promotion to the rank of Brigadier with effect from his due date i.e., the date on which he was eligible to be so considered, had the court martial proceedings and sentence not intervened.
In other words, to consider him for promotion to the next ranks by disregarding the proceedings of the Court Martial and the punishment imposed upon him as a consequence thereof, which now stand quashed, but by taking into account his record of service including particularly the letter of October 20,1983, whereby he had been informed that he had been approved for promotion as acting Brigadier.
It follows that Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits as would accrue from his promotions.
It is, indeed, to be hoped that Lt. Col. Jagdev Singh would be considered for further promotion without any further delay and the consequential benefits that he may be entitled to shall be granted to him forthwith.
Both these appeals are consequently dismissed with Rs. 1,500/- as costs (one set only).
Appeal dismissed.