JS Sekhon, J - Bhupinder Singh, workman, respondent No. 2, was appointed as Junior Laboratory Technician on 24121985 on ad hoc basis under the Institute Research Scheme in the Department of Radiotherapy of Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh, against the post reserved for Scheduled Tribes w.e.f.
24121985 and uptill 31-3-1986 (afternoon) vide order Annexure P-1.
He continued in service as such vide subsequent appointment orders Annexures P-2 to P-8.
His last appointment as such was extended w.e.f.
forenoon of 1-4-1988 to the afternoon of 31-10-1988.
His services were not extended after the expiry of this tenure on 31-10-1988.
During his tenure as such, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 10639 of 1988 in the High Court, seeking regularisation of his services.
The workman then served demand notice, Annexure P-9, under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') contending that he having worked for a period of 240 days in one calendar year, the termination of his services would amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act and the Management was found to comply with the provisions relating to the procedure of retrenchment of workman contained in the said Act.
He also maintained that juniors to the workman namely Sh. Gayar Ali Chaudhary and Naresh Kumar and others are still being retained in service and that as a matter of fact the workman was entitled to regularisation in service and that his services have been terminated on the ground that he has filed a writ in this regard.
2.
In reply to the demand notice, the Management took the stand that the services of the workman were terminated strictly in accordance with the terms of his employment as the workman was employed on contractual basis for a specific period and his services came to an end on the appointed day.
Thus, it was maintained that the removal of the workman did not amount to retrenchment as defined under Section 2(oo) of the Act, because the non-renewal of the contract of employment would not amount to retrenchment.
It was also maintained that the workman was not entitled to the regularization of his services, especially when the workman was appointed against the post reserved for members of Scheduled Tribes and on an ad hoc basis.
3.
Accordingly, the workman successfully sought a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
The Labour Court vide impugned order, Annexure P-12, after recording evidence led by both the parties and relying upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Prem Singh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala, 1989(1) RSJ 143 : 1991(1) SCT 552 (P&H), held that as the workman had completed more than 240 days in one Calendar year, his services could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act.
The order was also held bad as junior person i.e. Naresh Kumar has been allowed to continue in service while the petitioner was not considered for appointment against the regular post.
Thus, the order of termination of service of the workman was held illegal and set aside and he was ordered to be reinstated in service with full back wages and continuity of service.
The workman was held entitled to full back wages upto August, 1990, as he had admitted having joined some service since September, 1990.
4.
In this writ petition, the Management challenges the above referred order of the Labour Court contending that as the workman was appointed on ad hoc basis against the reserved post of Scheduled Tribe in the Institute research Scheme in the Department of Radiotherapy, PGI Chandigarh, and his appointment having been extended from time to time for a specific period, the termination of his services after the expiry of period of ad hoc appointment would not amount to retrenchment.
Itt was also maintained that the Research Scheme in which the workman was appointed on temporary and ad hoc basis came to an end and thus the Labour Court could not issue directions to the Management to take back the workman in the service with full back wages and continuity of service.
It was further averred that aforesaid Naresh Kumar was appointed in the Institute and not on a post in the Research Scheme on regular basis by the competent authority after inviting applications through Employment Exchange and that the workman could not claim parity in treatment with the employees of the PGI  5.
Mr. Arun Nehra, the learned counsel for the Management contends that the non-renewal of the contract of employment of the workman on its expiry would not amount to retrenchment as defined in Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act and that the non-compliance of the provisions of Sections 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act would in such a case of no consequence.
6.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, Senior Advocate, the learned counsel for the workman, on the other hand, contends tthat it is not a case of termination of service of workman due to non-renewal of contract of employment, but a case of the termination of the temporary services of the petitioner by way of discrimination as persons junior to the petitioner appointed on ad hoc basis had been retained in service.
'Retrenchment' has been defined in clause (oo) of Section 2 of the Act, as under :-  "(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include -  (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or  (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or  (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or  c) termination of services of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health."
A bare glance through the same leaves no doubt that termination of the service of the workman by the employer for any reason whatsoever otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action would amount to retrenchment.
The Exception in this regard pertains to the voluntary retirement of a workman on reaching the superannuation or termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment on its expiry or of such a contract being terminated under a stipulation contained therein in that behalf and termination of workman on the ground of ill-health.
In the case in hand, there is no dispute that initially the workman was appointed vide order, Annexure P-1 w.e.f.
24121985 (forenoon) up till 3131986 (afternoon) on purely ad hoc basis against a vacancy reserved for Scheduled Tribes in public interest.
Thereafter his services were extended from time to time uptill 31-10-1988 vide orders Annexures P-2 to P-8.
Thus, admittedly, he had remained for two years and ten months in service.
It is not disputed that in one calendar year he had remained in service for a period of more than 240 days.
Had the services of the workman been terminated simply due to non-renewal of contract of employment, then his case would not be covered by the above referred definition of retrenchment and the provisions of Sections 25-F, 25-G, and 25-H of the Act regarding the retrenchment compensation etc. would not have been attracted.
7.
The perusal of Annexure R-1 shows that Naresh Kumar was also employed as Junior Technician on ad hoc basis for six months vide order, dated 30-9-1986.
The order, Annexure R-2 reveals that services of Sh. Naresh Kumar and Smt. Girija K Amma were extended for another six months w.e.f.
30-3-1987 and 1-4-1987 respectively.
This order is dated 13-5-1987.
The order, Annexure R-3 dated 24-9-1987 further shows that the ad hoc services of Smt. Girija K Amma, Sh. Naresh Kumar and Sh. Gayar Ali were further extended for six months on the same terms and conditions as they were appointed initially.
Order, Annexure R-4, dated 15-6-1988 reveals that the services of these three persons were extended till they are regularized against the regular vacancy or replaced by Scheduled Tribe/Scheduled Caste candidates.
The last order, Annexure R-5, dated 21-8-1991 shows that the services of aforesaid Naresh Kumar were regularised w.e.f.
7-5-1991.
Sh. Bhupinder Singh, workman, having initially joined the service w.e.f.
24-12-1985 (forenoon) vide order Annexure P-1 was certainly senior to the above referred three persons including Naresh Kumar.
Thus, non-consideration of the regularisation of his services while regularising the service of his Junior introduces an element of arbitrariness.
There is no force in the contention of Mr. Arun Nehra that aforesaid Naresh Kumar was appointed against a post of junior Technician in the X-ray Department of the PGI while Sh. Bhupinder Singh workman was appointed against a post in the Research Scheme and thus Naresh Kumar could not be considered junior to him because both these posts of Junior Technicians are in the same Department of the PGI and the Management having failed to establish the closure of the Research Scheme, it cannot be said that aforesaid Naresh Kumar was not junior to Sh. Bhupinder Singh.
8.
Mr. Arun Nehra further contends that the perusal of Annexure P-1 to P-8 of the appointment of the workman clearly shows that he was appointed against the post of a Scheduled Tribe/Scheduled Caste in the Institute Research Scheme and after the Research Scheme has been abolished, the case of the petitioner would not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) of the Act, but it would fall under the provisions of section 25-FFF of the Act.
Thus, he maintains that no retrenchment compensation was required to be paid to the workman.
Reliance in this regard has been placed in the latest judgment of the Supreme Court in Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, Delhi, AIR 1992 SC 789 : 1992(1) SCT 425 (SC).
9.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, counsel for the workman, on the other hand, maintains that the Management has set up a new case in this petition for the termination of the services of the workman with the abolition of the Research Scheme in which he was employed.
On the other hand, he has drawn my attention to order, Annexure P-8, whereby the services of the petitioner were extended w.e.f.
Ist April, 1988 to 31st October, 1988.
In that order, the Head of the Department of Radiotherapy was requested by the Director, Post Graduate Institute to take immediate steps to select a candidate belonging to the Scheduled Caste category through the Employment Exchange before the ad hoc appointment of Sh. Bhupinder Singh had expired.
Thus, he maintains that the Research Scheme had not come to an end on 3rd of October, 1988, when this order was passed and the Management having led no other evidence to prove this fact, before the Labour Court to establish this fact, cannot be allowed to build up a new case in this writ petition.
10.
There is no dispute regarding the legal proposition that if the services of the workman are terminated with the closure of an establishment then the provisions of section 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act would not be attracted, but the case would fall under section 25-FFF of the Act, but in the case in hand, the perusal of the reply, Annexure P-10 of the Management to the demand notice clearly shows that the stand taken by the Management was that the appointment of the workman being for a specific period on ad hoc basis and the last tenure of his services having ended on 31-10-1988, the removal of the workman would not amount to retrenchment as defined under Section 2(oo) of the Act because non-renewal of contract of employment does not amount to retrenchment.
The Management has not set up a case of the termination or closure of the Research Scheme.
The matter does not rest here as before the Labour Court, Sh. Bhupinder Singh, workman, was not cross-examined to establish that his services were terminated with the closure of the Research Scheme.
This fact was for the first time figured in the cross-examination of Sh. ML Mehta, Superintendent-G-II, PGI, Chandigarh (PW) when he stated that the scheme against which the workman was appointed had been abolished.
This stray admission during the cross-examination being beyond the pleadings of the parties cannot be taken into consideration especially when no documentary evidence was brought on the record in order to prove the closure of the Research Scheme.
The observations of the apex Court in Shankar Chakravarti v. Britannia Biscuit & Co and another, AIR 1979 SC 1652 can be safely referred to in this regard.
In that case being fully vigilant that the pleadings in industrial disputes have not to be read, strictly observed as under :-  " ... ... ...  A contention to substantiate which evidence is necessary has to be pleaded.
If there is no pleading raising a contention there is no question of substantiating such a non-existing contention by evidence.
It is well settled that allegation which is not pleaded, even if there is evidence in support of it, cannot be examined because the other side has no notice of it and if entertained it would tantamount to granting an unfair advantage to the first mentioned party.
We are not unmindful of the fact that pleadings before such bodies have not to be read strictly, but it is equally true that the pleadings must be such as to give sufficient notice to the other party of the case it is called upon to meet."
11.
The matter does not rest here as the appointment orders, Annexures P-1 to P-8 simply refer to the appointment in Institute Research Scheme of the Department of Radiotherapy in the PGI but give no indication that this scheme was of temporary nature, what to say of its having been closed by the Management.
On the other hand, the perusal of order, Annexure P-8 of the Director of PGI dated 3-10-1988, issued to the various Heads of Department on 8-10-1988 reveals that the Head of the Department of Radiotherapy was directed to take immediate steps for selecting a candidate belonging to a scheduled category through the Employment Exchange before the ad hoc appointment of Sh. Bhupinder Singh, workman, expired on 31-10-1988.
To crown it all, even in the writ petition, the Management had not disclosed any specific date when the Research Scheme came to an end.
Under these circumstances, there is no option but to hold that the services of the petitioner were not terminated on the abolition or termination of particular research scheme.
If that is so then his services could be terminated only in accordance with the provisions of section 25-F, 25-H and 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Consequently, the Labour Court rightly held that the termination of the services of the petitioner was illegal for non-compliance of the above referred provisions and ordered for reinstatement of the workman with full back wages though w.e.f.
September, 1990.
For the reasons recorded above, there being no force in this writ petition, it is ordered to be dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
In view of dismissal of the writ petition, Civil Misc. No. 3113 of 1992 has become infructious and is disposed of as such.
Petition dismissed.