Ashok Bhan, J In this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the appointment of Shri HS Kaushik as Presiding Officer, Labour Court Faridabad, being in violation of section 7-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and Article 234 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner has prayed for a writ of quo warrant quashing the appointment of Shri HS Kaushik, Presiding Officer.
A prayer has also been made that since the impugned award has been passed by Shri HS Kaushik whose appointment as Presiding Officer is illegal and invalid, therefore, the impugned award passed by him is bad in law; a prayer for the issuance of a writ of certiorari challenging the award on merits has also been made.
2.
So far as the first point is concerned, the same stands covered by a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Tul-Par Machine and Tool Company, Faridabad v. Shri Joginder Paol, Workman and others, ILR (1983) 2 Punjab and Haryana 357 wherein it was held that appointment of Shri HS Kaushik, was bad in law and, therefore, liable to be quashed.
The second point as to whether the award rendered by Shri HS Kaushik, would be bad ipso facto it was held that the award delivered by Shri HS Kaushik, would not be rendered in-operative.
It was held as under :-  " Learned counsel for the parties were rightly agreed that the legal position is identical in C.W.P.
No. 4138 of 1982, M/s Remington Rand of India v. Paras Singh etc.
In this case, the challenge is to the appointment of the incumbent Presiding Officer of the Labour Court, Faridabad.
It is common ground that by Haryana Act No. 39 of 1976, an identical amendment had also been introduced in section 7 of the Act with regard to the prescription of qualifications for the Presiding Officers of the Labour Court.
The ratio and observations made in this judgment with regard to the appointment of a Presiding Officer of a Tribunal, therefore, applies mutatis mutandis in M/s. Remington Rand of India's case (supra) as well for the grant of writ of quo warranto against respondent No. 6 Shri HS Kaushik.
It is common ground that respondent No. 6, Shri HS Kaushik was never recommended for appointment as District Judge by the High Court and consequently would be ineligible for appointment.
His appointment has, therefore, to be necessarily quashed as well."
"However, there is merit in the stand of Mr. BS Gupta that merely because the appointments of the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal or the Labour Court have been quashed, this would not ipso facto vitiate the award rendered by them on the basis of the de fact doctrine.
It was rightly contended that the offices of the Presiding Officers of both the Tribunals and the Labour Court did lawfully exist and even though the appointments of the incumbents there to have been set aside, the awards delivered by them under the colour of office would not be rendered inoperative."
"It seems unnecessary to examine the aforesaid contention on principle because it appears to be covered by the binding precedent in Gokaraju Rangaraju's case (supra).
Therein the appointment of a Sessions Judge had already been declared invalid on the ground of its violation of Article 233 of the Constitution Later, the judgments rendered by the Sessions Judge were assailed on the ground that they stood vitiated as his appointment had been declared illegal.
Repelling such a challenge, Chinnappa Reddy, speaking for the Bench observed as follows :-  " A judge de facto, therefore, is one who is not a mere intruder, or usurper but one who holds office, under colour of lawful authority, though his appointment is defective and may later be found to be defective.
Whatever be the defect of his title to the office, judgments pronounced by him and acts done by him when he was clothed with the powers and functions of the office, albeit unlawfully, have the same efficiency as judgments pronounced and acts done by a Judge de jure.
Such is the de facto doctrine born of necessity and public policy to prevent needless confusion and endless mischief_____" and again :  " ____ We are concerned with the office that the judges purported to hold.
We are not concerned with the particular incumbents of the office.
So long as the office was validly created, it matters not that the incumbent was not validly appointed.
A person appointed as a Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge, would be exercising jurisdiction in the Court of Session and his judgments and orders would be those of the Court of Session.
They would continue to be valid as the judgments and orders of the Court of Session, notwithstanding that his appointment to such Court might be declared invalid.
On that account alone, it can never be said that the procedure prescribed by law has not been followed.
_____"  " Following the above, it has necessarily to be held that the awards rendered by the respondents S/Shri MC Bhardwaj and HS Kaushik are not necessarily vitiated on the sole ground that their appointments have herein been set aside."
On merits, I have examined the impugned award passed by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court.
The case of the workman was that there was a strike in the factory from 1971980 which ended on 9.8.1980 after which he was not allowed to join the duty.
As against the case of the petitioner, the case of the management was that the workman was absent from duty and his services were terminated under the standing orders.
Presiding Officer came to the conclusion that the workman was not absent from duty and his services had award carefully.
I find myself in agreement with the reasoning adopted by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court.
The findings recorded by the Presiding Officer of the labour Court are on facts which are not vitiated in any manner.
The management was granted proper opportunity to plead its case.
There is no misreading of the evidence.
The inference drawn by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court being of fact, I am not inclined to interfere in writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution and dismiss the writ petition with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.