Neeladari Rao, J The writ petitioner herein filed a petition under Section 2-A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (for short 'ID Act') challenging the order of termination on 30.11.80.
The Lower Tribunal, that is, R-3 herein dismissed the said application by holding that Section 2-A(2) which had come into effect from 27787 is prospective and it cannot be invoked for challenging the order of dismissal, removal or discharge which was passed prior to 27787.
The correctness of the said view is challenged in this writ petition.
2.
Section 2-A(2) of the ID Act was incorporated by the Andhra Pradesh Amendment Act 34/87.
It is evident from Section 2-A(2) of the ID Act that workman who was dismissed, removed or discharged from service can challenge the same by filing an application under Section 2-A(2) before the concerned Labour Court and it need not be referred to under Section 10 of the ID Act.
There is no period of limitation for challenging the order of dismissal, removal or discharge, under ID Act.
It is neither expressly stated nor it can be stated by implication that Section 2-A(2) of the ID Act cannot be invoked in challenge the order of dismissal etc., which was issued prior to 27787.
The lower Court relied upon the decisions in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel (reported in 1985-II L.LJ page 217) : (SC)] and MM Wagh v. State of Maharashtra (reported in 1991 LIN Page 764) in support of its finding that Section 2-A(2) of the ID Act is not applicable to challenge the order of dismissal etc., that was passed prior to 27787.
The latter judgment is a judgment of the Bombay High Court.
It merely refers to the scope of Section 3(1) of the ID Act.
It is not helpful in considering as to whether an application under Section 2-A(2) of the ID Act can be filed to challenge the order of dismissal etc., of the date prior to 27787.
The judgement of the Supreme Court starts at page 206 in 1985-II LLJ and does not throw any light for considering this aspect.
3.
As admittedly there is no period of limitation for challenging the order of dismissal etc., before the forum constituted under ID Act, and by incorporation of Section 2- A(2), the workman is given a right to directly approach the Labour Court to ventilate his grievance in case of dismissal, removal or discharge instead of moving the State Government for reference, and as there are no express words in Section 2-A(2) nor it can be construed by implication that Section 2-A(2) cannot be invoked in regard the order of dismissal etc., which was passed prior to the date of incorporation of Section 2-A(2), it has to be held that it can be invoked to challenge even the order of dismissal etc., of the date earlier to 27787, the date on which Andhra pradesh Act 34/87 had come into effect.
The delay in challenging the order of termination can be taken into consideration for moulding the relief if the Court finds that the order of termination is illegal, that is, it can disallow back wages from the date of alleged termination till the date of filing of the petition.
Hence, the impugned order of R-3 has to be held as illegal and the same has to be set aside.
The matter is remanded back to the lower Court, that is, the Labour Court and industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for restoring the ID and for disposing of the same in accordance with law.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No costs.
order accordingly.