Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred to as the Institute) is the petitioner.
It challenges the order dated May 5, 1992 passed by the Labour Court, Chandigarh, by which the application of the PGI Technologists' Association for the payment of wages for the period of 54 days during which the employees had remained on strike was allowed and it was held that "the employees are entitled to claim wages for the strike period."
A few facts as relevant for the disposal of this petition may be briefly noticed.
2.
The institute was incorporated by an Act of Parliament (Act No. 51 of 1966).
It was declared that it is "an institute of national importance".
It had been incorporated "to develop patterns of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education; to bring together as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity; and to attain self- sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for specialists and medical teachers."
The Act of Parliament authorises the institute to "do all other acts and things as may be necessary to further and promote" the above objects.
The Central Govt. can "after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in such manner as may be considered necessary by that Govt. for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under this Act."
The accounts of the Institute are required to be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
The Central Govt. has the power to make rules after consultation with the Institute and the Institute has the power to make Regulations with previous approval of the Central Govt.
The employees of the Institute are governed by the provisions of the Act, the Rules and Regulations as may be framed from time to time.
The institute maintains that the employees are governed by the provisions of the Central Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, and Fundamental Rules etc.
It is also averred that "the services of the Institute are declared `Essential Services' under the East Punjab Essential Services Maintenance Act, 1947 by Chandigarh Administration, vide notification No. _____ dated January 2, 1964".
3.
There are various categories of employees working in the Institute.
One such category is that of Technologists who have formed an association by the name of "PGI Medical Technologists Association _____" which consists of about 350 perrson.
It has been impleaded as respondent No. 1.
It is averred that the association had been raising certain demands and agitating.
In October 1991, it gave a call for indefinite strike.
All the Technologists proceeded on strike and absented from duty.
This strike continued from October 28, 1991 to December 20, 1991.
4.
It is averred that as a result of this strike the work of the Institute was totally paralysed.
The laboratories and the X-ray departments virtually became non-functioning.
As a result, the hospital could not provide even the essential services.
It had to request the Ministry of Defence to lend some personnel so that at least skeletal services could be provided.
To illustrate, the petitioner has averred that a total of 391 bio-chemistry tests were performed between October 28, 1991 to December 20, 1991, while 59565 such tests had been performed in the corresponding period earlier.
5.
During the period of strike, various communications were sent pointing out that disciplinary action could be taken against the employees who are on strike; and that no pay would be admissible "for the period during which the employees absent from duty".
On October 30, 1991, the Superintendent (Estt.)
of the Institute put up a proposal that "the Medical Technologists who staged dharna and are on strike may not be paid their salaries for the period of their absence, or dharna/strike".
This proposal was approved by the Director on October 30, 1991.
A communication dated November 13, 1991 was sent by the Director to the various Heads of Departments pointing out the above position.
A copy was forwarded to the President/General Secretary of the PGI Medical Technologists Association, PGI (respondent No. 1) also.
They were called upon to bring the contents of the letter to the notice of the members of the Association.
A warning was also given that "strict legal and disciplinary action will be taken against those employees who fail to resume their duties by 141191 FN".
6.
On December 18, 1991, the Assistant Labour Commissioner referred the demands of the Association to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court which is a subject-matter of Industrial Dispute Reference (IDR No. 1 of 1992).
Thereafter, on December 19, 1991, the Chief Commissioner, UT, Chandigarh and the Home Secretary called a meeting of the parties, in pursuance to which, it was decided by the Institute to withdraw the orders issued earlier regarding the break in service of the employees and to revoke the orders of termination of eight employees.
The employees also ended the strike and resumed their duties on December 21, 1991.
As the petitioner-institute did not pay the wages for the period of strike, the Association approached the Administration for reference of dispute regarding wages to the Labour Court.
It is averred that no notice of demand was ever served by the Association.
However, the Government, vide notification dated December 30, 1991 referred the following dispute for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh :-  "Whether the medical technologists of Post-graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh who were on strike from 28.10.91 to 20.12.91 are entitled to the wages for the said period or not ?"
The Association moved an application under section 2(b) read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying that a mandatory direction be issued by way of an interim award for the release of salaries for the strike period.
A copy of this application has been produced as Annexure P-3.
The petitioner-Institute filed its reply to the effect that the issue of any interim award would virtually amount to deciding the entire dispute and that no wages are legally admissible for the period of strike to the persons who remained absent from duty.
The Labour Court, vide its order dated May 5, 1992 directed that the employees who were on strike be paid their wages for that period.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-1.
Aggrieved by this order, the Institute has approached this Court through the present petition.
The order of the Labour Court has been challenged as being wholly arbitrary, illegal and without jurisdiction.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
Certain preliminary objection have been raised.
It has been averred that on November 2, 1991, orders regarding break in service had been issued by the Institute to all the members of the respondent-association.
Vide orders dated December 26, 1991, these orders were revoked retrospectively.
The orders regarding break in service having been retrospectively revoked without any reservation or qualification, there was no ostensible right with the employer to deduct wages for the strike period.
Another preliminary objection has been raised pointing out that the petitioner has suppressed a material fact that the application stating that arguments of the Association had been heard in the absence of the authorised representatives of the Institute and therefore, the interim award deserved to be recalled was pending.
The respondent-Association had filed a reply to the application followed by a replication by the Institute.
It is claimed that on these grounds the petition deserves to be dismissed.
7.
On merits, it has been averred that the Association never adopted any unreasonable attitude while agitating for their genuine demands.
The various disputes which had been lingering on for a long time, have been referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
These disputes relate to the grant of pay scales on the basis of the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission, grant of various demands and settlement of disputes regarding regularisation of Research Scheme Staff and extension of pension, gratuity, leave travel concession facilities etc. to the temporary employees.
It is only when these demands were not met that the Association staged Dharnas and Bandhs.
On March 4, 1991 the Association started a 24 hours' chain fast which continued till May 21, 1991.
During this period the members of the Association submitted mass casual leave as a mark of protest.
On May 22, 1991, the agitation was withdrawn on the death of Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
Various meetings took place and when nothing was done, the Association had no alternative but to resort to strike.
It has been further averred that the Institute is not a public utility service as defined in section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act and no notice was required to be given before resorting to a strike.
It has been further averred that prior to October 28, 1991 the members of the Association did not refrain from duty in full measure.
So far as the other averments regarding the paralysing the services at PGI or the suffering of the general public are concerned, the respondent avers that the Institute itself was to be blamed.
It is also stated that during the strike period, the out-patient departments and special clinics were functioning and the members of the faculty continued to order various tests to be performed.
In certain cases, samples were received and preserved.
Long dates for diagnostic tests and investigations are a usual feature of the PGI.
On the opening of the strike, all the backlog samples received and ordered were duly processed by the members of the Association.
The backlog was cleared without claiming any overtime allowance.
It is further averred that Fundamental Rule 17 was never invoked by the Institute in relation to their mass causal leave during the period November 1990, March 1991 and April 1991.
It has been further averred that "there is no order deducting wages".
The petitioner-institute has not produced any order before the Labour Court.
Nor has respondent No. 3 placed any order before this Hon'ble Court in the present petition for deducting the wages for the period in question, i.e., 28.10.1991 to 20.12.1991.
On these premises, it is claimed that the order passed by the Labour Court is legal and valid.
The Institute has filed a replication reiterating its stand in this petition.
8.
I have heard Mr. DS Nehra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Rajiv Raina, for the respondent-association.
9.
A Labour Court is entitled to examine and decide a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Govt.
In the present case, it was called upon to decide as to whether or not the medical technologists who had remained on strike from October 28, 1991 to December 20, 1991 were entitled to the wages for the said period.
The very reference presupposes that the technologists had remained on strike and the only question that had to be determined by the Court was as to whether or not they were entitled to the wages.
After examination of the evidence, the Court could have answered the question either in favour of the Institute or the Association.
However, in such a case, it is not appropriate to pass an interim award and thereby give the relief which may or may not be given at the conclusion of the proceedings.
This is what the Labour Court appears to have done in the present case.
It has given by way of an interim award what may not be available to the workmen at the end of the proceedings.
It has clearly erred in doing so.
10.
It is not to suggest that the Court could not have given an interim award.
Nor can it be said that a Court can never confer any benefits by way of of an interim award.
However, before making an interim award, it is incumbent on the Court to examine certain basic questions like the nature of the claim, the prima facie merits of the controversy and the balance of convenience.
It appears that the Court has failed to notice this aspect of the matter.
It has first of all observed that "the matter necessitated investigation as to whether the workmen did not put any extra duty ....." It further observes "that no order has been passed by the management withholding pay for strike period in question."
The order for break in service having been revoked "retrospectively by the management itself, it does not lie in their mouth to say that the workers are not entitled to claim wages for the strike period."
The Court finally says that "leaving apart all the legal bars to claim wages for the strike period by the employees, management itself had decided to pay wages for the strike period firstly by not specifically deciding to withhold the wages and secondly by revoking the interruption/break in service period with retrospective effect."
These reasons, in my view, did not entitle the Labour Court to pass the impugned order.
11.
In paragraph 8 of the petition, it has been clearly averred that "the extent of disruption caused to the service can be judged from the fact that the number of biochemistry tests performed during the strike period 28.10.91 to 20.12.91 fell to 391 as compared to 59565 and 43830 in the months of August and September 91, respectively."
In the reply filed by the respondent it has been averred that "at the opening of the strike, all the backlog samples received and ordered were duly processed by the members of the Association not only in the two departments mentioned in Annexures P-7 and P-8 but in the rest of the 42 departments also.
In view of this, it cannot be said that work suffered in the manner made out in the petition."
Replication has been filed in which it has been mentioned that "as a result of strike, the out-patients and special clinics had to be closed.
The Administration had to take the decision to admit only seriously ill patients requiring emergency services.
It was not possible for all the tests to be conducted at the Institute.
The extent of disruption in the services because of the strike is borne out from the fact that the number of tests being done in Bacteriology Laboratory fell from 12251 in September to 1609 in November.
Similarly in the Biochemistry Laboratory, the number of tests during the period from 28th October 91 to 27th November 91 fell to 391 as compared to 59565 and 43830 in the months of August and September 91 respectively.
This was a mere 07% of the routine work of the Biochemistry Lab.
The plea that the Association completed backlog of work is utter untruth because during the period of strike, no tests were accepted from a large number of patients as routine services were practically closed."
The respondent has not filed any rejoinder to controvert this position.
It is thus apparent that the services in the PGI suffered immensely.
In fact only 07% tests were conducted.
Further, there is no evidence that the samples collected from the patients kept on accumulating.
In fact, it is well known that samples of blood, urine or stool cannot be kept for an indefinite period of time.
The observation of the court that "the workmen had cleared the backlog which had accumulated during the period of strike by putting extra labour and without claiming any overtime" or that it was necessary to investigate as to whether the workman did not put any extra duty in order to enable the management to deprive the workmen of their wages is wholly without any basis.
12.
It has been next observed that no order has been passed by the management for withholding pay for the strike period.
This observation is contrary to the order dated October 30, 1991 when the Director approved the proposal that "the Medical Technologists who staged dharna and are on strike may not be paid their salaries for the period of their absence, or Dharna/Strike."
Still further, on December 27, 1991, the Director approved the proposal that "only salary from 21.12.91 to 311291 is to be paid".
Copies of both the aforesaid orders have been produced on record as Annexures P-6 and P-6-A with the writ petition.
Furthermore, during the period of strike itself, it had been stated that no pay is admissible for the period during which the employees were absent from duty.
Even otherwise, there could be no occasion for referring the matter to the Labour Court unless the wages had been actually withheld.
13.
The Labour Court then goes on to observe that the order regarding break in service having been retrospectively withdrawn on December 26, 1991, "it does not lie in their mouth to say that the workers are not entitled to claim wages for the strike period."
Absence from duty results in various consequences like break in service and deduction of wages etc.
The effect of break in service is that the continuity in service is broken.
Seniority and various other benefits available to an employee are accordingly affected.
If the order regarding break in service is withdrawn, it does not follow as a matter of course that the employee becomes entitled to the payment of back wages.
The entitlement to wages is actually dependent on different considerations.
The normal rule is `no work no wages'.
You must earn your wages by working.
You cannot earn them by disrupting the work.
The learned court is clearly in error in holding that the revocation of the order regarding break in service automatically results in the employees being entitled to payment of wages.
14.
In view of the above, the conclusions of the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
15.
It is no doubt true that industrial and other laws are calculated to promote industrial peace.
This is to achieve the twin object of promoting production and helping the poor workmen.
However, the continued concern for the `poor workman' has brought the country to a sad pass where majority of workmen show no concern for the society which they are meant to serve.
While the production is not increasing, `industry' is going into losses and tax payers's money is going down the drain, the workmen claim higher wages and better working conditions.
The present case is illustrative of the heartless and callous attitude of the workmen, the Medical Technologists of the PGI.
It is not unknown that X-ray and other tests are necessary diagonistic aids for the treatment of the sick.
By stopping work, the Technologists made it impossible for the doctors to effectively treat the patients.
During almost two months, when the Technologists were on strike, no work worth the name was done.
No worthwhile services were provided.
Hundreds may have died or suffered wholly avoidable pain and misery.
The employees showed no concern.
They thought it was irrelevant.
They struck work.
They deprived the sick and suffering public of the services and facilities which the Institute is required and equipped to provide.
In spite of this, they claim a right to wages.
16.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it prima facie appears that the Institute's attitude in denying wages was not only affair and proper, but the only course which could have been adopted in the circumstances of the case.
The members of the Association should thank the Institute and the competent authority for not initiating disciplinary proceedings which could have entailed serious consequences.
Time has come when the disruptive tendencies of the workmen need to be curbed by a firm hand so that the growing indicipline is checked.
Those who do not work should hope for no sympathy either from the managements or from the Court.
The right to wages is closely linked with the performance of duties.
Those who do not work have no right to wages.
The management has not only a right but it owes a duty to the tax payer that it does not pay those who do not work and thus earn no wages.
17.
Having considered the matter, I am of the view that the Labour Court clearly erred in passing the impugned order.
It ignored the fundamental principles governing the grant of interim relief.
The impugned order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 is accordingly quashed.
It is, however, clarified that nothing said above shall be taken into consideration while passing the final order by the Labour Court.
It shall pass the order on the basis of evidence that may be produced by the parties.