NK Sodhi, J - This writ petition has been filed by one Dr. HK Bali under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Assistant Professor of Cardiology in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (for short `the PGI').
Facts giving rise to this petition lie in a narrow compass and are as under :  2.
By an advertisement published in various newspapers in July, 1992 the PGI invited applications on prescribed forms for filling up, amongst others, one post of an Assistant Professor in the Department of Cardiology and the last date for the receipt of applications was July 16, 1992.
The essential qualifications required for this post were as follows :  a) a recognised medical qualification;  b) must be registered with the Central/State Medical Registration Council;  c) a post graduate qualifications i.e. M.D./M.S./M.D.S.
or a recognised qualification equivalent thereto in parent branch of super-speciality.
Petitioner who is working on ad hoc basis as Assistant Professor in the Department of Cardiology, PGI, Chandigarh fulfilled the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement and applied for the post.
In his application, he gave the information regarding his qualifications, prizes, medals, national awards, experience etc. Respondent No. 4 who was also eligible and like the petitioner is working as Assistant Professor on ad hoc basis, also applied in response to the aforesaid advertisement.
He also furnished all the information regarding his educational qualifications, prizes, medals, national award and experience etc. Apart from the petitioner and respondent No. 4, there were some others also who had applied.
The applicants for this post including the petitioner and respondent No. 4 appeared before the Selection Committee for interview held at New Delhi on August 30, 1992.
The Selection Committee consisted of the following members :  1) Prof. MS Valiathan .... Chairman  2) Prof. JS Bajaj .....
Member  3) Dr. GK Vishwakarma .....
Member  4) Prof. BS Chaubey .....
Member  5) Shri Sada Nand ......
Member  6) Prof. U Brahmaji Rao .....
Member  7) Prof. BM Goswami .....
Member  8) Prof. Ajmer Singh .....
Member  9) Prof. BNS Walia ...... Member-Secretary.
To a pointed query as to whether the Selection Committee was one of the Standing Committee constituted under sub-section (5) of Section 10 of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act'), Shri D.S.
Nehra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the PGI, admitted that it was so.
The Selection Committee which had to select persons for various faculty posts in the PGI including the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology was assisted by the subject-experts of the concerned specialities while making selections.
For making recommendations for appointment of the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology, this committee was assisted by Dr. ML Bhatia as an External Expert and Dr. RP Sapru as an Internal Expert.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the Selection Committee consisted of medical professionals of national eminence except Shri Sada Nand who was stated to be an able administrator.
Director General of Health Services, Government of India was also a member of the Selection Committee and he is, under the Rules, required to be a member of all Selection Committees constituted by the PGI for recruitment to the faculty posts.
3.
The Selection Committee after interviewing candidates and after making individual assessment of each applicant taking into consideration their academic qualifications, teaching experience, performance and achievements, as also the rating given to each candidate by the subject-experts and after due deliberations, recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment to this post.
The name of another candidate other than respondent No. 4 was placed at number 2 by the Selection Committee.
Respondent No. 4 was not selected and consequently not recommended for appointment by the Selection Committee.
The unanimous recommendations of the Selection Committee were then sent to the Governing Body of the PGI which under the Act and the Rules & Regulations framed thereunder is admittedly the appointing authority.
The Governing Body is a larger body consisting of a Chairman who is the Minister for Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi and twelve other members including Prof. MS Valiathan and Prof. BNS Walia who were the Chairman and member-secretary respectively of the Selection Committee as well.
It is stated that members of the Governing Body are also eminent persons in their respective fields but only four out of thirteen belong to the medical profession.
The Governing Body in its meeting did not accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee and instead decided to appoint respondent No. 4 as Assistant Professor of Cardiology.
Accordingly, the PGI through its Director issued letter of appointment dated September 26, 1992 to respondent No. 4 informing him about his appointment.
He was asked to join his post at the earliest but not later than October 8, 1992.
Respondent No. 4 is stated to have joined his duty on the same day ie September 26, 1992.
It was at this stage that the present petition was filed challenging his appointment.
At the time of admission, motion bench stayed the operation of the order appointing respondent No. 4 as Assistant Professor of Cardiology.
In obedience to the orders passed by this Court on October 19, 1992, respondent No. 4 was not allowed to continue on the post and was informed that his appointment by the Governing Body had been stayed by this Court.
4.
The case of the petitioner is that having been selected and recommended for appointment by the statutory Selection Committee constituted under the provisions of the Act, the Governing Body could not, without good and valid reasons, ignore the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
It is also his case that the Governing Body as the appointing authority could at the most reject the recommendations of the Selection Committee but could not appoint a person other than the one recommended by the Selection Committee and for this reason, the appointment of respondent No. 4 was liable to be quashed.
Shri RK Garg, Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the PGI, on the other hand, contended that the power of appointment to any faculty post including the post of Assistant Professor vested in the Governing Body which was not bound by the recommendations of the Selection Committee as the latter is constituted only to aid and advise the former in the matter of appointments.
In this context, it was urged that the Governing Body could appoint any one in the exercise of its absolute power of appointment and, therefore, no fault could be found with the order appointing respondent No. 4.
5.
From the rival contentions advanced before me, the question that arises for determination in this petition is whether the Governing Body as the appointing authority was bound by the recommendations of the Selection Committee and if not, was it open to travel beyond the recommendations and appoint a person other than the one recommended.
6.
Before dealing with the submissions made on behalf of the parties, it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the Act and the statutory Rules and Regulations framed thereunder.
The Act was enacted to declare the Institution known as the PGI to be an Institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith.
PGI has been constituted as a body corporate by the name aforesaid and consists of members referred to in Section 5 of the Act.
Sub-sections (1), (2) and (5) of Section 10 of the Act are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "10(1) There shall be a Governing Body of the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations :  Provided that the number of persons who are not  members of the Institute shall not exceed one-third of  the total membership of the Governing Body.
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations make in this behalf, confer or impose upon it.
(3) xxx xxx xxx  (4) xxx xxx xxx  (5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules, the Institute may constitute as many standing committees as many ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power of discharging any function of the institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter which the Institute may refer to them.
(6) xxx xxx xxx  The Central Government in exercise of its powers conferred by Section 31 of the Act has made Rules called the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Rules, 1967 (hereinafter called `the Rules').
Sub-clauses (1), (2) and (5) of Rule 7 read as under :-  "7.
Creation of Posts and Appointments thereto :-  (1) The Institute may create posts, subject to provision in the budget, on such scales of pay as are approved by the Central Government classify them into grades and specify their designations :-  Provided that no post above the Associate Professor level shall be credited except with the prior approval of the Central Government;  (2) The Director General of Health Services shall be a member of all selection committees constituted by the Institute, for recruitment to faculty posts;  (3) xx xx xx xx  (4) xx xx xx xx  (5) The method of recruitment, the age limit, the educational qualifications and other matters relating to the appointments to various posts in the Institute shall be determined in the manner provided for by regulations."
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 32 of the Act the Central Government has also framed Regulations, known as the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Regulations, 1967 (referred to hereinafter as `the Regulations').
Regulations 12, 23(1), 32(1) and 34 read as under :-  "12.
Powers and functions of Governing Body :-  The Governing Body shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are specified in the Schedules-I  23.
Standing and ad hoc Committees :- (1) The Standing and ad hoc Committees shall consist of the Director of the Institute as ex officio member and such number of other members as are considered necessary.
32.
Qualification for appointment :- (1) Age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to a post shall be as specified by the Institute keeping in view the qualifications and experience prescribed by the Central Government for similar posts before applications of candidates are called for subject to the condition that non-medical personnel shall not be appointed to the posts of Director and Medical Superintendent.
(2) xx xx xx  (3) xx xx xx  34.
Seniority :- Seniority of employees of the Institute in each category shall be determined by the order of merit in which they were selected for appointment to the grade in question, those selected on earlier occasion being ranked senior to those selected later :  Provided that the seniority inter se of employees, other than the teaching staff of the Institute shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in a particular service :  Provided further that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission or the Selection Body shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority :  Provided further xx xx xx xx"  It is not in controversy before me that the power to appoint an Assistant Professor which is a Group-A post in any faculty vests in the Governing Body of the PGI in terms of Entry 61 of Schedule-I to the Regulations.
7.
Now, I come to the question posed hereinabove.
There is no doubt that the appointing authority which is the Governing Body is quite distinct from the Selection Committee and it alone has the power to make appointments to any group-A post which includes the post of an Assistant Professor.
It is also true that the Selection Committee which is constituted under sub-section 5 of Section 10 of the Act is primarily constituted for the purpose of aiding and advising the Governing Body in the matter of appointments and it cannot, even for a moment, be said that the Governing Body would be bound in every case to accept and adopt the recommendations of the Selection Committee while making appointments.
The Governing Body is required to exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are specified in the Schedule to the Regulations and the power to make appointments to group-A posts vests in it.
It has to apply its own independent mind to the recommendations made to it by the Selection Committee and is not a mere rubber stamp and for good and valid reasons, it may refuse to accept the recommendations and not appoint those recommended by the Selection Committee.
I may hasten to add here that in every case when the appointing authority disagrees with the recommendations of the Selection Committee and refuses to appoint the persons recommended, it must have good, strong and cogent reasons for such disagreement and cannot have the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee has, thus, to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons and in public interest.
These reasons will, of course, have to be disclosed to the Court as and when the action of the appointing authority in not accepting the recommendation of the Selection Committee is challenged in a Court of law.
Without meaning to be exhaustive one can visualise a few instances when the Governing Body would be justified in not appointing those recommended by the Selection Committee.
Where the constitution of the Selection Committee is for some reason defective or it did not have the requisite quorum when it met to make selections or there was such an illegality or patent material irregularity in its procedure or proved mala fides or bias affecting the selection, it would perfectly be in order for the appointing authority to discard the recommendations.
Again, after the recommendations are made the appointing authority finds on police verification or otherwise that the recommendees had bad conduct or character which fact was unknown to the Selection Committee, the recommendees need not be appointed.
Even where the appointing authority decides not to fill up the vacancies owing to paucity of financial resources, it would be justified in not accepting the recommendations and keep the posts vacant or abolish them.
If the Selection Committee through inadvertence recommends a candidate who is otherwise ineligible under the Rules governing the Service, the appointing authority would not be bound to appoint such a recommendee.
Again, if the persons recommended do not measure upto the expectations or level of merit required by the appointing authority, it would be open to the latter to turn down all the recommendations.
If, for any reason there is no vacancy after the selection is made, the selected candidates would have no right to claim appointment.
8.
While power to appoint vests in the appointing authority, which power, as already observed above, has to be exercised bona fide, the power to select and choose the best and most suitable candidate from amongst the available vests in the Selection Committee alone.
It is true, as was contended by Shri Garg, learned counsel for the PGI that the Act and the Rules in terms do not spell out any specific role to be performed by the Selection Committee, but, in my opinion, in the very nature of things, the role of the Selection Committee is to select and choose the best from amongst those available.
It is one of the Standing Committees constituted under sub-section (5) of Section 10 of the Act and it cannot be said that it has no role to perform and that it is always open to the appointing authority to ignore its recommendations at its sweet will and to reassess the inter se merits of the various applicants and appoint anyone it likes.
The very purpose of having a Selection Committee is to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates and to select the best and this purpose would be frustrated if the Governing Body starts making its own selections thereafter.
Such committees which consist of professionally eminent persons assisted by subject-experts alone are suitable for this job.
The appointing authority, as in the instant case, consisted of persons who may be eminent in their own fields but they are certainly not expert in the field in regard to which selection was made.
Moreover, the appointing authority in the present case has not even interviewed the candidates and only on the basis of the bio-data of the candidates has chosen to reassess their relative merits without the assistance of the experts, which in my opinion, runs counter to the object of appointing selection committees.
Such committees consisting of professional assisted by subject-experts are constituted with a view to ensure selection of the best available persons for appointment and to guard against arbitrariness and nepotism in the matter of appointments.
Therefore, if the appointing authority had good reasons, it could refuse to accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee but if it decided to fill up the post, it was bound by the unanimous recommendation of the Selection Committee in respect of the merit of the petitioner as compared to that of others.
9.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Regulation 34 quoted above makes it clear that while making appointments, the seniority of the employees in each category has to be determined by the order of merit in which they were selected for appointment and those selected on earlier occasions have to rank senior to those who were selected later.
Not only this, in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Selection Committee cannot be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
For instance, if A and B are recommended for appointment by the Selection Committee in this order of merit, it would not be open to the appointing authority while accepting the recommendations to make B senior to A.
If this is so, how can the appointing authority travel beyond the list of names recommended by the Selection Committee and appoint a person not even recommended for appointment.
To test the argument of Shri Garg that the power of appointment is absolute and that the appointing authority could appoint any one according to its sweet-will, one may notice another example.
If A and B are recommended for appointment for two posts in this order of merit, then if the argument of Shri Garg is to be accepted, the appointing authority can appoint B and C and ignore A altogether.
In that eventuality, how will the seniority of B and C be determined when C has not been recommended by the Selection Committee.
In my opinion, the appointing authority cannot appoint C who was not recommended.
It is, therefore, clear that the appointing authority when chosen to appoint someone, it will have to appoint those recommended by the Selection Committee in the order of merit as decided by the latter and cannot appoint a person who has not been so recommended though it may be open in certain cases to the appointing authority not to appoint any one and keep the post vacant.
10.
To conclude, I hold that the appointing authority is not bound in every case to accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee and may for good and valid reasons, turn down the same.
However, if it chooses to make appointments, then it cannot appoint a person other than the one recommended by the Selection Committee and that too in the same order of merit in which they were selected by the said Committee.
For the view that I have taken, I am fortified by the following observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jatinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 SC 1850 where the question was whether a person selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for direct appointment had an unfettered right to be appointed on the basis of the recommendation made by the said Board :  "......
The selection by the Commission, however, is only a recommendation of the Commission and the final authority for appointment is the Government.
The Government may accept the recommendation or may decline to accept the same ......
This, however, does not clothe the appellants with any such right.
They cannot claim as of right that the Government must accept the recommendation of the Commission.
If, however, the vacancy is to be filled up, the Government has to make appointment strictly adhering to the order or merit as recommended by the Public Service Commission.
It cannot disturb the order of merit according to its own sweet will except for other good reasons viz. bad conduct or character.
The Government also cannot appoint a person whose name does not appear in the list.
But it is open to the Government to decide how many appointments will be made ......"  (Emphasis supplied).
Similar observations made earlier by the Apex Court in The State of Haryana v. Subash Chander Marwaha and others, AIR 1973 SC 2216 also lend support to view that I am taking.
It would be pertinent to quote the following observations :  "......
Indeed, if the State Government while making the selection for appointment had departed from the ranking given in the list, there would have been a legitimate grievance on the ground that the State Government had departed from the rules in this respect.
The true effect of Rule 10 in Part C is that if and when the State Government proposed to make appointments of Subordinate judges the State Government (i) shall not make such appointments by travelling outside the list and (ii) shall make the selection for appointment strictly in the order the candidates have been placed in the list published in the Government Gazette.
In the present case neither of these two requirements is infringed by the Government ......."  Rule 10 (ii) referred to in this judgment is pari matria with Regulation 34 as quoted above.
In a somewhat similar context, the Apex Court again in Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 194 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1612, observed as under :-  "............
Unless the relevant recruitment rule so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies.
However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies or any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test and no discrimination can be permitted ...  ....."  11.
In the instant case, the Governing Body which is the appointing authority did not accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee and appointed respondent No. 4 whose name was not recommended for appointment.
The appointment of this respondent is, therefore, contrary to law and has to be quashed.
12.
It was then urged by Mr. JK Sibal, learned counsel for the petitioner that this was fit case in which the Governing Body should be directed to appoint the petitioner in terms of the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
I find merit in this contention.
It was open to the appointing authority, namely, the Governing Body not to accept the recommendation of the Selection Committee but it had to be only for good and valid reasons.
By not appointing the petitioner, the appointing authority has obviously not accepted the recommendation of the Selection Committee and for doing so the reason given by the Director in the written statement is as under :  "While making the recommendations for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology, the Selection Committee was assisted by Dr. ML Bhatia as an Internal Expert and Dr. RP Sapru, as an Internal Expert.
The External Expert Dr. ML Bhatia rated the petitioner as `Very Good' and the respondent No. 4 as `Good', whereas the Internal Expert rated the petitioner as `Very Good' and the respondent No. 4 as `Outstanding'.
The Selection Committee recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor of Cardiology.
It is, however, submitted that the recommendations of the Selection Committee are not binding on the Governing Body, which, under the PGIMER Chandigarh Rules & Regulations, is the appointing authority."'
This is hardly a sound reason and the same must have been rejected by the Selection Committee itself since it recommended the appointment of the petitioner unanimously.
Significantly, two members of the Governing Body, namely, Prof. MS Valiathan and the Director of the PGI were the Chairman and member secretary respectively of the Selection Committee as well and the decisions of both the bodies are stated to be unanimous.
By that as it may, the appointing authority appears to have reassessed the relative merits of the candidates which, as I have already said, was not within its domain.
No other reason has been spelt out.
In Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) SLR 389, the name of the petitioner therein had been withheld by the Public Service Commission although she was successful in the competitive test and ranked at number 24 in the merit list.
Twenty-six candidates only had been recommended including 17 from the general category to which the petitioner belonged although the vacancies were 54.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court found that names of all the qualified candidates had to be sent to the Government and the reason given by the Public Service Commission for not communicating the entire list of the qualified candidates was that it had originally been informed that there were only 28 vacancies.
It was found that the reason given by the Commission was not sound and consequently, a direction was issued to include her name in the list of candidates selected for appointment and she was also given her due place in the seniority list.
In the present case, since the Governing Body had no valid reason for not accepting the recommendation of the Selection Committee, I think it is a fit case in which the former should be directed to appoint the petitioner.
Shri Garg, learned counsel for the PGI, however, contended that there was no such prayer made in the petition and the petitioner was not entitled as a matter of course to seek a mandamus directing the Governing Body to appoint him merely because he was selected by the Selection Committee.
I am conscious that a candidate does not get a right to be appointed merely because he has been selected by a selecting authority but as observed earlier, the appointing authority has to have good reason for not giving an appointment to such a candidate.
In the case before me, it is not only that no good reasons are forthcoming but, on the other hand, the appointing authority has travelled beyond the list of recommended candidates and acted in excess of its powers.
It is true that no specific prayer seeking mandamus for appointment has been made in the petition but one of the prayers made is :  "This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to grant any other relief to which the petitioner may be found entitled and in this respect, may pass any such order or direction or suitable writ as deemed fit."
This prayer, in my opinion, is comprehensive enough to include the prayer that the petitioner be directed to be appointed if it is otherwise found that he is entitled to such a relief.
Even otherwise, it is by now well settled that this Court has wide discretion in the matter of granting relief to the petitioner to suit the exigencies of a particular case and the same cannot be denied simply on the ground that proper writ or direction had not been prayed for.
No other point was argued.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, order dated September 26, 1992 appointing respondent No. 4 as Assistant Professor of Cardiology is set aside and the Governing Body is directed to appoint the petitioner in accordance with the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.