NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Karnal, whereby the court despite having reversed the judgment and decree of the trial Court holding that the dismissal of the plaintiff as illegal, yet declined to grant him wages for two years during which he remained out of employment of the Municipal Committee.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 31.3.1981 of his retirement is wrong, illegal, void and thus nullity and consequently sought declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to all service benefits including upto date salary from 141981 till the date of his resuming the duties, leave salary, yearly increments and other service benefits such as right of pension etc.  3.
The defendant put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the various allegations of the plaintiff.
It was also urged that the plaintiff was working as a Sanitary Patrol/ Daroga and not as Sanitary Mate.
The post of sanitary patrol was placed in the category of Class III employees and so the letter dated 8.12.1977 is not applicable in the case of the plaintiff.
Besides, it was urged that there was no post of Sanitary Mate in the Municipality of Panpat.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether order passed by the Administrator, Municipality, Panipat, on 31.3.1981 is liable to be set aside on the grounds mentioned in the petition.
If so, to what effect ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
4.
Relief.
5.
The trial Court decided learned counsel against the plaintiff, issue No. 2 (sic) and with defendant in favour of the plaintiff.
In view of the findings in respect of issue No. 1, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
The appellate Court after re-appraising the evidence on record and in the light of the submissions made by the respective counsel came to the conclusion that the post of Sanitary Patrol which is now termed as Conservancy Jamadar/Sanitary Mate is at serial No. 14 as per exhibit P-8/1 and was thus a Class IV employee.
Since, as per case of the defendant also, such an employee could be retired at the age of 60 years, the retirement of the plaintiff at the age of 58 was held to be illegal and so the finding of the trial Court was reversed in respect of issue No. 1.
All the same, the Additional District Judge declined to grant the plaintiff back wages for two years during which period he remained out of employment with the cryptic observation that since the plaintiff completed 60 years of age during the pendency of the suit, so he cannot claim wages for these two years.
Denial of this consequential relief has impelled the appellant to approach this Court by way of Regular Second Appeal.
The short and the only submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that in view of the finding to the effect that the retirement of the appellant was wholly illegal, the appellant was entitled to all consequential benefits, i.e., full back wages and other benefits and for this relied upon the full bench judgment in case reported as Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) SLR 151 and Abhinash Chandra Gautam (since deceased) through its Lrs.
v. Union Territory of Tripura and another,  1983(2) Labour and Industrial cases, 1738.
Reference to the Full Bench was formulated in the following terms :-  "Whether, in a suit for declaration, the Civil Court or the High Court sitting in appeal or otherwise is competent to give any direction etc. for the payment of the arrears of pay as a result of the dismissal order having been declared illegal or without jurisdiction."
Relying upon the earlier judgment of the Apex Court in case reported as Krishan Murari Lal Sehgal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1977 Supreme Court, 1233, it came to the conclusion that the conclusion that the above question stands answered at least implicitly if not explicitly.
In the above mentioned case of Krishan Murari Lal Sehgal, the petitioner despite having succeeded was denied of emoluments beyond 15th January, 1963 when his suit was decreed by the Sub Judge 1st Class, who thus preferred another civil miscellaneous subsequent to the decision of the Civil Appeal by the Apex Court and the following order was passed by their Lordships on the civil miscellaneous application :-  "Heard, counsel for the parties.
This application is disposed of on a short ground.
It has become necessary to clarify the order made by this Court allowing the appeals of the petitioner.
According to the derision of this Court, the petitioner was given a declaration that he would be deemed to continue in service with effect from the date of suit.
As a logical consequence of this declaration, it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to back salary back right from 1st June, 1962 till 9th February, 1974.
The only way in which the judgment of this Court can be implemented is to pay the aforesaid amount of salary to the petitioner.
With these observations, this application is disposed of.
The amount of the salary must be paid within two months from today."
7.
The facts of the present case are at much better footing.
In the present case, the plaintiff claimed declaration to the effect that the order of retirement is illegal and void and also sought relief of reinstatement and payment of his back wages.
Once it is held that the retirement of the plaintiff is illegal and void, it necessarily follows that such an employee continues to be in service and so is entitled to emoluments flowing from his status.
Accordingly, he must be deemed to be in a position identical with that existing prior to the passing of the order of his retirement.
The emoluments of the post are logical consequence of setting aside of the order of retirement.
There is no proof on record that the employee was gainfully employed after the date when he was retired.
Since he could be retired on completion of 60 years of age, he in law is entitled to claim wages for two years, i.e. from 141981 till his date of retirement.
Consequently, I accept the appeal, modify the judgment and decree of the lower appellate court and grant him wages for a period of two years.
Since the appellant had been denied the just relief, the defendant would pay the amount of salary of two years along with interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
The appeal is accepted with costs.
Costs assessed at Rs. 500/-.
Appeal accepted.