RS Mongia, J - Petitioner, Shri Chander Kiran Maini, possesses a Post Graduate Diploma in Management (which according to him, is recognised as equivalent to M.B.A.) from the Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta.
He also possesses a degree in Law from the University of Delhi.
The petitioner, in the year 1970, had initially joined on the post of Junior Manager (Personnel), with the Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited (IFFCO).
In December, 1974, he was promoted as Assistant Personnel Manager and thereafter promoted as Deputy Manager (Personnel) in December, 1977, with an additional charge of the Personnel & Administration Department of Krishak Bharti Cooperative Ltd, New Delhi, which was a newly floated Co-operative Organisation of IFFCO.
Thereafter, in 1981, he was further promoted as Manager in the Personnel & Administration Department.
The petitioner thereafter joined the Gujarat Narmada Fertilizer Co Ltd in the year 1983 as Deputy General Manager (Personnel) in the Pay scale of Rs. 2750-4775.
2.
The Punjab Agro Industries Corporation, Chandigarh (In short the Corporation is a Punjab Government undertaking and is fully financed by the State of Punjab.
It is a Government Company within the meaning of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
It is not necessary to go into its constitution and other details regarding its management as it is not disputed on behalf of the respondents that Corporation is a `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In December, 1983, the Corporation had issued an advertisement for the post of General Manager in the Personnel Department.
The petitioner applied for the said post, and was selected by the Selection Committee of the Corporation.
The Corporation issued an appointment letter to the petitioner on 2nd March, 1984 (Annexure P-2) appointing him as General Manager (Personnel) Gr.
I in the pay scale of Rs. 2500-3500 plus dearness allowance and other benefits as admissible in the Corporation, at the starting pay of Rs. 2900/- by giving four advance increments.
The appointment letter was followed by another letter dated 27th March, 1984, intimating the petitioner the terms and conditions of his appointment.
According to the terms and conditions of his appointment, the petitioner was to be on probation on the post of General Manager (Personnel) for a period of one year in the first instance, which was extendable as per the Rules of the Corporation.
Another term of appointment was that the petitioner would continue in service of the Corporation till the attainment of 60 years of age.
In pursuance of the appointment letter, the petitioner joined the Corporation on 5th July, 1984.
4.
Before joining, the petitioner had made a representation to the Corporation on 17th May, 1984 to waive off the condition regarding probation as he had already vast experience in the field of Personnel Management.
The request of the petitioner was acceded to by the Corporation and the condition of probation was deleted by orders of the Corporation dated 19th May, 1984 (Annexure P-3).
5.
The Board of the Corporation in its meeting held on 28th September, 1987, decided to abolish the post of General Manager (Personnel) Grade I and to terminate the services of the petitioner with immediate effect.
The resolution of the Board of Directors of the Corporation, which has been attached as Annexure R/A with the written statement, reads as under :-  The Managing Director informed the Board of Directors that prior to March, 1984, there was only one post of General Manager in the Marketing division of the corporation.
In the 87th meeting of the Board of Directors held on 6384, it was decided to reorganise the organisational structure of the corporation and to create, inter alia, another post of General Manager Grade I, in the Personnel division.
The Board of Directors further decided that while filling up the posts, minimum basic qualifications should be laid down for each post.
The expansion at managerial levels was expected to lead to a substantial increase in turnover and profitability of the corporation and the Board of Directors had desired that the impact of the proposed reorganisation on growth and profitability should be assessed after a period of three years.
The Board of Directors discussed at length the desirability of continuing the post of General Manager (Personnel).
It noted that Shri CK Maini had been recruited specifically for the post of General Manager (Personnel) Grade I in the scale of Rs. 2500-3500 and had worked as such for about three years from July 1984 to July, 1987, since which date he has been deployed to look after the Agro Engineering and Implementation Cell.
However, the Board of Directors felt that although the corporation was incurring a financial liability of more than one lakh of rupees per year by creation of this additional post, there has not been any commensurate impact on the growth and profitability of the corporation.
On consideration, the Board of Directors passed the following resolution :  "Resolved that the post of General Manager (Personnel) Grade I, be and is hereby abolished and that the services of Shri CK Maini, General Manager (Personnel) presently deployed to look after the Agro Engineering & Implementation Cell be terminated with immediate effect."
The Managing Director of the Corporation on the same day, i.e. 28th September, 1987, in pursuance of the above-said resolution of the Board of Directors, passed an order terminating the services of the petitioner with immediate effect.
The copy of the said order has been attached as Annexure R/8 with the written statement.
The Resolution of the Board of Directors referred to above and the order of termination of services of the petitioner have been made the subject-matter of challenge by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
6.
Before adverting to the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner to assail the impugned action of the respondent-Corporation, I may deal with a Preliminary Objection raised on behalf of the Corporation, Mr. HL Sibal, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the respondent-Corporation, submitted that even though the Corporation may be a `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, yet there being no violation of any statute or statutory rule by the Corporation and the action being not violative of any fundamental right, the Writ would not lie against the Corporation.
The learned counsel submitted that at the most what the petitioner could contend was that there had been breach of contract, inasmuch as the services of the petitioner had been dispensed with before attaining the age of superannuation of 60 years, as envisaged by the appointment letter, the remedy with the petitioner would be to file a civil suit for damages for the breach of the contract and no Writ would lie for enforcing a contract of service.
7.
In reply, the learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted that the abolition of the post was in violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as the abolition of the post was wholly arbitrary.
The learned counsel for the petitioner cited Supreme Court judgment in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, AIR 1986 SC 1571, wherein a similar contention as raised by Mrs. Sibal, was repelled by observing as follows :-  "102.
It was, however, submitted on behalf of the Appellants that this was a contract entered into by the Corporation like any other contract entered into by it in the course of its trading activities and the Court, therefore, ought not to interfere with it.
It is not possible for us to equate employees with goods which can be bought and sold.
It is equally not possible for us to equate a contract of employment with a mercantile transaction between two businessmen and much less to do so when the contract of employment is between a powerful employer and a weak employee.
104.
The contesting respondents could, therefore, have filed a civil suit for a declaration that the termination of their service was contrary to law on the ground that the said Rule 9(i) was void.
In such a suit, however, they would have got a declaration and possibly damages for wrongful termination of service but the civil court could not have ordered reinstatement as it would have amounted to granting specific performance of a contract of personal service.
As the Corporation is "the State" they, therefore, adopted the far more efficacious remedy of filing a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
105.
As the Corporation is "the State" within the meaning of Article 12, it was amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226.
It is now well established that an instrumentality of agency of the State being "the State" under Article 12 of the Constitution is subject to the Constitutional limitations, and its actions are State Actions and must be judged in the light of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution (See, for instance, Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi, AIR 1975 SC 1331; The International Airport Authority's case, AIR 1979 SC 1628) and Ajay Hasia's case, AIR 1981 SC 487).
The actions of an instrumentality or agency of the State must, therefore, be in conformity with Article 14 of the Constitution "  The above observations of the Supreme Court are complete answer to the Preliminary Objection raised by Mr. Sibal, and I hereby overrule to same and hold that the present writ is maintainable against the Corporation.
8.
The following points were raised by Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner :-  1) The abolition of the post of General Manager (P&A) was not a bona fide abolition of the post.
In fact, it was a pretence or device to terminate the services of the petitioner.
2) There is a joint cadre of various General Managers Grade I in the Corporation and the posts are interchangeable.
Even if the abolition is held to be good, the services of the junior-most General Manager Grade I should have been dispensed with.
3) Even if the post of General Manager (P&A) stood abolished, the petitioner was not holding that post on 28th September, 1987 and the person who was holding the post of General Manager (P&A) should have been asked to go; and  4) There is infirmity in the decision of the Board of Directors, dated 28th September, 1987, inasmuch as :  (i) The matter regarding abolition of the post in question was not on the Agenda of the meeting of the Board of Directors, but was suddenly taken up at the instance of the Managing Director.
(ii) The Board of Directors relied upon the decision of its 87th meeting dated 6th March, 1984 for abolition of the post of General Manager, (Personnel) Grade I, which has no relevance to the post of General Manager (P&A).
(iii) The Board of Directors has not considered the entire structure of the Organisation and rather only concentrated on Personnel & Administration Department for coming to the conclusion that the post of General Manager (P&A) should be abolished.
(iv) The material placed before the Board of Directors was not even shown to the petitioner.
The material considered was regarding the quality of work of the petitioner and not regarding the desirability of continuing the post.
(v) The work and duties which were being performed by the petitioner are still in existence and are now being performed by another General Manager, Grade I  Point No. 1  9.
In support of the first point, Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted that there is no doubt about the proposition of law as to whether a post should be retained or abolished is essentially for the Government or the employer to decide.
However, he added, if the Court comes to the conclusion that the decision to abolish the post is not taken in good faith or it is used as a cloak or pretence to terminate the services of a person holding the post, then in such an eventuality the abolition of the post would suffer from serious infirmity and would be liable to be set aside, being arbitrary.
Further, he submitted that whether the decision to abolish the post is in good faith or it is just a cloak or pretence to terminate the services of a person holding the post, is justiciable.
His whole argument was that in the present case the whole idea and the intention was to terminate the services of the petitioner and with that idea in mind it was just a pretence or ruse to abolish the post.
In support of contention, the learned counsel cited the judgment of the Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Shri Des Raj Sangar, 1976(1) S.L.R.
191, in which it was observed as under :-  "Whether a post should be retained or abolished is essentially a matter for the Government to decide.
As long as such decision of the Govt. is taken in good faith, the same cannot be set aside by the court.
It is not open to the court to go behind the wisdom of the decision and substitute its own opinion for that of the Government on the point as to whether a post should or should not be abolished.
The decision to abolish the post should, however, as already mentioned, be taken in good faith and be not used as a cloak or pretence to terminate the services of a person holding that post.
In case it is found on consideration of the facts of a case that the abolition of the post was only a device to terminate the service of an employee the abolition of the post would suffer from a serious infirmity and would be liable to be set aside.
The termination of a post in good faith and the consequent termination of the services of the incumbent of that post would not attract article 311.
In M Ramanatha Pillai v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 2641, Ray, C.J speaking for the Constitution Bench of this Court observed :  A post may be abolished in good faith.
The order abolishing the post may lose its effective character if it is established to have been made arbitrarily, mala fide or as a mask of some penal action within the meaning of article 311(2)"  The learned counsel further cited a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Prem Chand, Naib Tehsildar v. State of Haryana, 1989(2) SLR 56, in which various earlier judgments of the Supreme Court were considered and it was held that if the abolition of the post is a pretence or ruse to terminate the services of the holder of the post, then the same is liable to be set aside and the whole matter is justifiable.
It was observed in the above-said authority of the Division Bench as under :-  The power to create, continue and abolish any civil post is inherent in every sovereign Government.
It is a policy decision exercised by the executive and is dependent on exigencies of circumstances and administrative necessity.
The abolition of post results in termination of services.
But such termination is not dismissal or removal within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution because both in case of dismissal or removal there is a stigma.
The abolition of post is not a personal penalty against the Government servant.
The opportunity of showing cause against the proposed penalty of dismissal or removal does not arise in the case of abolition of post.
It also does not comfer on the person any right to hold the office after it is abolished or to any.
other employment.
Of course, the appropriate Government could frame rules offering alternative posts to the holder of the civil office or post which has been abolished.
It is a matter of policy decision of the Government.
The nature and the scope of powers to abolish a post has been the subject-matter of several decisions.
It was pointed out in N Ramanatha Pillai v. State of Kerala (supra) by their Lordships of the Supreme Court as under :-  A post may be abolished in good faith.
The order abolishing the post may lose its effective character, if it is established to have been made arbitrarily, mala fide or as a mask of some penal action within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
A similar view was also taken in the State of Haryana v. Shri Des Raj Sangar, AIR 1976 SC 1199.
Again, the Supreme Court observed in K Rajendran v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1982 SC 1107, in the words of ES Venkataramiah, J, as under :-  The power to abolish a civil post is inherent in the right to create it.
The Government has always the power, subject, of course, to the constitutional provisions, to re-organise a department to provide efficiency and to bring about economy.
It can also abolish an office or post in food faith.
The action to abolish a post in good faith.
The action to abolish a post should not be just a pretence taken to get rid of an inconvenient incumbent.
It was further pointed out that whether the action taken is legislative or executive, it is always subject to judicial review.
It was stated thus :-  The power to abolish a post which may result in the holder thereof ceasing to be a Government servant has to be recognised.
But we may hasten to add that any action legislative or executive taken pursuant to that power is always subject to judicial review."
The learned counsel went on to submit that if from the record available and from the perusal of the impugned order, the Court comes to the conclusion that in fact the paramount consideration was not to abolish the post, but to get rid of the person holding the post, then the action would be wholly arbitrary and liable to be quashed.
He referred to a judgment reported as Shri Ram Dinesh Lall v. Sikkim Khadi and Village Industries Board, 1986(1) SLR 791, in which it has been observed as under :-  "It would thus appear that whereas evaluation was considered advisable in respect of several other posts which could be found to be superfluous and several sick training centres and Bhandars which could be found unnecessary, no such evaluation was considered necessary in respect of the post of Senior Accountant held by the petitioner which was straightway abolish without considering the relative usefulness of each post and record does not speak what ultimately happened to the proposed evaluation of other posts, and sick training centres and Bhandars.
If, on a fair consideration of the entire matter, more than one post was to be found equally superfluous or more superfluous than the post of Senior Accountant could it be said that the petitioner, by the abolition of the post held by him, was not singled out from amongst a homogenous group for hostile discrimination.
Would the legal affect in any manner be different, if while deciding to make evaluation about the other posts, at the time of abolishing one post, subsequently the mind was changed and either the evaluation was not completed, or even if completed, decision was taken that other posts would not be abolished to avoid the attendant hardship to the incumbents of the relevant posts ?
Record does not give even the slightest indication as to how the post of Senior Accountant was superfluous.
It is obvious that abolition only of one post could hardly be expected to result in some meaningful economy in expenditure.
Then admittedly, besides the post of the Senior Accountant, there were two other posts of Accountants in the Accounts Department.
Assuming that one of the posts in the Accounts Department could be abolished, due regard must have been given to the normal rule in service jurisprudence of last come first go with the result that the Senior Accountant who was the senior-most in the Accounts Department should not have been asked to quit so long as the two persons junior to him were to be in service in that department."
To substantiate the above submissions, the learned counsel submitted that the following facts and circumstances be kept in mind to come to a conclusion that the abolition of the post was not fair and reasonable but only a cloak or pretence to get rid of the petitioner :-  (i) The matter of abolition of a post is a serious and important matter, on which there has to be application of mind of all concerned in greater depth and all pros and cons have to be considered before this far-reaching decision is to be taken.
In the present case, in the meeting when the decision to abolish the post in question was taken, the matter was not even on the Agenda and it was just put up by the Managing Director in the meeting of the Board of Directors without there any Agenda note having been circulated to various Directors and there was no application of mind.
(ii) The perusal of the resolution abolishing the post in question (Annexure R/A with the written statement) would go to show that the entire emphasis was to get rid of the petitioner than on abolishing of the post.
(iii) The documents, which were placed before the Board of Directors, concerned the work and conduct of the petitioner and had nothing to do regarding the continuance or discontinuance of the post.
Even the consideration was regarding the termination of the services of the petitioner; rather than the abolition of the post.
(iv) There was no material before the Board of Directors as to for which reason the Corporation was suffering losses and to minimise the losses, which post or posts should be abolished.
The only consideration was regarding the termination of the services of the petitioner by abolition of the post on which he was working.
If one post was to be abolished the entire structure should have been taken into consideration and only then a conclusion should have been reached as to which of the posts of the General Manager, Grade I, should be abolished and not necessarily the post of General Manager (P&A) which post the petitioner was holding.
(v) The decision dated 6th March, 1984 of the Board of Directors, to which reference has been made in the impugned resolution, Annexure R/A, abolishing the post in question, has no bearing regarding the continuance or discontinuance of the post in question.
(vi) The material regarding the work and conduct of the petitioner, which was made the basis for abolition of the post, which resulted in the termination of the services of the petitioner, was never put to the petitioner.
(vii) Even after the abolition of the post, the functions and duties which the petitioner was performing as General Manager (P&A) Grade I, still continued and were assigned to another General Manager, Grade I, meaning thereby that the requirement of the post still existed, inasmuch as the functions and duties performed by the petitioner continued, and, therefore, the abolition of the post was a pretence to ease out the petitioner.
10.
On the other hand, Mr. HL Sibal, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that it is by now well settled that the Government or the employer, as the case may be, has the sole discretion to decide whether a particular post in the Organisation should be retained or abolished and an incumbent of the post has no right to say that a particular post must be continued.
He further argued that the post of General Manager (P & A) was particularly created to see that there is substantial increase in the turnover and profitability of the Corporation and since the purpose for which the post had been created, had not been achieved for which one of the reasons may be that the work and the performance of the petitioner had not come upto the expectations of the Board of Directors of the Corporation, there was nothing wrong in abolishing the post as the object for which the post had been created has not been achieved.
According to him, maybe the work and conduct of the petitioner was good, but if it was not upto the mark for achieving the object for which the post was created, the Board of Directors were fully justified to abolish the post, which resulted in the termination of the services of the petitioner.
It was also argued that the decision was taken in good faith without any stigma being attached to the petitioner.
No mala fides had been alleged against any person and in the absence of any such allegation it should be taken that the abolition of the post was in good faith and not a cloak to get rid of the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, while deciding the question of abolition of the post, the work done by the incumbent of the post is a relevant consideration.
11.
Further, according to the learned counsel, any item could be taken for consideration with the permission of the Chairman of the meeting, even if that item was not on the Agenda and none of the Directors had objected to the matter being taken regarding the continuation of the post in question.
He further submitted that the entire material was taken into consideration before abolishing the post and the material regarding work and conduct of the petitioner was not required to be put as that was only being taken into consideration along with the other material as to whether the post in question should be continued or not, and not whether the petitioner should be retained in service or not.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, while replying to the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that it was not necessary for him to allege any mala fides.
His argument was that it was a case of legal malice, inasmuch as held by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Des Raj Sangar's case (supra) that if the Court comes to the conclusion that the abolition of the post is just a cloak or pretence to get rid of the incumbent, then the abolition of the post would suffer from serious infirmity and would be liable to be set aside.
That was what according to the learned counsel, the precise prayer of the petitioner.
13.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on this point, I am of the view that there is a force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
There is no doubt that the scope of judicial review in such circumstances is very limited.
If on the material and the circumstances put before me, it becomes evident that the post had been abolished to get rid of the petitioner, then following the case-law referred to above, it would be within the domain of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to set aside the order of abolition of the post.
14.
From the various facts and circumstances mentioned above, while noticing the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, it becomes evident that the abolition of the post in question, which, according to the Board of Directors, had resulted in some losses to the Corporation, was taken in a very casual manner.
Such an important matter should have formed part of the Agenda circulated much earlier to all the Directors, so that mind could be applied to all the facts and circumstances at a greater depth by devoting more time by the Directors.
The matter was suddenly taken up without the Directors being really apprised of the material, on the basis of which the decision to abolish the post was taken.
From the reading of the resolution also, an impression is formed that the paramount consideration was not regarding abolition of the post, but the work and conduct of the petitioner as to whether he should be continued in service or not.
15.
It may be observed here that in the affidavit filed by Shri ML Dewan, Divisional Manager (P&A), the Corporation, which was in reply to the Misc. application No. 1822 of 1989, filed by the petitioner has been stated as under :-  "That the work and conduct of the petitioner was assessed by the then Managing Director for the year 1984-85 and it was observed by the then Managing Director, Mr. A Pandey, IAS that petitioner's performance was just about satisfactory.
It is further observed by the then Managing Director that the petitioner is still in the process of trying to find a suitable role in the organisation.
Similarly, for the period 1985-86 the then Managing Director while writing the Confidential Report on the work of the petitioner found that the petitioner has not been able to resolve the inter-personal problem which he was expected to.
It was, therefore, opined by the then Managing Director that the Respondent-Corporation does not really need him.
That Mr. A Pande, IAS, the then Managing Director, wrote a personal and confidential letter dated 5/12th June, 1986 to the petitioner which is a hand-written letter and was duly communicated to the petitioner along with a copy of his A.C.R.
for the year 1985/86.
This clearly shows that the petitioner was not showing any progress in his work.
It is further clear from this letter that the petitioner was a misfit in the organisation.
After giving clear and frank views, the then Managing Director suggested the petitioner to resign.
That the above-mentioned documents were placed before the Board of Directors in the meeting held on 28-9-1987 and were duly considered by it while deciding on the desirability of continuing the post of General Manager (Personnel).
It is, therefore, expedient and necessary to place these documents on record to show that the Respondent-Corporation was not getting any benefit from the Services of the petitioner."
Along with the affidavit, the A.C.Rs.
of the petitioner for the years 1984-85 and 1985-86 have been attached, which, according to the petitioner, were never communicated to him.
In the report of 1985-86, it has been mentioned by the Managing Director, "I am somewhat doubtful if the organisation really needs him and he may adjust better in a more established, larger manufacturing organisation with `proper' hierarchical structures, and well drawn command lines."
It will also be apparent from Para 4 of the affidavit of Shri ML Dewan, referred to above, that the then Managing Director, Mr. Pandey, after giving his views regarding the petitioner, had suggested the petitioner to resign.
16.
The petitioner had joined the Corporation after he made it certain that he will be treated as a permanent employee by getting the clause of probation period from the service conditions of his appointment, deleted as he never wanted to be at the mercy of the Corporation for getting confirmation as he had come after resigning quite a lucrative job held by him elsewhere.
The affidavit of Shri Dewan mentions what was considered by the Board of Directors in the meeting.
It goes to show that the Corporation was not very happy with the working of the petitioner and in fact even it was suggested that the petitioner should resign.
The whole endeavour, it looks, was to somehow get rid of the petitioner and the best way the Corporation could think was to abolish the post itself; otherwise, there was no other short-cut to get rid of the petitioner, who was a permanent employee.
Apart from this, it has not been shown as to what other material was before the Corporation when the impugned decision was taken.
The profit and loss account of the entire Corporation and which particular department of the Corporation was responsible for the same and for minimising the losses which post or posts should be abolished, was not discussed at all and the only discussion was regarding the petitioner and the post he held.
If a post is to be abolished because of financial losses, naturally the entire structure of the Corporation would come into consideration and then it would be decided as to which of the post or the posts have become superfluous which may require abolition.
17.
It will further be evident from Annexure A-2 attached by the petitioner with Civil Misc. No. 576 of 1991 and Annexure A-3 attached with Civil Misc. No. 3887-A of 1991, dated 13th July, 1987 and 12th October, 1988, respectively, which are the orders issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation that the functions of the General Manager (P&A) still existed even after the abolition of the post.
In the former order, it is mentioned as under :-  "All powers delegated to the General Manager (P&A) including the power to conduct court cases shall henceforth be exercised by the Divisional Manager (P&A)."
In the latter order, it has been mentioned as below :-  "Shri ML Dewan, Divisional Manager, will continue to look after the work of the Personal & Administration Division and exercise powers delegated to GM (P&A)."
In somewhat similar circumstances, in Prem Chand's case (supra) where one post was abolished, but another post with some other designation of the same nature, character and identical duties and responsibilities was created, it was held that in fact really no post stood abolished.
It was observed as under :-  "The power of the executive to abolish a post has been well recognised but it must always be exercised in good faith and in public interest and never arbitrarily.
A formal order of abolition of a post is not decisive of the question whether the post has factually been abolished.
Whether a particular post has been abolished or not would depend upon the facts of an individual case.
Where a post is formally abolished but another post by some other designation of the same nature and character with identical duties and responsibilities and conditions of service is created, the Court may find that no post was abolished, change being merely in designation.
Similarly it is also possible that an existing post is abolished and another post of an entirely different nature but with the same designation is created.
In that case it would not necessarily follow that simply because another post is created with the same designation, the existing post was not abolished.
Shankaranarayan v. State of Mysore, AIR 1966 SC 1571 is an instance of a case where the existing post was held to be abolished even though the newly created post had the same designation.
It was observed thus :-  It is argued that even after abolition, the same posts are sought to be continued.
It is no doubt true that the names of the offices have not been changed but there is a basic structural difference between the posts that have been abolished and the posts that have been created.
The posts created by the new Act are stipendiary posts.
They carry salaries according to the grades created by the rules.
The incumbents are transferable and their service is pensionable.
Different qualifications are prescribed for the new posts.
From a consideration of the incidents attached to the new posts it is clear that the old posts have been abolished and new posts have been created and that the whole complexion of the posts has been changed."
18.
I am also of the view that though for the abolition of the post, the material which is relevant for the abolition of the post, need not necessarily be shown to the incumbent, who might have to quit, yet in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the view that since the work and conduct of the petitioner on the post was being made a strong basis for the abolition of the post, at least he should have been apprised of the material that was being used against him.
A letter has also been shown to me written by the same Managing Director who had earlier adversally remarked against the petitioner that he had really faultered in his assessment regarding the petitioner's work.
Had the petitioner been informed of the material against him, he might have been in a position to show that in fact his work and conduct was upto the mark and there was no basis to rely on the material especially for the purposes of abolition of the post as the same had no bearing on the abolition of the post.
According to me, the work and conduct of the petitioner could not be considered as the basis for the abolition of the post and it could only just be a small consideration in the whole matter.
19.
From whatever has been observed above, I am of the view that at the back of the mind, the Corporation wanted to get rid of the petitioner and the abolition of the post was a cloak or pretence to ease out the petitioner.
20.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also argued that even if it is held that the abolition of the post in question cannot be assailed and the action of abolition of the post is held to be good, even then the junior-most General Manager, Grade I should have been asked to go, inasmuch as the post of General Manager (P&A) Grade I and other posts of General Managers were interchangeable.
To substantiate this argument, the learned counsel referred to the pleadings in Para 7 of the writ petition, which are to the effect that for the smooth conduct of the activities of the Corporation, the Corporation is organised in Eight Divisions under two main heads, known as `Operating Divisions' and `Service Divisions'.
The eight divisions are as follows :-  "Operating Divisions Service Divisions.
i) Marketing i) Personnel & Administration.
ii) Projects ii)Accounts.
iii) Horticulture & Good iii) Secretarial iv) Renewable Energy.
v) Agro Engg.
& Implementation."
Each of these eight divisions is headed by an Officer of the rank of General Manager who reports to the Managing Director of the Corporation.
It has further been averred that the divisions falling under the head `Operating Divisions' are profit centres whereas those under the head `Service Divisions' are cost centres which regulate the internal working of the Corporation.
All the posts of General Managers of these Divisions are in the pay scale of Rs. 2500-3500.
It has further been averred that the posts of General Managers are interchangeable and by way of illustration, the following transfers ordered by the Corporation have been referred to in Para 8 of the writ petition which reads thus :-  "Name From To 1) Atul Kapoor General Manager (Marketing) General Manager (Horticulture & Food) 2) Kawaljit Singh General Manager (Finance & Corporate Planning) General Manager (Marketing) 3) Surjit Singh General Manager (Accounts) General Manager on Special Duty.
4) S.R.K.
Agnihotri Company Secretary Company Secretary with additional charge of General Manager (Accounts).
21.
The order of transfer of Shri Atul Kapoor, General Manager (Marketing) and that of Shri Kawaljit Singh, General Manager (Finance & Corporate Planning), dated 1st February, 1985 (Annexure P.4) may be reproduced hereinunder :-  "Consequently upon the decision to merge the Punjab Horticulture Corporation Limited with the Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Limited, Shri Atul Kapoor, General Manager (Marketing) is transferred to the Horticulture Division and is designated as General Manager (Horticulture and Food).
Sh. Kawaljit Singh, General Manager (Corporate Planning & Finance) is transferred to Marketing Division as General Manager (Marketing).
The above transfers will come into force with immediate effect."
Further, by way of illustration, the petitioner has attached the order dated 9th July, 1987, where inter se transfers of the General Managers, including the petitioner, were made.
Since this order has some relevance to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, the same is also reproduced :-  `Following transfers/postings are ordered with immediate effect in the interest of Corporation work :-  Sr. No. Name & Designation From 1.
Sh. CK Maini, GM(P&A) P&A Division Agro Engg.
& Implementation division as General Manager vide Sh. ML Dewan.
2.
Sh. ML Dewan, DM(AE&I) AE&I Division Personnel & Administration division in his own pay scale vice Sh. CK Maini.
3.
Sh. Ravi Srinivasan, M(MPD) Corporate Cell P&A Division vice Shri Harbant Singh.
4.
Sh. Harbant Singh, M(O&M) P&A Division District Manager Bhatinda vice Sh. NK Sharma.
5.
Sh. NK Sharma, DM PAIC Bhatinda 6.
Sh. Anand Padalia, Manager(IR) P&A division Implement Workshop 7.
Shri TP Singh Kocchar, Manager AE&I) AE&I Division P&A Division vice Shri Anand Padalia.
Shri CK Maini, Shri ML Dewan, Shri Ravi Srinivasan and Shri TP Singh Kochhar should take over their respective assignments immediately.
Shri Harbant Singh and Shri Anand Padalia should relinquish charge and join the new place of posting after availing usual joining time.
Shri NK Sharma should move in being relieved."
Further illustrations have also been given by the petitioner, whereby on various dates the General Managers were inter se transferred.
The document showing the said inter se transfers has been attached as Annexure A-4 with Civil Misc. No. 3887 of 1991.
22.
The respondent-Corporation in its written statement denied the factum of inter changeability of the posts of General Managers.
The stand taken was that the posts are not really interchangeable, but because of some administrative reasons and exigencies of service, some additional charge was being given to one or the other General Manager or one General Manager was just being temporarily asked to look after the work of the other department, but that did not mean that the posts were inter changeable or inter- transferable.
Further, it was also stated that there was no seniority list of General Managers, Grade I According to the Corporation, since the petitioner had been directly recruited against a particular created post of General Manager (P&A) and that post having been abolished, which the petitioner was holding permanently, it is he who was to quit the service and not any other General Manager who were appointed and holding the posts in the other departments of the Corporation.
In the replication, it was averred by the petitioner that he was the senior-most General Manager, Grade I, having joined on 5th July, 1984 and all other General Managers joined later than the petitioner in that grade.
The seniority list of General Managers, Grade II of the Corporation, as on 1st June, 1984, was attached as Annexure P-10.
It has further been averred that in March, 1986, three General Managers, Grade II, were promoted as General Managers on the upgradation of their posts in the order of seniority as General Managers and the seniority of the General Managers, Grade I, was being maintained, which has been appended with Civil Misc. No. 3887-A of 1991, which is as under :-  SENIORITY LIST OF GENERAL MANAGERS GR-I.
Name Date of appointment/promotion Order No., Date Mode of appointment Shri KK Maini 5.7.1994 PAIC/84/23200 dated 2731984 Selection Atul Kapoor 1101984 - By absorption from deputation.
Sahai 6.3.1986 PAIC/P&A86/12211-19 dated 1031986 Promotion.
SK Agnihotri 6.3.1986 PAIC/P&A/86/12202-10 dated 1031986 -do- Kawaljit Singh 6.3.1986 (Has left PAIC) -do- Surjit Singh 23.1.1987 PAIC/P&A/87/13047-53 dated 21.1.1987 -do-."
23.
From the perusal of the facts stated above and the documents which have been referred to, I am of the view that the posts of General Managers, Grade I, were inter-changeable and it has nowhere been mentioned in the transfer orders that only a temporary arrangement was being made or any additional charge was being bestowed on the incumbents.
The transfer orders do not support the written statement of the Corporation that the inter-transfer of the General Managers was a stop-gap or temporary arrangement to tide over a particular situation or that these were to last for a particular temporary phase or period.
Not only that, a seniority list of General Managers, Grade II, was being maintained and after the upgradation of their posts, they were shown amongst the General Managers, Grade I, where the petitioner was shown the senior-most.
No doubt, the petitioner had been appointed as a General Manager (P&A), but after his appointment he was also transferred as General Manager, Grade I, in other department and some other General Manager had been transferred in his place as General Manager (P&A).
If that is so and especially in view of the fact that a seniority list of General Managers, Grade I, is being maintained in the Corporation, then on the abolition of the post of General Manager (P&A), the junior-most General Manager should have been asked to quit.
This would be for all the more reason that the functions and duties which were being performed by the petitioner are still in existence.
Point No. 3.
24.
This point need not be dealt with in view of what I have held on Point No. 2 above.
Point No. 4 has already been dealt with while dealing Point No. 1 and I do not feel the necessity to deal it separately.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned Resolution and the order of the Corporation, dated 28th September, 1987 (Annexure P-7), abolishing the post of General Manager (P&A) and dispensing with the services of the petitioner, are hereby quashed.
Resultantly, the petitioner would be deemed to be in service of the Corporation from the date of the termination of his services.
However, considering that the petitioner has not physically worked with the Corporation for all these years, I direct that the petitioner be given only 50 per cent of arrears of the pay and allowances, which, according to me, would meet the ends of justice.
However, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.