JK Mehra, J - This is a writ petition brought by the employees working with respondent No. 2 in their Family Planning Clinic which is funded fully by grants-in-aid by Delhi Administration.
Respondent No. 2 is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act for promoting the family planning programme.
The petitioners have prayed, inter alia, for -  (i) issue of appropriate writ or direction in the nature of Writ of Mandamus directing the Delhi Administration.
Respondent No1 for providing the same and similar emoluments and benefits to the petitioner's as are provided to the other employees working at the grant-in-aid side of Family Planning Centres at the various hospitals in Delhi.
(ii) issue of appropriate writ order or direction in the nature of Writ of Mandamus or any other writ directing the Delhi Administration, respondent No. 1 and Respondent No2 for granting the benefits of 4th Pay Commission retrospectively as are granted to the employees of other Centres in the various hospitals of Delhi working for family planning in grant-in-aid side:  2.
Briefly the acts are that in or around 1962, Government of India started a Scheme for family welfare whereunder Union Territories and State Governments introduced various programmes to promote family planning.
Respondent No1 also introduced such a programme in the year 1964 for promoting family planning and it approached various institutions/societies/ family planning associations including the respondent No. 2 for starting family planning centres as per the Scheme of the Government of India.
In its establishments in other states the Respondent No. 2 on being approached by the State Government had started Family Planning Centres.
Likewise respondent No1 also approached various societies/organisations and got started family planning centres in other hospitals in Delhi such as ESI hospitals Municipal Corporation hospitals.
Red Cross Society, St Stephen's Hospital, BL Kapoor Memorial, AIIMS among others.
Under the Scheme.
Under such set up, Delhi Administration was to fully reimburse to the said societies or organisations the cost of running such centres including pay and allowances to their staff employed at such centres.
All employees were employed afresh in such family planning centres established to the government employees performing similar functions.
The nature of duties at all such centres was like.
Since the Government scales at the material time were better the petitioners resigned their jobs with respondent No. 2 and applied for being considered for the jobs which were created on the establishment of such family planning centres in order to avail of more favorable terms of employment.
The members of staff who were employed by Respondent No. 2 and wanted to join the said family planning centre had to resign their job first before they could be considered for the job in such centres.
At the time of selection of the candidates, one of the Members of the Interview Board was a representative of the respondent No. 1.
Not only in the year 1964, i.e. at the inception of the centre in question, but even later there was no discrimination in the pay and allowances of the government employees and the persons employed and performing the duties at such family planning centres.
In this connection a reference is to the Ministry's letter No. 4-17/64-FPL(P&E) dated the 10th May 1966, which reiterated that same conditions of service as were applicable to Government employees continued to apply to the petitioners.
Even under the G.O.No.XI-9/70(68) Dated 14121970 it was emphasised that pay allowances of the various categories of the staff employed for the family welfare planning centres under the Voluntary Organisations and Local Bodies should be the same as are admissible to the same categories of the staff under the State Government, in the interest of the programme, provided the qualifications experience, etc. laid down by the State Government for their employees are strictly adhered to by the Voluntary Organisations for their employees.
The targets to be achieved by the petitioners were and are being fixed by Respondent No. 1, in implementing the conditions of service applicable to the petitioners.
The respondent No1 had duly granted the benefits flowing from 2nd and 3rd Pay Commissions and also the interim relief granted w.e.f.
1186 by the 4th Pay Commission.
This clearly indicates that not only the conditions of service were dictated by respondent No1, but those conditions were in fact implemented and all disbursements, in that respect, were reimbursed by the said Respondent No. 1.
It is also pointed out that the retirement age of the petitioners has been fixed like other government employees at 58 years while rest of the staff of respondent No2 retires on attaining the age of 60 years.
Another important term of employment of the petitioners is that their employment would come to an end automatically on completion of the project or discontinuance of the grant by the Government.
It had also exercised control in the selection of the petitioners through its nominee on the interview Board.
After having employed the petitioners on the understanding that they will be entitled to the same pay and allowances as the Government employees performing similar duties, the Respondent No1 unilaterally and without notice purported to introduce a modification in the conditions of service without any justification for such change in the conditions of service of the petitioners which had the effect of adversely affecting the staff, i.e. the petitioners in this case, on the basis of a letter dated 9111981 from Government of India which had provided, inter alia, the following:  "3.
Meanwhile many States had revised the pay scales of their employees during the years 1973-76.
But due to the restrictions imposed by the 19th August, 1976 orders, many voluntary organisations in various States/U.Ts could not revise the pay-scales of their staff to bring these at par with the revised pay-scales of parallel staff in the State Govt/UTs concerned.
In order to remove the grievance of the employees of such voluntary organisations, the Government of India have reviewed the entire matter and taken the following decisions:  (i) the State Govts/UTs may allow revision of pay-scales in respect of employees of those voluntary oganisations, local bodies etc. where the scales of pay of these organisations were previously at par with the corresponding posts in the State Govts./UTs before the scales of pay were revised by the States/UTs and it is now proposed to bring them at par with the revised scales of pay of the respective State Govt./UT.
(ii) where the voluntary organisations/local bodies etc. have an independent scales of pay for their staff, which have been revised but the revised scales of pay could not be given to the staff engages on FW work on account of the above ban, the scales of pay of the FW staff may also be revised to bring them on par with the revised pay-scale of the voluntary organisation etc. provided that such scales of pay are not more than the scales of pay of corresponding staff employed by the respective State Govt.U.T.
In case the scales of pay of the voluntary organisation etc. are more than the scales of pay of the respective State Govt./U.T.
then the Central assistance will be restricted to the State/UT scales of pay.
The above will be subject to the proviso that where the voluntary organisations/local bodies etc. have adopted different scales of pay, for their own staff and for the staff employed on Family Welfare schemes being implemented with Government assistance the scales of pay of the staff engaged in FW work should conform to the lower of the scales of pay viz., the scales of pay given to their own staff or the scales of pay of the respective State Govt./UT."
However it appears that the said letter was not acted upon even in 1986 when interim relief recommended by 4th Pay Commission for Government servants was paid to the petitioners.
However, the benefits under the 4th Pay Commission which were paid to the Govt. servants doing work similar to the petitioners in 1988 were not extended to the petitioners.
No explanation was offered to justify such action of respondent No1 action on this communication in 1988 only in the case of petitioners although persons employed at all other centres, run by other societies and organisations in Delhi have been extended the benefits under the 4th Pay Commission by Respondent No. 1.
Even the staff of Family planning Centres set up by Respondent No2 in other States under such programmes have also since been paid the pay and allowances in terms of 4th Pay Commission in line with what was paid to Government employees performing similar jobs.
3.
At the hearing, apart from the objection arising from the aforesaid letter dated 9.11.81.
The only pleas taken by respondent No. 1 are that there was no relationship of employer and employee between the petitioners and the respondent No1 and as such no writ of mandamus could lie against the said respondent and that though the revision of pay scales was allowed in respect of all voluntary organisations working under FW Programme, it was not made applicable in the case of staff working with the respondent No. 2 due to an audit objection pending against the said respondent No. 2 regarding the pay scales of its staff.
A decision could only be taken after removal of the audit objection.
It is submitted that the family welfare department of Delhi Administration is trying to get the objection removed by taking up the case with the Finance Department of Delhi Administration and a reference has also been made by it to Government of India vide its letter dated 921990.
It may not be possible for the Delhi Administration to implement the Fourth Pay Commission pay scales in respect of the staff of Respondent No2, i.e. the petitioners, till a reply is received from the Government of India.
A decision on the issue will be taken only after clarification from the Government of India is received.
Delhi Administration had not yet taken a stand that the Fourth Pay Commission will not be implemented in the case of the staff engaged by Respondent No2 in its Family Planning Clinic under the said programme.
However, on account of delay in the decision of Government of India, the matter is still pending.
The respondent No1 has not disputed its liability to fully bear all costs including pay & allowances payable to the petitioners.
4.
The respondent No2 at the time of hearing, contended, inter alia, that it is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act and is not an authority as contemplated in the Constitution of India.
As such the present petition against it is not maintainable.
It, however, clearly conceded that since the project was funded 100% by the Delhi Administration and since the Administration had introduced a change in the payment pattern by not implementing 4th Pay Commission in respect of the staff employed at the said Respondent's Delhi Family Planning Centre, they cannot do anything but to abide by the said change.
They have also conceded that in case the Administration agrees to reimburse the said respondent the pay for the petitioners as per the 4th Pay Commission, they will have no objection to pass on the benefits to the petitioners.
They have also conceded that the scales of pay and other benefits to their staff other than family planning centres are now slightly better than what is being paid to the staff of the family planning centres.
But they contended that since these persons had joined their present jobs after resigning from the earlier jobs under respondent No2 and had at that time gained substantially they cannot be granted the benefits which other employees of Respondent No2 are now enjoying.
5.
On the objection raised by 2nd Respondent regarding maintainability of the Civil Writ Petition on the plea that it is not an "authority" under Constitution of India, the respondent No2 has placed reliance on "Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India and others" reported as AIR 1975 S.C. 1329, where the question as to whether the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, is an "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, was involved and the Hon'ble Supreme Court had answered this question in the negative.
However this view seems to have undergone a change.
In the subsequent cases such as PK Ramachandra lyer and others v. Union of India and others reported as AIR 1984 SC 541, where the Hon'ble Supreme Court went into this question and while reversing the decision of this court held that the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and its affiliate Indian Veterinary Research Institute would be comprehended in the expression "other authority" in Article 12 of the Constitution The Hon'ble Supreme Court after certain discussion held that ICAR was an instrumentality of State.
Of course, on the plea that ICAR though a society was almost an inseparable adjunct of the Government of India.
Further, in the case of Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sephrawardi and others reported as AIR 1981 SC 487, the Hon'ble Supreme Court dealt with this question in the light of its earlier judgment in the case of International Airport Authority (AIR 1979 SC 1628), wherein among others the following tests were considered to be important :  (2) "Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the corporation, it would afford some indication of the corporation being impregnated with government character."
(4) "Existence of "deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the corporation is a State agency or instrumentality."
(5) "If the functions of the corporation of public importance and closely related to governmental functions, it would be relevant factor in classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of Government."
(emphasis supplied).
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further laid down in that case as under:  "Whatever be its genetical original, it would be an "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 if it is an instrumentality or agency of the Government and that would have to be decided on a proper assessment of the facts in the light of the relevant factors.
The concept of instrumentality or agency of the Government is not limited to a corporation created by a statute but is equally applicable to a company or society and in a given case it would have to be decided.
On a consideration of the relevant factors, whether the company or society is an instrumentality or agency of the Government so as to come within the meaning of the expression authority in Article 12."
6.
Again while dealing with the question in the case of Tekraj Vasandi alias KL Basandhi v. Union of India and others reported as AIR 1988 SC 469, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, inter alia, held that "there cannot indeed be straight jacket formula.
It is not necessary that all the tests should be a satisfied for reaching the conclusion either for or against holding an institution to be "State".
In a given case some of the features may emerge so boldly and prominently that a second view may not be possible.
There may yet be other cases where the matter would be on the border line and it would be difficult to take one view or the other outright".
On the peculiar facts of that case the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies did not qualify to be an agency or instrumentality of the State so as to come within the purview of "other authority" in Article 12 of the Constitution  7.
The question also came up for consideration before a full bench of this Court in "Master Vibhu Kapoor v. Council of Indian School Certificate Examination a reported as ILR (1985) I Delhi 649 when this Court, while dealing with the question whether the respondent society is an agency or instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, held that "there can be no doubt that the public nature and the function discharged by the first respondent is so impregnated with Government character that it has to be regarded as an authority within the meaning of the term in Article 226 of the Constitution".
The court further held that the first respondent being a society registered under the Societies Registration Act was having the object of educational and includes the promotion of science, literature, the fine arts and diffusion of useful knowledge by conducting school examinations through the medium of English.
8.
The Supreme Court in the case of Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayantri Mahotsav Smarak Trust v. VR Rudani."
AIR 1989 SC 1607 held -  "The term "authority" used in Article 226 in the context, must receive a liberal meaning unlike the term in Article 12.
At this it is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights under Article 32.
Article 226 confers power on the High Court to issue writs for enforcement of the fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights.
The words "any person or authority" used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed by the person or authority to the affected party.
No matter by what means the duty is imposed.
If a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.
It may be pointed out that mandamus cannot be denied on the ground that the duty to be enforced is not imposed by the statute.
The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting the fight of the people should not be put into watertight compartment.
It should remain flexible to meet the requirements of variable circumstances.
Mandamus is a very wide remedy which must be easily available to reach injustice wherever it is found.
Technicalities should not come in the way of granting that relief under Article 226."
(emphasis supplied)  9.
In the recent case of Chander Mohan Khanna v. N.C.E.R.T, AIR 1992 SC 76 : 1992(1) S.C.T.
100, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had laid down as under:  "The powers, functions, finances and control of the Government are some of the indicating factors to answer the question whether a body is "State" or not.
Each case should be handled with care and caution.
Where the financial assistance from the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the institution, or the share capital of the corporation is completely held by the government, it would afford some indication of the body being impregnated with governmental character.
It may be a relevant factor if the institution or the corporation enjoys monopoly status which State conferred or State protected.
Existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication.
If the functions of the institution are of public importance and related to governmental functions, it would also be a relevant factory."
The State control does not render such bodies as "State" under Article 12.
The State control, however vast and pervasive is not determinative.
The financial contribution by the State is also not conclusive.
The combination of State aid coupled with an unusual degree of control over the management and policies of the body, and rendering of an important public service being the obligatory functions of the State may largely point out that the body is "State".
If the Government operates behind a corporate veil, carrying out government activity and governmental functions of vital public importance, there may be little difficulty in identifying the body as "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution"  10.
In view of the rulings discussed above, right from the case of International Airport Authority coming down to the case of Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru SMVSJMS Trust (supra), the concept of "authority" as it emerges finally would be that if a body satisfies some of the salient tests laid down above such as, payment made by the State, performing important public functions of propagating family planning which happens to be the crying need of the society and nation and the extent of control exercised by Respondent No1 over the 2nd Respondent in recruitment of staff for the said Family Planning Centre and in fixing targets to be attained by the petitioners.
I think the petitioners have made out a case where the said respondent is covered by the term "authority" at least in respect of such family planning centres.
It is not necessary that all salient features should exist in each case.
11.
Moreover, in the present case the Family Planning Centres similar to the one in which the petitioners are working were got set up by Respondent No1 through various organisations and societies such as Respondent No2 for promoting the programme of family planning which is one of the important functions undertaken by the Government and bearing total cost of running such centres including payment of pay and allowances to the staff employed to man such centres.
The terms of employment including pay and allowances are fixed by Respondent No1 which had declared those to be on par with the government employees discharging functions similar to the functions discharged by the petitioners.
An important question for consideration in the present case is as to whether Respondent No. 1 could withhold the benefits flowing from the 4th Pay Commission from the petitioners though those benefits had been extended to the Government servants performing duties similar to those discharged by the petitioners.
As already observed above, the Respondent No1 has not disputed its liability to bear 100% expense on running such centres including pay and allowances to the petitioners though through Respondent No2.
It may be added that in a case like the present one where the State gets its job done through a society by bearing full cost thereof and exercises control over selection and performance of the staff employed for the job such technical objections cannot be sustained.
I must state that the Respondent No1 has not raised any objection to the maintainability of the writ petition.
Objections, in the present case should not stand in the way of the court, since relief is sought against the Respondent No1 for making payments in implementation of 4th Pay Commission.
12.
The next question that would arise in the context for consideration is whether the respondent can deny parity of pay or introduce any unilateral change in the conditions of service of the petitioners which disturbs the parity of pay and allowance which were earlier in existence.
The petitioners have placed reliance on "Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh and others v. State of Haryana and others reported as (1988) 4 SCC 571, where the Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with the question of employment between the teachers of recognized aided private schools and teachers of government schools held that the teachers of recognised aided private schools were performing similar duties which were being performed by teachers of government schools and therefore, they were entitled to party in pay with the teachers of government schools.
That was also a case where the scales of pay of the government teachers were revised, but such benefits were extended to the private aided schools two years later.
The petitioners had also relied upon the case of AIR 1982 SC 879 and 1986 (1) SCC 637 & 639 in support of the contention that the petitioners were entitled to parity in pay.
I need not dwell upon these cases in the light of the decision the Supreme Court in the case of Jaipal and others, v. State of Haryana and others reported as (1988) 3 SCC 354, where the court had held that while applying the concept of "equal pay for equal work" and considering the question of equal work what has to be seen is that the work is similar and not exactly the same.
In the situation like the present one, the writ under Article 226 is maintainable in view of the following facts:  13.
Full financial assistance is given to run the family planning centre in question.
There is existence of "deep and pervasive control" as would appear from discussion hereinafter, inasmuch as State has been in the selection of the personnel as also the implementation of the programme by fixing the targets in monitoring, attainment of such targets and by each of the petitioners.
The functions performed by such family planning centre are clearly of utmost public importance and in performing such functions these centres are in fact performing the government functions in promoting the family planning programme of the government, apart from other features.
14.
Coming to the merits of the case, I am also unable to appreciate the stand of the respondents, particularly, Respondent No1 when it is conceded before me that the staff of other family planning centres in Delhi at St Stephen's Hospital, CGHS, ESI, etc. has been given the benefits of 4th Pay Commission.
There appears to be considerable force in the contention of the petitioners that the Administration by its impugned action has introduced discrimination by denying the petitioners the benefits under 4th Pay Commission which have been extended by it to employees of other family planning centres notwithstanding the fact that the petitioners perform exactly the same duties as are being performed by the staff at other family planning centres.
15.
In the present case, I find that Delhi Administration also appears to be exercising considerable control on recruitment inasmuch as selection is made by a board on which Delhi Administration has its own nominee.
It is contended by respondent's counsel for Delhi Administration that such person sits only as an observer ensure that suitable candidates with requisite qualifications are selected, but, I fail to understand as to what else could be the function of members of the interview Board.
Such Boards are constituted only to ensure this and if Delhi Administration's representative has been sitting there on the interview board to ensure selection of persons with requisite qualification he was not meant to be a mute witness but it would be -deemed that he played an important part in selection process.
Thus, I am of the view that respondent No1 has a say in the selection of the candidates.
The petitioner's retirement on joining was fixed at 58 years in place of 60 years which they enjoyed earlier and which employees of respondent No2 continue to enjoy till date.
This reduction in retirement age was also introduced to bring them in line with the conditions of service enjoyed by other government employees.
The payments by the State Government are stated to be also dependent on the petitioner's meeting the targets fixed by Respondent No1 which means monitoring of the performance of the petitioners by respondent No1 although it is true that the Administration is not exercising any control with regard to the transfers, day to day supervision, promotions etc. Delhi Administration still having laid down conditions of service earlier pursuant whereto the petitioner applied for job after resigning their existing jobs and having issued a circular whereunder the terms and other conditions of service were equated with those of the government servants performing similar jobs and having continued with that policy all along, it appears to be absolutely an act of bad faith on the part of the Respondent No1 to cause serious prejudice to such employees by unilaterally changing the conditions of service on the ostensible grounds of a circular letter dated 9.11.81 which was ignored/not given effect to in 1986 when interim relief granted by 4th Pay Commission was extended to the petitioners or a pending audit objection and pending clarification from Govt. of India which appear to have already taken about 2 years.
Notwithstanding the fact that Govt of India allowed revision of pay scales of staff of voluntary organisations in the light of 4th Pay Commission.
In fact the Respondent No. 1 has taken a contradictory stand.
Its stand in para 3 of the counter-affidavit to the effect that the rules and regulations of voluntary organisations apply to the staff employed in such centres and that the scales of pay also vary is clearly belied by the communication dated 141270.
Similarly its stand in paras 7 and 8 seems to be not consistent.
The petitioners acting on the assurance of being treated at par in terms of pay with government employees performing similar jobs had resigned their jobs and applied for being selected in the family planning centres and were put to the risk of being placed on probation were now after over 25 years told that those conditions stand changed by a mere circular of the government issued in 1981, which was not followed even in 1986, without prior deliberations or justification, when at other Family Planning centres the staff is still enjoying the same conditions as before.
16.
The Circular of 1981 was issued by the government without being made known to the petitioner in any event, the said circular could not be said to have been intended to deprive the petitioners of their existing conditions of service acted upon as the benefit of interim relief of 4th Pay Commission was extended to the petitioners even after the date of issue of the said circular nor does the said circular lay down or provide for denying the benefits of 4th Pay Commission or to deprive the petitioners of their existing rights except for the proviso to in para 3(i) & (ii) which to my mind is arbitrary.
If the contentions of the respondents are accepted, a peculiar situation would come into existence whereunder the petitioners will not be able to enjoy the benefits of 4th Pay Commission which have become available to all others in similar centres under other voluntary organisations in Delhi and those working in such centres of Respondent No2 in other states also.
They would also be deprived of parity with the members of staff employed by the Respondent No2 in its own establishment on the plea that petitioners had resigned their job and joined family planning centre established under the Government Scheme and for which 100% reimbursement of all expenses including wages was to be made by the Respondent No. 1.
Such a situation is totally unacceptable and is irreconcilable with the concept of establishment of welfare state and equity.
17.
The principle of equal pay for equal work, though not incorporated in the Constitution as one of the fundamental rights, still is one of the goals under Article 39 of the Constitution and the government who had taken the steps in that direction and was implementing that programme faithfully cannot be said to have acted bona fide in taking a step back and in introducing discrimination between the staff members such as the petitioners from other government servants or members of staff in Family Planning Centres of other voluntary organisations in Delhi or the staff of the respondent No2, in Family Planning Centres in other states though they are performing the same or similar duties.
State has the additional burden of treating all persons performing similar duties and getting reimbursed for their wages from the state Government to ensure that such persons are not discriminated against employees at other centres set up under its Scheme or its regular employees performing same or similar duties.
18.
Respondent No. 1 has merely relied upon the principle that there is no relationship of employer and employee between itself and the petitioners.
Respondent No. 2 has expressed its inability to pay in view of the fact that they have no funds to spare and in case the State reimburses them, they are prepared to pay the benefits flowing from 4th Pay Commission to the petitioners.
Although the petitioners have placed on record a letter dated 1789 from Bombay Office of Respondent No. 2 to all its branches stating : "The Government Funded Staff will continue to draw their salary according to recommendations of 4th Pay Commission."
19.
Another question that would arise for consideration in this case is one relating to the promissory estoppel.
The law relating to the promissory estoppel as was first enunciated in Union of India v. Indo-Afghan Agencies Ltd., AIR 1968 SC 718 crystalised in the case of Motilal Padampath Sugar Mills Co Ltd v. State of UP, (1979)2 SCC 409 has come up for further consideration in the various cases, such as Union of India v. Godfrey Phillips India Ltd, (1985)4 SCC 369 and Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd v. Union of India, (1988) 1 SCC 86.
A passage from the judgment in the case of Union of India v. Godfrey Phillips India Ltd, may be usefully extracted hereunder :-  "Now the doctrine of promissory estoppel is well established in the administrative law of India.
It represents a principle evolved by equity to avoid injustice and, though commonly named promissory estoppel, it is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of estoppel.
The basis of this doctrine is the interposition of equity which has always, true to its form, stopped in to mitigate the rigour of strict law."
(emphasis supplied)  20.
This position was further clarified by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Delhi Cloth & General Mills case (supra) as under :-  "All that is now required that the party asserting the estoppel must have acted upon the assurance given to him.
Must have relied upon the representation made to him.
It means the party has changed or altered the position by relying on the assurance or the representation.
The alteration of position by the party is the only indispensable requirement of the doctrine.
It is not necessary to prove further any damage, detriment or prejudice to the party asserting the estoppel."
21.
In the present case, it is an admitted fact that the petitioners had after resigning their existing jobs applied to respondent No. 2 for the jobs in the family Planning Centres being set up under the Scheme of Respondent No1 wherein it was clearly set up under the Scheme of Respondent No. 1 wherein it was clearly set out that the terms of payment will be the same as were applicable to government staff performing similar duties and such terms happened to be better than the terms which were being offered by the respondent No. 2 at the material time except for age of retirement.
22.
The petitioners had thus clearly altered their position on an invitation for application for jobs by Respondent No2 on the basis of a representation from respondent No. 1 regarding conditions of service which were also confined in the form of the guidelines of 141270 with regard to the remuneration etc. and as the terms of employment could not be altered to their detriment without the petitioners being heard by respondent No. 1 in my view, it is fit case where the principle of promissory estoppel comes into play.
Even in the latest ruling by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s Amrit Banaspati Co Ltd v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) SCC 411, it has once again reiterated that the law of estoppel furnishes a cause of action to a citizen enforceable in a court of law against the government if it or its officials in course of their authority extend any promise which creates or is capable of creating legal relationship, and it is acted upon, by the promisee irrespective of any prejudice.
The only exception to this rule is if the promise is incapable of being enforced in the court of law being statutorily prohibited or is against the public policy.
In the present case, it is no body's case that the original guidelines which had provided conditions of services including remuneration were statutorily prohibited or officers issuing the said guidelines had no authority to issue or that the same were against the public policy.
In the light of this and in the light of the legal position that the doctrine of promissory estoppel being a principle evolved by equity to avoid injustice even though the said promise is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of estoppel.
I am of the view that the doctrine of promissory estoppel is fully applicable to the facts of the present case and on this account also no unilateral change in the conditions of service without any cogent reasons to the detriment of the employees performing similar duties as their counter parts in the government family planning clinics are performing, could be introduced by the government suddenly and such change, to my mind, apart from being arbitrary had given rise to discriminatory treatment to two sets of employees one where the respondent No1 had contractual relationship of employer and employee in the technical sense and the other where such employees were employed through other voluntary organisations or societies though those societies were fully reimbursed the costs of establishment of such claimants.
For this reason also, to my mind, the Respondent No1 is not justified in withholding from petitioner the said benefits under 4th Pay Commission and the petition should succeed and the respondent No1 is liable to release funds to Respondent No2 sufficient to pay the petitioners on the same terms which they had offered at the time of recruitment and under the circular of 1971 i.e. on par with the staff employed by respondent No1 directly.
The respondent No1 is directed to release funds, for payment to the petitioners, the pay and allowances payable under the 4th Pay Commission to Government servants performing similar jobs as the petitioners w.e.f.
the date from which such benefits were extended to the government servants within two months from the date hereof to Respondent No2 who should disburse the same to the petitioners within 15 days of the receipt of the said funds.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.