AL Bahri, J - The dispute relates to fixation of seniority of members of service as constituted under the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961 (Hereinafter called `the Rules').
The petitioner BD Sardana is the direct recruit whereas the private respondents are promotees from Class II Service.
Challenge in this writ petition is to different orders whereby the State re-determined the seniority of officers of Class I Service.
2.
Earlier the question of interpretation of the Rules aforesaid and the Punjab Service of Engineers PWD (Road & Buildings) Rules, 1960 was considered by the Supreme Court in two cases.
The aforesaid two set of Rules are identical with respect to the recruitment and fixation of seniority of members of the two services covered by such rules 1960 rules were considered and interpreted and the law was laid down in AN Sehgal and others v. Raja Ram Sheoran and others, JT 1991(2) SC 123 : 1991(3) SCT 234.
The entire reasoning of this case was adopted while dealing with the case of the Rules of 1961 by the Supreme Court in SL Chopra v. State of Haryana and others, JT 1991(2) SC 203 : 1991(2) SCT 427.
Specific directions were given therein calling upon the State to determine the cadre strength, if nor, already determined and to fix seniority of members of Class I service under the Rules as interpreted.
It is after decisions of the Supreme Court aforesaid that the State of Haryana redetermined the cadre strength and re-determined the seniority of members of Class I Service which are under challenge in this writ petition.
The recruitment to the service is from three sources i.e. by direct appointment, by transfer from other Government offices and by promotion from Class II service.
BD Sardana is a direct recruit whereas private respondents are promotees from Class II service.
Before reverting to the Rules and the specific questions debated, reference to the rule of law as land down in AN Sehgal's case (supra) while interpreting identical rule is necessary.
Further reference to the rules would be made as and when considered necessary.
As per these rules seniority of the members of the service is required to be fixed by allocating year of allotment to the members of the service.
With respect to direct recruit the year of allotment has to be the year of his first induction in the service as Assistant Executive Engineer on which post the direct recruit is required to work for five years unless the same is relaxed for being promoted as Executive Engineer.
If for certain reason the probationary period is extended such period would be added to the date of initial appointment and such a date would be deemed to be first induction of the direct recruit as Assistant Executive Engineer.
In his case year of allotment thus fixed is unalterable.
With respect to the promotees it may be stated that as per rules aforesaid their appointment to the cadre posts which are permanent can only be to the extent of 50%.
They can be posted against ex cadre posts or permanent posts beyond the aforesaid quota which is meant for the direct recruits.
However, such service is not to be reckoned for the purposes of fixation of service.
Thus, for all intents and purposes the promotees would become members of the service as and when posts within their quota arc made available for their confirmation Paragraphs 9 and 21 from AN Sehgal's case are quoted in extenso as the questions raised during arguments centre around the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court therein as to whether cadre strength could be redetermined and seniority has been fixed in accordance therewith :-  Para 9 "Para 11(b) of appendix `A' read with Rule 3(2), while determining the cadre strength of the service, adumbrates creation and appointment of Asstt.
Executive Engineers (direct recruit) to an ex cadre junior scale post in each year.
Therefore in a given situation, a direct recruit appointed to an ex cadre post, cannot be kept in lurch until he is appointed to a cadre post so as to become a member of the service.
Obviously to avoid such a hiatus, Rule 2(12)(a) was introduced.
The main part of Rule 2(12)(a) declares that an appointee substantively to a cadre post i.e., permanent post is a member of the service.
The inclusive definite brings an officer by direct appointment of probation' who having successfully completed probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post is also a member of the service.
Take for instance if direct recruitment is made to fill in five posts of Assistant Executive Engineers of which four are cadre posts and one ex cadre post and four persons are appointed to cadre posts in the order of merit and the last one to the ex cadre post.
The first four officers appointed on probation to the substantive vacancies and they are covered by the main part of Rule 2(12)(a).
The fifth one intended to cover the field of operation of the inclusive definition which says that `and also includes an officer directly appointed on probation' `and such an officer who having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post'.
The words `and such an officer directly appointed' would obviously be referable to an Assistant Executive Engineer directly appointed to an ex cadre post, who may be placed on probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post.
By operation of the definition clause he also becomes the member of the service from the date of initial `appointment.
This view is further fortified by the definition of the appointment to the service' in Rule 2(1) which says that appointment to the service includes an appointment made according to the terms and provisions of these rules to an officiating vacancy or to an ex cadre post.
Rule 2(7) says that direct appointment means appointment by open competition but excludes promotee' or transferee; So a promote promoted to an officiating vacancy or on ex cadre post does not become member of the service unless he is appointed substantively to a cadre post.
We, therefore, hold that a direct recruit appointed to an ex cadre post alone is a member of the service even while on probation and Rule 2(12)(a) applies to them and it does not apply to promotee from Class Il service."
"A promotee within quota under rule 5(2) gets his seniority from the initial date of his promotion and the year of allotment, as contemplated in Rule 12(6) shall be the next below `the junior most officer in the service whether officiating or confirmed as Executive Engineer before the former's appointment' counting the entire officiating period towards seniority, unless there is break in the service or from the date of later promotion.
Such promotee, by necessary implication, would normally become senior to the direct recruit promoted later.
Combined operation of sub-rules (3) to (5) of Rule 12 makes the direct recruit a member of the service of Executive Engineer from the date of year of allotment as an Assistant Executive Engineer.
The result is that the promotee occupying the posts within 50% quota of the direct recruits, acquired no right to the post and should yield to direct recruit, though promoted later to him, to the senior scale posts i.e. Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and Chief Engineer.
The promotee has right to confirmation in the cadre post as per Rule 11(4) if a post is available to him within his quota or at a later date under rule 5(2) read with rule 11(4) and gets appointment under section 8(11).
His seniority would be reckoned only from the date of the availability of the post and the year of allotment, he shall be next below to his immediate senior promotee of that year or the junior most of the previous year of allotment whether officiating or permanent occupying the post within 50% quota.
The officiating period of the promotee between the dates of initial promotion and the date of the availability of the cadre post would thus be rendered fortuitous and stands excluded.
A direct recruit on promotion within his quota, though later to the promotee is inter posted in between the periods and interjects the promotee's seniority; snaps the links in the chain of continuity and steals a march over the approved promotee probationer.
Harmonious construction of Rules 2(1), 2(3), 2(7), 2(10), 2(12), (a), 5(2), (a), 8, 9(2), 11, 12(3), 12(5) to 12(7) would yield to the above result, lest the legislative animation would be defeated and the rules would be rendered otiose and surpluses.
It would also adversely affect the morale and efficiency of the service.
Mere officiating appointment by promotion to a cadre post outside the quota; continuous officiation therein and declaration of probation would not clothe the promotee with any right to claim seniority over the direct recruits.
The necessary conclusion could, therefore, be that the direct recruit shall get his seniority with effect from the date of the year of the allotment as Assistant Executive Engineer which is not alterable.
Whereas the promotee would get his seniority w.e.f.
the date of the availability of the posts within 50% quota of the promotees.
The year of allotment is variable and the seniority shall be reckoned accordingly.
Appointment to the cadre post substantively and confirmation thereof shall be made under Rule 8(11) read with Rule 11(4) of the rules.
A promotee Executive Engineer would only then become member of the service, `Appointed substantively' with in the meaning of Rule 2(12) (a) shall be construed accordingly.
We, further hold that the seniority of the promotee from Class II service as Executive Engineer shall be determined with effect from the date on which the cadre post was available to him and the seniority shall be determined accordingly."
3.
Since SL Chopra's case (supra) relates to the Rules with which we are concerned, the directions given herein in para 12 are also reproduced below :-  "Therefore, the State Govt. is directed to determine the cadre strength in the Haryana Service of Engineer Class I P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) under the rules, Executive Engineers; Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers; consider the cases of the appellants and the contesting respondents BD Sardana, FL Kansal for promotion to the senior post, to Executive Engineers, Superintencling Engineers and Chief Engineers respectively with the respective quota of 50% and make appointment if found eligible and fit for promotion.
This exercise shall be done within four months from the date of the receipt of the order.
The impugned promotions or any appointment made pending the writ petitions in the High Court or appeals in this Court are subject to the above directions."
4.
During arguments, on behalf of the petitioner photocopies of the orders passed by the State Government from time to time were produced.
Copies of the same were supplied to the counsel for the State and the private respondents observing that if genuineness of the same was being disputed they could submit in writing and they should also submit written arguments, if necessary.
Some of the respondents have submitted written arguments.
However, the fact of genuineness of these orders has not been disputed.
Thus they are being taken into consideration.
The foremost question for consideration is as to whether under the directions of the Supreme Court in the two cases referred to above it was necessary for the State to re-determine the cadre strength retrospectively and then to decide the question of fixation of seniority of members of the service or if the cadre strength already stood fixed under orders of the State Government, the seniority was to be fixed with respect to the number of officers so manning the strength.
In other words, as has been argued on behalf of the petitioner, the cadre strength having been once determined with respect to a particular date in accordance with the rules, it could not be re-determined retrospectively in order to jeopardise the vested rights and the interests of the members of the service.
It is not disputed that the State Government could re-determine the cadre strength prospectively.
Before these documents are referred to brief reference to the provisions of the Rules be made.
Rule 2(1) defines appointment to the service which would include appointment made according to the terms and provisions of the Rules to an officiating vacancy or an ex cadre post.
A proviso added thereto shows that by such appointment a person is not deemed to have be come a member of the service as defined in clause (12) of the Rules.
The cadre post has been defined to mean permanent post in the service under rule 2(3).
An ex cadre post has been defined to mean a temporary post of the same rank as a cadre post under rule 2(10).
It is sub-rule (12) of Rule 2 which defines members of the service which means an officer appointed sub-stantively to a cadre post.
In the case of direct appointment it is further mentioned that such an officer on probation or who has successfully completed his probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post would also be a member of the service.
At this stage it may be mentioned that there is no such inclusive sub-clause like sub-clause (a) dealing with the direct recruits in respect of the promotees.
Rule 3 provides for strength of the service.
The service is to comprise of such number of posts of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers, and Chief Engineers as may be specified by Government from time to time.
Rule 3 sub-rules (2) and (3) are reproduced below :-  3(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-rule (1) the strength of the service for the first five years after the commencement of these rules shall be determined each year on the 1st day of January, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable according to the provisions of Appendix A The strength the determined shall remain in force till it is revised.
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2), government may appoint an officer to an ex cadre post not included in the service in accordance with the provisions of these rules, provided such post has been sanctioned."
5.
The post of Assistant Executive Engineer to be filled under these rules by the direct recruit is known as junior scale post in the service whereas other posts of Executive Engineers and above are considered as senior scale post in the service.
It is with respect to the promotees from Class II Service who are to be appointed as Executive Engineers that their number is not to increase by 50% of senior scale post of Executive Engineers and above.
Vide letter dated March 5, 1968 - Annexure RW 1/4, a temporary post of Superintending Engineer was converted into permanent with effect from 1111966.
The State Government vide letter dated August 2, 1968, Annexure RW 1/3, fixed the cadre strength of PWD (Public Health Branch) Haryana under Rule 3 of the Rules as on November 1, 1966 as under :-  Superintending Engineer : 1  Executive Engineers : 8  Vide letter dated April 24, 1970 several posts which were temporary were made permanent.
The annexures attached with this letter show that one post of Chief Engineer was made as permanent.
Vide letter dated May 4, 1979 one post of Superintending Engineer and two posts of Executive Engineers were made as permanent.
Vide letter dated November 5, 1980 one post of Chief Engineer and two post of Superintending Engineers and two posts of Executive Engineers in the Head Office and 3 posts of Superintending Engineers and 20 posts of the Executive Engineers at the Subordinate Offices were converted as permanent.
It would be noticed that sanction for 5 posts in the Head Office, as referred to above, was received some time after 1980 and thus in 1980 only 23 posts stood added to the cadre.
Vide letter of 1984, two permanent posts of Executive Engineers were reconverted into temporary ones.
Vide letter dated September 20, 1989 in pursuance of Rule 3(2) of the Rules with effect from January 1, 1989 cadre strength was determined as 69 of Senior Grade posts of the rank of Engineer-in-Chief, Chief Engineers, Superinteriding Engineer and Executive Engineers.
These documents would show that at two stages, one in 1968 cadre strength was fixed as on November 1, 1966 at 9 of senior cadre posts and vide letter dated October 26, 1989, as on January 1, 1989 the cadre strength was fixed as 69.
Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 3 as reproduced above be again reverted to, which provides that after constitution of the service at the time of enforcement of the Rules for the first five years the cadre strength was required to be determined every year as on first day of January or thereafter as may be practicable according to the provisions of appendix `A'.
The strength so determined was to remain in force till it was revised.
The impugned orders be now referred to wherein the State Government re-determined the cadre strength.
Vide Annexure P12 which is dated April 23, 1991, the State Government fixed the strength of service/cadre of Class I service as on first January of the year as per details given below.
(Relevant extracts reproduced) :-  Year Strength of Class I Posts Strength of Class I Junior Posts Cadre Posts Ex-cadre Posts Cadre Posts Ex-cadre Posts 111970 14 2 2 - 1.1.1973 29 5 5 - 1.1.1976 38 7 7 - Vide letter dated May 23, 1991 - Annexure P13 the cadre strength as on first January every year was re-fixed as under : (extracts reproduced)  111970 14 2 2 - 1.1.1971 16 3 3 - 1.1.1972 21 4 4 - 1.1.1973 29 5 5 - 1.1.1974 35 6 6 - 1.1.1975 38 7 7 - 111976 38 7 7 - 1.1.1977 44 8 8 - 1.1.1978 53 9 9 - Vide letter dated January 16, 1992 - Annexure P14 break up of the different posts in pursuance to the declaration made vide Annexure P13 was given.
Only extract of two years which is relevant is mentioned from Annexure `A' attached to the aforesaid letter :-  Year Total Senior Cadre posts already notified Mechanical Civil Chief Engineers Supdt.
Engineers Executive Engineers Total Engineer in Chief Chief Engineer Addl.
Chief Engineer Total Supdt.
Engineer Executive Engineer Total Civil Grand Total 1.1.76 38 - - 2 2 - 1 1 2 7 27 36 38 1.1.77 44 - - 2 2 1 1 - 2 7 33 42 44 6.
As on January 1, 1976 total senior cadre posts shown were 38, wherein two posts of Executive Engineers (Mechanical) were included and with respect to Civil, the remaining 36 posts represented one of Chief Engineer, one of Additional Chief Engineer, 7 Superintending Engineer, 27 Executive Engineers, total : 36.
On January 1, 1977, out of the total senior cadre posts of 44,2 were of Executive Engineers, Mechanical, and the remaining 42 for the Civil Engineers, namely, one Engineer-in-Chief, one Chief Engineer, 7 Superintending Engineers and 33 Executive Engineers.
The State Government earlier had determined the cadre strength as on November 1, 1966 vide letter dated August 2, 1968 of 9 posts and vide letter dated September 20, 1989, fixing cadre strength as on January 1, 1989 as 69 posts (Notification issued is dated October 26, 1989).
The contention of counsel for the petitioner is that the cadre strength so declared could not, under the Rules, be changed retrospectively as the cadre strength once determined under Rule 3 was to continue till it was revised and the revision contemplated under the Rule is to be prospective.
The impugned orders referred to above vide which cadre strength was fixed with retrospective dates and enhancing the cadre strength already declared as on such dates is arbitrary and with a motive to give undue advantage to the promotee on.
7.
On the other hand Advocate General and the counsel representing the promotees have argued that the question of fixation of seniority only arises to appointment of the direct recruit in the service and that is the relevant time for declaring the cadre strength which is required to be fixed from time as time as mentioned under Rule 5 sub-rule (2).
Even otherwise it has been argued that under the Rules aforesaid the cadre strength was required to be determined every year as on 1st day of January according to the formula laid down in appendix `A' and if it was not so determined on the first day of January or soon thereafter the State Government was legally bound to do so even at a later stage and the cadre strength so fixed after following the formula as given in appendix `A' cannot be termed to be arbitrary to give undue benefit to one set of employees in the cadre.
8.
We have given due consideration to the respective arguments.
The plain reading of Rule 3(2) leaves no room for doubt that for first five years of commencement of the Rules the State Government was legally bound to declare the cadre strength as on 1st day of January as per provisions of appendix `A' and thereafter the State Government could do so from time to time.
It is not disputed that even after five years of the enforcement of the Rules the State Government could determine the cadre strength prospectively keeping in view the formula of appendix `A'.
The question which has been canvassed is about the right of the State Government to determine the cadre strength with effect from a retrospective date.
This question can be examined from different angles.
It was required of the State to determine the cadre strength for first five years of commencement of the Rules and if the State Government had not done so for reasons best known to it, a direction could legitimately be given to do so as the rights of the promotees having been appointed on ex cadre post in the service or against cadre post beyond the quota of the promotees may have been affected.
Straightaway on increase in the cadre strength some of the promotees who having completed probationary period were waiting for confirmation would have got the benefit of becoming members of the service on their confirmation on posts failing within their quota.
Such a right which was given under the Rules to the promosees could not be affected by inaction on the part of the State Government as required under the Rules.
Right of the persons who were eligible to be considered for becoming members of the service under the provisions of the Rules could not be taken away be executive inaction.
With the appointment of a direct recruit which is always made when permanent post in the cadre is available, his right to be fixed in the seniority of the members of the service cannot either be taken away or jeopardised, postponed, or denied by passing an order having retrospective effect.
As per the cadre strength on the relevant date, in the case of direct recruit, being the date of his initial appointment to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer, to be allocated the said year of allotment his right to be fixed in seniority among the then members of the service cannot be affected subsequently by induction of more persons as members of the service to put him down.
This is what appears to have been done by redetermining the cadre strength as on the date BD Sardana joined as Assistant Executive Engineer.
Some of the promotees who otherwise would not have been eligible for consideration for fixation of seniority as permanent posts within the quota of the promotees were not available for them for their confirmation, in the absence of re-determination of the cadre strength would have ranked junior to the petitioner.
However, by increasing the cadre strength retrospectively such persons have been given undue advantage to be ranked as senior to the petitioner, BD Sardana.
Thus vested right of the petitioner has been adversely affected by the action of the State Government in passing the order fixing cadre strength retrospectively a date prior to induction of the direct recruit in the service.
It would be an arbitrary Act hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In Sushil Kumar Jain and others v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) SLR 265, the action of the State Government to convert one temporary post with permanent in Haryana Superior Judicial Service retrospectively fixing arbitrary date, which was to the disadvantage of direct recruit of divesting him of vested right, was held to be arbitrary violating Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution by Division Bench of this Court.
The Supreme Court in BS Yadav v. State of Haryana, 1980(3) SLR 591, in para 71 of the judgment of observed as under :-  "The fairness which Articles 14 and 16 postulate is that if a promotee is otherwise fit for confirmation and a vacancy failing within the quota of promotees is available in which he can be confirmed, his confirmation ought not to be postponed until a direct recruit whether yet appointed or not completes his period of probation and thereupon becomes eligible for confirmation."
9.
It was strongly argued by the learned Advocate General, Haryana, and other counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents-promotees that his re-determination of the cadre strength is under directions of the Supreme Court in the cases referred to above and thus cannot be held to be arbitrary or against the Rules.
This contention cannot be accepted.
The directions given in the case of AN Sehgal, specifically in para 28, mentioned are to the effect that the Government of Haryana would determine the cadre strength, if not already done.
In that case, as the judgment reveals.
No question was raised or debated as to whether the State Government had earlier determined the cadre strength or not.
Thus the direction was that if it had not already done, the State Government would determine the same.
There was no direction that the State Govt. would re-determine the same (emphasis supplied).
In SL Chopra's case (supra), specifically mention was made that cadre strength had already been fixed as was mentioned in one of the affidavits filed on behalf of the State Government as stated in para 12 of the judgment.
However, the Supreme Court declined to go into that question leaving it open to the Government to determine the seniority after giving opportunity to all the parties concerned.
However.
directions given in para 12 are quoted as above where the State Government was directed to determine the cadre strength under the Rules and consider the case of the parties for fixation of seniority within the respective quota.
Again it may be emphasised that the ultimate direction was to determine the cadre strength and not to re-determine (emphasis supplied).
As a matter of fact re-determination of the cadre strength is not at all contemplated under Rule 3(2) of the Rules.
It is every year and every time determination of the cadre strength which may increase or decrease posts in the service and ordinarily it would be prospective.
If it is made retrospective, the vested rights of the members of the service are likely to be affected which was not the intention of the Rules.
Thus it is held that where the State Government had fixed the cadre strength may be retrospectively much prior to induction of the direct recruit into service, it will be given effect to and such cadre strength will remain in force till it is increased or decreased by passing another order under Rule 3(2) of the Rules or by conversion of temporary posts into permanent.
Such increase or decrease cannot be retrospective, if it is to affect vested rights of any of the members of the service a direct recruit in particular.
10.
Advocate General has argued that promotees on permanent appointment as Executive Engineers would normally become members of the service, as observed by the Supreme Court in para 21 of the judgment in AN Sehgal's case.
This contention cannot be accepted if para 21 is read as a whole as reproduced above.
The Supreme Court has further clarified the position in detail while making reference to the relevant rule in subsequent portion of the judgment.
In para 25 it was observed as under :-  "---No countenance could be given to the contention that the officers put on probation in terms of Rule 11(1) irrespective whether they occupied declared posts, but also posts which ought to have been declared as such from time to time and have continuously remained in service entitle then to become member of service and that, as and when the posts occupied by them are declared as cadre posts within retrospective effect, they are entitled to be treated as members of the service w.e.f.
the due dates.
In other words it amounts to put a premium on the inaction on the part of the State Govt. to declare the cadre posts in terms of Rule 3(2) read with Appendix `A' defeating the scheme of the Rules."
Rule 3 reads as under :-  "3.
Strength of Service :- (1) The service shall comprise of such number of posts of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers as may be specified by Government from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-rule (1) the strength of the Service for the first five years after the commencement of these rules shall be determined each year on the 1st day of January, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable according to the provisions of Appendix `A'.
The strength so determined shall remain in force till it is revised.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2), Government may appoint an officer to an ex cadre post not included in the Service in accordance with the provisions of these rules, provided such post has been sanctioned."
Rule 2(3) defines cadre posts as to mean permanent posts in the Service.
11.
Reading of the Rules aforesaid makes it clear that as and when required the State Government may specify number of different posts in the Service under Rule 3(1) and further declare cadre strength under Rule 3(2) of the Rules as per formula provided under Appendix `A'.
In both contingencies as provided under Rule 3(1) and (2) such posts either on conversion or on declaration would become cadre posts.
Persons.
appointed against such posts within the quota provided under Rule 5 can only be considered for purposes of fixation of seniority under Rule 12.
12.
It has been argued by the learned Advocate General for the State of Haryana that when Haryana was carved out only 14 Officers were allocated, but out of which 10 were permanent and that should constitute a group of officers in the Service itself as if it was constituted at the time of enforcement of the Rules.
It is further argued that even if number of promotees were more than 50%, in view of Rule 5(3) they would be deemed to the constituting 50% of the posts within their quota and further recruitment is to be based on this assumption.
This contention cannot be accepted as such.
The Rules came into force in 1961 when there was joint Punjab.
Whatever service constituted at that time was to be governed under Rule 5(3) of the Rules aforesaid.
Even on carving of the State of Haryana at the most it can be said that in respect of permanent members of the service who were allocated to the State of Haryana, their seniority will not be affected by the persons inducted into the service thereafter.
Assuming for the sake of argument, it is held that when the State of Haryana was carved out and the Rules again made applicable to the service, even if persons more than 50% out of the promotees were in service by fiction of law to be 50% under Rule 5(3) of the Rules aforesaid, fresh recruitment is to be made on that basis and if by fresh recruitment the number of the promotees increase 50% that would be hit by Rule 5(2) of the Rules.
In other words so long there is no deficiency of 50% of promotees quota among the persons constituting the service on formation of Haryana other posts could be treated qua the promotees as ex cadre posts or posts beyond their quota.
If all the 10 persons so allotted were in fact the promotees from Class II service, as and when first five vacancies occur, all were to be given to the direct recruits as the promotees continued to be filling vacancies of their quota of 50%.
The moment 6th vacancy occurs making a post available to the promotees within 50% of their quota the same would be filled by the next promotee.
It is in this manner that Rule 5(3) is to operate.
13.
It has been argued by learned counsel for the respondents that ten Posts, which stood allocated to State of Haryana cannot be considered cadre posts and are to be kept apart while determining quota of the promotees in the declared cadre strength and the vacancies occurring thereafter are to be allocated to direct recruits and promotees by rotation to maintain quota therein.
There is no merit in this contention.
Rather reading of different rules negatives the theory of rota.
In AN Sehgal's case it has specifically been ruled that rota is not provided in the rules in the matter of either filling the posts or determination of seniority.
The promotees are also supposed to man all the temporary posts as well as permanent posts of the quota of direct recruits till such direct recruitment made.
In this manner promotees hold posts beyond their requisite quota of 50%.
However, period of such service is not to be considered while determining the question of fixation of seniority under Rule 12.
Thus those ten posts, which were allocated to Haryana on November 1, 1966 are to be treated as cadre posts within the cadre strength so declared under Rule 5(2) of the Rules.
In fact declared cadre strength was 9 as on 1111966 as per order dated August 2, 1968 Annexure RW 1/3.
14.
On behalf of respondent No. 4 it has been argued that a promotee for whom post within the quota is made available after direct recruit joins as Assistant Executive Engineer and before he is promoted as Executive Engineer would be allocated year of allotment not of such direct recruit but of such junior officer in service who was then officiating or confirmed.
Reliance was being placed on the observations of Mongia, J. in Devki Nandan Shant v. State of Haryana, 1992(4) S.L.R.
226 : 1992(2) SCT 424.
It is not necessary to refer to the same as appeal in the aforesaid case is also being disposed of today.
Suffice it to say that as laid down by the Supreme Court in AN Sehgal's case (supra) by fiction of law a direct recruit on appointment as an Executive Engineer gets year of allotment when he was first inducted as Assistant Executive Engineer.
For all intents and purposes he is deemed to have been appointed as Executive Engineer on the date he first joins as Assistant Executive Engineer.
The contention is repelled.
15.
It has also been argued that there is breakdown of quota rules in the present case as only one direct recruit joined the service and the promotees who were appointed against the quota of direct recruits would rank senior to the Direct recruit Joining later.
In support of this contention reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1607, wherein it was held as under :-  "Where the quota rule has broken down and the appointments are made from one source in excess of the quota, but are made after following the procedure prescribed by the rules for the appointment, the appointees should not be pushed down below the appointees from the other source inducted in the service at a later date."
16.
The aforesaid principle cannot be applied to the case in hand.
It was further held in the above case that if the Rules permit for relaxation of rule of quota, it would be deemed that such relaxation was granted.
In the rules governing the present service, there is no provision to relax the quota rule.
Clear directions have been given in the matter of fixation of seniority under the Rules in cases of AN Sehgal, and SL Chopra (supra).
17.
It has been further argued on behalf of respondent Nos. 4 and 6 and since they were not parties in SL Chopra's case before the Supreme Court, they are not bound by the decision.
There is no merit in this contention.
The Supreme Court has interpreted the Service Rules and left it open to the State Government to determine seniority under the Rules.
Whenever the Supreme Court interprets any statute or the rules framed thereunder, it declare the law.
Such a declaration is binding on all Courts within the territory of India under Article 141 of the Constitution.
18.
The seniority of members of the service is required to be fixed under Rule 16 of the Rules as interpreted thy the Apex Court in AN Sehgal and SL Chopra cases.
relevant paras quoted above.
Before the appointment of BD Sardana, a direct recruits, in the service, the promotees were mostly manning the cadre posts.
Such of the promotees who were manning cadre posts beyond their quota became eligible for fixation of seniority among members of the service, when they became eligible for becoming members i.e. on availability of posts for them within their quota of 50%.
If they became eligible for becoming members of the service prior to the appointment of Direct recruit, they would get year of allotment of junior-most member of the service whether officiating or confirmed.
Otherwise they would get the year of allotment of such a direct recruit, who by fiction of law, get allotted year of allotment of the year in which he was inducted as Assistant Executive Engineer in the service.
BD Sardana's year of allotment being 1977 as relevant date of joining as Assistant Executive Engineer being August 25, 1977, it is to be seen as to what was the cadre strength on that date, to determine the exact numbers of promotees quota of 50% under the Rules.
19.
In the present writ petition the challenge to the fresh determination of the seniority vide order Annexure PAS is two-fold : Firstly the State Government treated the first 10 posts which were allocated to Haryana as on November 1, 1966 out of the cadre strength and, thereafter, making appointments and fixing seniority rotation-wise taking into consideration the vacancies occurring thereafter.
This approach of the State Government is clearly against the rules.
It were required of the State Government to specify the number of the promotees and direct recruits allocated to the State of Haryana on formation of the Haryana State.
If that has been done, there would have been no difficulty in determining as to whether such promotees were manning 50% of the posts i.e. their quota under the rules.
If the number of such promotees officers was only 4, one more person could be accommodated within their quota.
If their number was 5, obviously 11th post would not have been given to the promotees as it would have increased their 50% quota.
The 12th post of course, in such circumstances, would have gone to the promotees as such appointment would not have exceeded 50% of their quota.
If the number of promotees had been 6, or more, the vacancy occurring thereafter would not have fallen to their share till the number of the vacancies exceeded proportionately to their 50% quota e.g. if all the 10 posts is on November 1, 1966 were manned by 10 promotees as allocated, subsequently upto the sanctioned strength of 20 or 21 posts no promotee could be accommodated.
This is the only way to apply the rule of quota as provided under the rules in the matter of recruitment and fixation of seniority.
In the order Annexure P 18 it was mentioned that the interpretation of the Supreme Court in AN Sehgal and SL Chopra's cases appeared to be harsh and not acceptable to the State for which the State intended to get the decisions aforesaid reviewed but that can hardly be a ground not to fix seniority in accordance with the Rules as interpreted by the Supreme Court.
It was argued by the Advocate General as well as the other counsel appearing on behalf of the promotees that normally such promotees by the time they are promoted as Superintending Engineers are fairly aged and if by any process a direct recruit young in age would intersect, their chances of promotion to further higher post would be jeopardised.
While determining seniority of members of the Service, there would be no place for emotional or sentimental approach.
A direct recruit when he joined service as Class I officer, he also takes into consideration the future prospects.
If the Rules contemplated that in the Service young blood could also he there, it would be too harsh to put them down subsequently in the matter of fixation of seniority and denying them promotion to the higher post.
The object for which direct recruitment is made would obviously be frustrated.
Thus different service rules providing different modes of fixation of seniority qua direct recruits and promotees are to be so interpreted that it would achieve the object of the Rules and in the present case the Supreme Court has already interpreted the Rules and the seniority was required to be fixed strictly under the Rules as interpreted by the Supreme Court.
There is no indication either in the judgment of the Supreme Court or in the Rules that the persons allocated to the State of Haryana as on November 1, 1966 would form a separate cadre in the service.
Thus, for all intents and purposes under the Rules those Class I members of the Service who stood allocated to the State of Haryana form cadre strength of the service.
State of Haryana declared cadre strength as 9.
Out of 9 persons so allocated, Shri JL Sethi retired on November 30, 1976, thus 10th person, promotee stood adjusted making their number as ten, though tenth person was exceeding 50% of the quota.
It was only in the matter of fixation of the seniority that these 10 posts were being kept Separate from the cadre strength.
While referring to Annexure P18 as it stands, cadre strength on January 1, 1970 was fixed at 14 i.e. 10 posts allocated to Haryana plus four more.
Out of four more posts, two were kept for the direct recruits and two were filled by the promotees.
As already observed above, if all the ten persons allocated to the State of Haryana were promotees, by appointment of two more, their number would be 12, which would obviously be more than 50% of their quota as provided under the Rules.
For the subsequent period also the seniority was fixed accordingly.
Reference may only be made to the position shown in Annexure P 18 as on January 1, 1977 when number of allocable senior cadre post was mentioned as 42 (-) 36 = 6.
This shows that to the cadre strength as on January 1, 1976; 36, 6 more posts were added making the total cadre strength of 42.
Leaving 3 posts for the direct recruits, 3 persons were fixed in the seniority for that year namely; Sensi Singal, KC Jain and SL Chopra at Sr. Nos. 34, 35 and 36 the promotees respectively.
BD Sardana was fixed at Sr. No. 47.
With respect to the cadre strength of 51 (-) 42 = 9 as on January 1, 1978 and in between five promotees were adjusted namely; MS Mighani, JC Yadav, JR Batra.
RK Dilbagi and SK Mutneja.
Taking the figure of 42 cadre strength as on January 1, 1977 as mentioned in the seniority list attached with annexure P.18, 50% of the promotees quota could have been 21, meaning thereby that only 21 promotees could be permanent kith respect to total number of posts available on January 1, 1977 in respect of 1977 year of allotment.
However, the list Annexure P18 does not contain the names of 10 persons who were originally allocated to the State of Haryana on November 1, 1966.
If those posts are also considered as cadre post, obviously BD Sardana whose year of allotment is 1977 was to be fixed in seniority of course within his own quota below 21st promotee.
Such promotees fixed in the seniority after 21st post were obviously working against ex cadre post and their claim for seniority was not ripe till post within their quota in the declared strength was available.
20.
Viewed from other angle it would be noticed that rota principle cannot be read into the rules in the matter of recruitment in the service.
If there is no increase in the cadre strength in a particular year, however, out of 50% promotee members, there occur vacancies either on account of retirement, death or removal or dismissal, such number of vacancies would be filled by the promotees and are not to be shared by the direct recruits by rotation.
Under the rules quota as prescribed is to apply in the matter of recruitment as held by the Supreme Court.
21.
The other attack of the petitioner with respect to order Annexure P18 is that the seniority of the cadre had already been determined and the State was in error in re-determining the cadre strength as on January 1, 1977 at 42.
Thus the question which calls for consideration is as to whether any time before order Annexure P18 or orders Annexures P12 and P.13 were made, the strength of the cadre was fixed.
If the answer is in the affirmative, then obviously the State Government could not re-determine the cadre strength retrospectively in order to give advantage to the promotees in the present case or to the disadvantage of the direct recruit.
As already referred to above, vide order Annexure RW 1/3, dated August 2, 1968, in exercise of powers conferred under Rule 3 of the Rules, cadre strength was fixed at 9 i.e. Superintending Engineer : 1 and Executive Engineer : 8.
This was so fixed with effect from November 1, 1966 when Haryana was carved out.
On such declaration, one temporary post of Superintending Engineer made permanent as per order dated Annexure R 1/4 stood merged in the declared cadre which was nine.
Vide letter dated April 24, 1970, one post of Chief Engineer was declared as permanent making the cadre strength to ten.
This was the cadre strength as on 1111977 as well as on the date BD Sardana joined service i.e. December 25, 1977 and also on January 1, 1978 and January 1, 1979.
It was only on May 4, 1979 that 4 temporary posts of Superintending Engineers and 2 temporary posts of Executive Engineers were made permanent making the cadre strength at 13.
Vide letter dated November 5, 1980, out of 28 posts sanction for 23 posts only has been received for being made permanent.
Thus the cadre strength became 36.
This stand was taken by the State in affidavit filed in SL Chopra's case in the Supreme Court, copy of which is Annexure P16.
Annexure R.1/3 attached to P16 makes it clear that cadre strength on April 20, 1970 was 10 and on May 4, 1979, it was 13.
In the affidavit filed in the Supreme Court, copy Annexure P17, the position in Annexure P16 was sought to be clarified to the extent that cadre strength as on January 1, 1977 was 11 posts and on May 4, 1979 it was 14 and on November 5, 1980 it was 40.
22.
Annexure P16 gives the correct position as it existed, as discussed above.
Cadre strength was 9.
BD Sardana having been appointed in the service on December 25, 1977 and ultimately his year of allotment being 1977, he is to rank just below the 9th person, already allocated to the State on Haryana on its constitution.
No other promotee could be adjusted above BD Sardana as the same would have amounted to increase of promotee quota.
Cadre strength having been declared as on January 1, 1989 at 69 vide notification dated October 26, 1989, State Government could not determine or re-determine the cadre, strength prior to January 2, 1989.
Vide orders Annxures P12, P.13 and P.18 fixing and declaring cadre strength retrospectively for the years 1977 and 1979, which adversely affects vested right of BD Sardana to be fixed in seniority under the Rules are arbitrary and illegal to that extent.
The impugned order of promotion based on seniority list Annexure P18 thus cannot be sustained in law.
23.
After adjustment of B.D Sardana, taking his year of allotment as 1977, as already discussed above, immediately after the aforesaid 10 persons allocated to State of Haryana, since their seniority is not under challenge, declaration of cadre strength for subsequent years, may be retrospectively, will be valid as right of other direct recruits will not be involved as none has so far been appointed to the service.
However, State is required to refix the seniority of BD Sardana, a direct recruit and other promotees to the extent of their quota fixed including 10 persons allocated to Haryana as on November 1, 1966 in the cadre.
State Government is also required to pass fresh promotion orders of BD Sardana and other promotees to the post of Superintending Engineers and above as and when such posts became available keeping in view the seniority of the member to be redetermined.
24.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with costs to be borne by the State.
Orders Annexures P12, P.13 and P14 declaring cadre strength retrospectively for the years 1977 and 1978 and the seniority list Annexure P18 and the orders of promotion and confirmation passed thereunder are quashed with the directions to the State of Haryana to fix the petitioner BD Sardana in the seniority of Class I service below the 10th person allocated to the State of Haryana and the promotee-respondents as per directions above and further to pass orders of promotion of BD Sardana, the petitioner, and other promotees to higher posts accordingly as and when vacancies of such posts occurred.
Costs Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.