VK Bali, J (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 11261,11262,11263,11264,11265, 11266,11267, 11268, 11269, 11270, 11,271, 11272, 11273, 11274 and 11275 of 1989 as common questions of law and facts are involved in all the cases.
However the facts have been extracted from CWP No. 11261 of 1980  2.
The Kurukshetra Central Cooperative Bank Ltd seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash orders passed by the Presiding Officer Labour Court, Ambala dated 5th June, 1989 (Annexure P-2) vide which workman Ranbir Singh was reinstated with all consequential reliefs like back wages etc.  3.
The brief facts culled out from the pleadings at the petition as also the impugned order will reveal that the workman Ranbir Singh was initially employed for a period of 89 days on 6th March, 1986.
After ten days' break he was re-employed on 13th June, 1986.
Like that he got five extensions, the last being on 23rd June 1987 which again was for a period of 49 days.
As referred to above the first break in the period of service was of ten days, the second one for six days' the third one for four days, the fourth one for two days and the last one for seven days.
It is just a few days prior to his last tenure that his services were terminated.
It requires to be mentioned that the facts of all the cases are similar even though in all the cases there may not be as many extensions as in the present case and the dates of termination likewise, may not be common.
4.
The respondent-workman sought a reference under Section 10(i)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter to be referred to as the Act) and Sh. SD Anand, Presiding Officer Labour Court, Ambala before whom the reference came up for adjudication held vide award dated 5th June, 1989 that the workman shall be entitled to reinstatement with continuity in service.
The workman was also held entitled to back wages for the period of his idleness.
As indicated earlier, it is this award of the Tribunal which is challenged in this petition.
5.
After reproducing the bare minimum facts the petitioner pleads that the award of the Labour Court is illegal inasmuch as discharge of a workman on expiry of limited period for which he was employed would not entail following of procedure as contained in Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The amendment brought about in the definition of retrenchment by virtue of clause 1(bb) is pressed into service for the aforesaid contention.
It is also pleaded that the dispute referred to the Labour Court was "whether the termination of services of Sh. Ranbir Singh was justified and the Labour Court had erred in travelling beyond the scope of reference as it was nowhere in the reference whether non-renewal of the contract of service was justified or not ?
It is also pleaded that under Section 102 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984, read with Section 128 thereof, the jurisdiction of the Labour Court and the Industrial Tribunal was excluded and the matter was only competent to be decided by the authorities constituted under the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act.
In the same strain, it is pleaded that the dispute between the petitioner and the workman fell within the ambit of Section 102 of the said Act and, thus, the jurisdiction of the Labour Court is barred.
The workman-respondent has contested the petition and in the reply it has been pleaded that the petition deserves to be dismissed on the solitary ground that the co-employees who were appointed on similar terms and in a similar manner as the petitioner-bank had employed him had filed various writ petitions (details of which are given in para 1 of the preliminary objections) all of which were allowed vide judgment recorded in CWP No. 8607 of 1987, operative part whereof reads as under :-  "All the remaining writ petitions falling in the second category mentioned above which have been filed by the ad hoc employees whose services have been terminated, are disposed of with the direction that those petitioners who are deemed to be in continuous service of the Bank for a period of one year under Section 25-B(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act in that they during a period of 12 calender months preceding the date of termination of their services and actually worked with the Bank for not less than 240 days shall be treated to have been in the regular employment of the Bank.
The termination of their services without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act is held to be illegal.
They are entitled to reinstatement in service from the date they were removed from service.
They shall get salary from the said, date till the date they are taken back in service.
The bank shall comply with this order within one month from today.
It is, however, made clear that the remaining petitioners are not entitled to any relief and their claims are, therefore, rejected.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs."
The said petitions were decided on 1st September, 1989.
Against the aforesaid orders, the petitioner-Bank had filed even a Special Leave Petition in Appeal (Civil) No. 8843 and 9372 of 1989 which came up for hearing before the apex Court on 19th February, 1990 and the following orders were passed,-.
"The Special leave petitions are dismissed."
6.
There are other preliminary objections raised but no detailed reference of the same is required to be made.
On merits, the case of the workman is that there were only notional breaks and within the calendar year 1986, the workman had worked for about 240 days.
It is also pleaded that the amendment brought about in the definition of `retrenchment' would not come to the rescue of the petitioner as in the present case giving repeated extensions after few days' break would be nothing short of an unfair labour practice.
7.
After going through the record of the case as also hearing learned counsel for the respondent-workman I do not find any substance in the writ petition.
In similar circumstances, a Division Bench of this Court, to which I was a party, in Haryana State Federation of Consumers' Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh, 1992(1) SCT 697 held that "the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) are to be read along with Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
When the management allows the workman to continue in service with notional breaks after the workman had put in 240 days in service in 12 months, it amounts to unfair labour practice if his services are terminated, In that case, Section 25-F(ii) of the Act, would cover the case and the workman would be entitled to retrenchment compensation if his services were to be terminated.
If his services had been terminated within a period of 240 days, obviously, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner could be accepted that it was a case of contract and service stood terminated on the expiry of the period of contract.
After the workman was allowed to continue for 240 days and the management wanted to get rid of him and started employing other persons, obviously it amounted to unfair labour practice.
It was so held on similar facts in Kapurthala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, 1984 LIC 974."
While giving the aforesaid judgment, reliance was also placed on a decision in P Rajeev and others v. Karnataka State Construction Corporation Ltd, Bangalore, 1991 LIC (N.O.C.)
22 (Kar) and the decision of this Court in Raj Bahadur v. General Manager, Food Specialities Ltd, Moga, 1991(1) PLR 631.
8.
The facts of the present case are similar to the one cited above and, in fact, the present case is on a far better footing as the employment of the petitioner continued from 6th March, 1986 to 19th Sept, 1987, a period of one year and six months.
As referred to above, there are five notional breaks ranging between two and ten days.
It is not the case of the petitioner- employer that after 19th Sept, 1987, work that was being taken from the respondent ceased to exist and no one was thereafter ever employed.
The employer cannot be permitted to act in such a way that may cause complete injustice to the workman and also to conveniently deviate from the provisions of law of retrenchment which necessarily requires one month's notice or compensation in lieu thereof at the time of retrenchment.
It is not disputed that the aforesaid procedure was not followed in this case.
No exception can, thus, be taken to the well-reasoned award passed by the Labour Court.
9.
At this stage, Mr. Khoji, learned counsel for the petitioner has put in appearance and contends that clause 1(bb) introduced in the amended definition of retrenchment is fully attracted to the facts of the present case and the mere fact that the respondent workman was given extension after break in service of few days would not amount to unfair labour practice.
He further contends that `unfair labour practice' means any of the practices specified in Fifth Schedule as per definition of the words contained in Section 2(ra) of the Industrial Disputes Act and perusal of Fifth Schedule would demonstrate that `unfair labour practices' enumerated therein are the only unfair labour practices.
Inasmuch as break in service and extension thereafter has not been mentioned to be unfair labour practice in the Fifth Schedule, which is all comprehensive, the workman cannot contend the same to be so and the finding recorded by the Labour Count to that effect cannot sustain.
It is also the contention of the learned counsel that but for the unfair labour practice as mentioned in the Fifth Schedule.
no other action the part of the management can amount to unfair labour practice.
In support of his contention that on expiry of contractual period there was no necessity at to follow the mandate contained in Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act he relies upon judgment of Gujarat High Court in M. Shrimali v. District Development Officer, Jilla Panchayat and others, 1989 Lab.
IC 689.
The other contention of the learned counsel is that in similar circumstances, the Single Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 778 of 1988, decided on 18th January, 1989, even though reinstated the workman yet found him not entitled to back wages and therefore, even if the order of the Labour Court may not be set aside in toto, the same requires to be modified to the extent that the management should not be saddled with the responsibility of back wages.
10.
After hearing learned counsel and giving thoughtful consideration to the matter, I do not find any substance in the contentions raised by him.
It may be true that `unfair labour practices' are one which have been enumerated in Fifth Schedule, but reading of the same would rather show that break in service for few days and reemployment thereafter for limited period repeated time and again would come within clause 5(b) of the Fifth Schedule of the Act, and if another person is employed on the same job after discharging a workman then it will also fall in clause 5(c).
Clause 5 of the Fifth Schedule in so far as it is relevant for deciding the present case runs thus :  "5.
To discharge or dismiss workmen  (a) by way of victimisation;  (b) not in good faith, but in the colourable exercise of the employer's rights;  (c) xxx xxx  (d) for patently false reasons;  (e) to (g) xxx xxx"  The employer has every right to retrench a workman.
The law only prescribes that before it is so done the procedure provided in Section 25(F) of the Act is followed.
If with a view to do away with the mandate of the law, the employer discharges or dismisses a workman the same has to be termed as not in good faith, but the colourable exercise of the employer's rights.
Further if the work is available and somebody else is employed after discharging a workman on the plea that his employment was for limited period, the same would be on patently false reasons.
If the contract of the employment specifies that the work is of limited nature and is of short duration and as a matter of fact, if the work is over which might take even little more time than the one which is specified in the contract, the employer would have every right to discharge a workman on expiry of the period mentioned in the contract or by extending the period till such time the work is over but if after the expiry of period mentioned in the contract a few days break is given and the workman is re-employed once again for limited period and such course is repeated number of times and ultimately when a workman is shown the exit door, the work is still available then the same has to be held to have not been done in good faith but in colourable exercise of the right as also the same would be on patently false reasons.
The ratio of the judgment relied upon by the learned counsel cannot come to the rescue of the management as the workman in that case was engaged purely on ad hoc and temporary basis and his tenure was to last till scarcity works were in progress and that the services were liable to be terminated without notice and without assigning any reason whatsoever by the State Government.
The order of employment clearly stated that the same will be terminated on the winding up of the scarcity relief work.
The workmen were told in no uncertain terms that duration of their engagement was co-extensive with the duration of the scarcity relief work, meaning thereby that their services will end on the closure of the relief work.
It is in these circumstances that it was held in the case referred to above that the case of the workman would clearly fall within second part of clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act will not be attracted.
It is amply made out from the facts of the aforesaid case that no extensions or repeated extensions after break in service of few days were given and it was not shown by the workman in the aforesaid case that scarcity relief works continued even after' their retrenchment.
The facts of the aforesaid case are entirely different and have thus no bearing whatsoever upon the present case.
11.
In so far as contention of the learned counsel that in similar circumstances back wages were not paid in the decision rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 778 of 1988, I would only like to observe that when unassailable finding has come on the records that retrenchment was on account of unfair labour practice, normal rule is to allow back wages.
It shall also be seen that in similar matters this Court in bunch of petitions, reference of which have been given above, allowed back wages, which order was upheld by the Apex Court in Special Leave Petition preferred against the aforesaid judgment.
No other point has been urged by Mr. Khoji.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is dismissed with no costs.