Santosh Duggal, J - The petitioner, who is working in the substantive rank of Addl.
Town Planner in the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (for short 'MCD'), has sought issuance of a writ or direction quashing the advertisement issued on 28th March, 1992 by the Union Public Service Commission ('UPSC' for short) for filling up the post of Town Planner on regular basis; being Advertisement No. 7 appearing in the Hindustan Times of 28th March, 1992.
The challenge to the validity of this advertisement is on a basic issue to the effect that the post of Town Planner in MCD is one and solitary and according to accepted principles, there can be no reservation for Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe when the post to be filled up is a single post.
It is contended that inasmuch as the impugned advertisement notifies that the post was reserved for Scheduled Castes, it was liable to be withdrawn for the short reason that there could not be any reservation for this post, and it has to be filled up, without adhering to any reservation formula, as specified in the forty point Roster in the Brochure on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services.
2.
The petitioner has also given narrative of the steps the respondent-Corporation has taken from time to time, after the post fell vacant on retirement of the previous incumbent, Shri DD Mathur on 31st March, 1990.
It is alleged that at the time of retirement of Shri Mathur, there were three officers working on the post of Addl.
Town Planner, namely, Shri OP Malik, Shri BS Khurana and the petitioner.
The petitioner further states that according to recruitment rules, pertaining to the post of Town Planner, it is to be filled up firstly by promotion from amongst the officers working as Additional Town Planners with 7 years service in the grade, and in the alternative by direct recruitment.
3.
The plea is that as per the Corporation's stand taken at the time when the post fell vacant, 7 years regular service in the grade was contemplated by the recruitment rules, as the requisite qualification to bring an Additional Town Planner, within the zone of consideration, and since none of the three incumbents of the post of Addl.
Town Planner had completed the required period of regular service as per respondents' calculation, no steps were taken at the time to fill up the post by promotion.
Instead the senior-most Addl.
Town Planner Shri OP Malik was first allowed to hold current duty charge, and was given ad hoc appointment thereafter shortly before date of his superannuation.
Similar orders were passed after the retirement of Shri OP Malik and Shri BS Khurana was likewise first given orders to hold current duty charge, and thereafter given ad hoc promotion in the month of December 1991, when he was retiring on 31st December, 1991.
The treatment given to the petitioner is, however, different inasmuch as he has been asked only to look after the work of Town Planner in addition to his own duties of Addl.
Town Planner.
4.
The petitioner has imputed mala fides to the respondents on a number of counts.
It is alleged that firstly when on respondent's calculation no officer could be considered for promotion, then immediately steps ought to have been taken to advertise the post for filling up by direct recruitment through the UPSC.
Not only this was not done; two officers, before the petitioner were given benefit of holding the post of Town Planner, on ad hoc basis and that this betrays motive on the part of the respondent to give benefit to those officers, in the matter of pension based on the last drawn salary and other retirement benefits, and that the end result is that these officers did not suffer to any material extent by not being considered for regular appointment to the post of Town Planner, as they were allowed to hold the post for all practical purposes, and shortly before the date of superannuation, were given ad hoc appointment through the UPSC.
5.
All this has, according to the petitioner, resulted to his detriment inasmuch as in case the post had been advertised for being filled up by direct recruitment, at the right time, shortly after it fell vacant, he was eligible, to apply on the basis of academic and other qualifications, whereas he was now debarred from so doing as he has completed 55 years of age on Ist November, 1991, and the recruitment rules require that a departmental candidate for the post of Town Planner in direct recruitment category, shall not be above the age of 55 years.
He has further impugned mala fides and discriminatory treatment at the hands of the respondent in not being given current duty charge like the other two Addl.
Town Planners before him, and not being recommended even for ad hoc appointment, like the other two officers, and steps having been initiated for filling up the post by direct recruitment only after retirement of second of the two officers.
6.
Mr. GD Gupta, arguing for the petitioner, submitted that the petitioner was promoted to the post of Addl.
Town Planner on ad hoc basis with effect from 1st May, 1985.
He contended that the principle was well established now that in case a person had been continuously working against a post, and subsequently confirmed on the said post, and there was no break in continuity, then the period of ad hoc appointment had also to be counted and that in this view of the matter, the petitioner would have to be treated as having completed 7 years service in the grade of Addl.
Town Planner, with effect from 1st May, 1992 and thus eligible for being considered for the post of Town Planner by promotion.
7.
The learned counsel argued that the conduct of the respondents smacks of mala fides in making reference to the UPSC for filling up the post of Town Planner on regular basis only after retirement of the second officer, Shri BS Khurana, and having advertised it when the petitioner become ineligible on account of age bar, and further excluded him even from applying by reserving it wrongfully for Scheduled Caste, and further proceeding to have the post advertised for being filled up by direct recruitment, shortly before the petitioner was due to become eligible for consideration for appointment to the post of Town Planner, by promotion.
According to Mr. Gupta, there is a definite scheme and purpose in all these actions of the respondents with a view to harm petitioner's prospects for being considered, and that they have positively shown discrimination against him by not giving him even current duty charge or promotion on ad hoc basis, like the other two officers, namely, S/Shri OP Malik and BS Khurana.
8.
The stand of the respondents as spelt out in the counter-affidavit is to controvert the allegations of mala fides or discriminatory treatment as attributed to them.
The reservation of the post for Scheduled Caste is justified on the ground that this post had been filled up once by a General Category candidate by direct recruitment when Shri DD Mathur was appointed on regular basis as Town Planner through the UPSC and that in accordance with the instructions contained in the Brochure, at the time of filling up the vacancy second time, it has to be treated as reserved.
It is further contended that in any case the petitioner not being eligible for consideration, on account of over age, has no locus standi to challenge the legality or validity of this advertisement.
It is further denied that there was any delay on their part in taking steps to fill up the post by direct recruitment and that the requisition for the purpose was sent to the UPSC by their letter dated 21st October, 1991, and the time which has been taken by the time advertisement was published is a normal time on account of administrative procedure.
It is also contended that the petitioner was not entitled to be considered for appointment by promotion because the period of 7 years service as Addl.
Town Planner in terms of the recruitment rules was the period "spent on regular basis" and would not include the period spent on ad hoc appointment.
It is denied that ad hoc appointments were given to S/Shri OP Malik and BS Khurana with a view to benefit them, and that this was done in the normal course of office procedure.
9.
There is no specific explanation in the counter-affidavit in relation to the averments in the writ petition that the petitioner was not given similar treatment as accorded to the other two officers.
10.
The challenge in this writ petition, as already noted, is to validity of the advertisement issued by the UPSC for the reason that the post is shown to be a reserved post for Scheduled Castes candidate.
The respondent Corporation has applied the guidelines issued with the forty point rester to the effect that in case there is a single vacancy occurring in a cadre, in a given recruitment year, then for the first time, it should be filled up by the general category candidate, in spite of the fact that point No. 1 in the forty point roster is reserved for Scheduled Castes.
The guidelines further say that this Schedule Castes reservation is to be carried forward to the subsequent recruitment year with the result that even though again there is a single vacancy; it has to be filled up by Scheduled Castes candidate.
According to the respondents since at the time of the first recruitment to the post of Town Planner, it was filled up by a general category candidate, namely; Mr. DD Mathur, for the second recruitment year of this post, the vacancy has to go to a Scheduled Castes candidate.
11.
Mr. Gupta has contended, and rightly so, that these guidelines apply only in cases where there are multiple posts in a cadre or grade; and this rule certainly would not apply in the case of a single isolated post.
Although the Brochure on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services, is silent on this point but the matter is concluded by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and others, (1988) 3 S.C.R. 130, where it has been held categorically and unequivocally, as under :  "----------if there is only one post in the cadre, there can be no reservation under Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
The whole concept of reservation for application of the 50 point roster (sic) is that there are more than one posts, and the reservation as laid down by this Court in MR Balaji's case can be upto 50%.
The Government cannot, for instance, declare that the post of the Director of Indigenous Medicines shall be reserved for candidates belonging to schedules castes."
12.
The Supreme Court has laid down this principle so flinchingly that it was further held that even when there are three posts of Deputy Directors but each Deputy Director belonged to separate and distinct discipline, namely, Homoeopathic, Unani and Ayurvedic, then also the post of Deputy Director of each discipline has to be treated as a single isolated post and principle of reservation would not be attracted.
The Court has expressed itself strongly against such a course being adopted for the reason that doing so would be tantamount to 100% reservation.
13.
In face of this authority, the view being taken by the respondents in applying the guidelines issued with the forty point roster for carrying forward of the vacancy, is palpably erroneous and unsustainable, because in this case also, there is no dispute that the post of the Town Planner is one and the only post.
14.
There would thus be no hesitation in quashing down this advertisement issued on 28th March, 1992 (Annexure P-7 to the writ petition).
Before ordering so, I would like to deal with the objection raised by Miss Tewatia to the effect that since the petitioner was not eligible on account of age bar, in so far as direct recruitment is concerned, he has no locus standi in the matter, and advertisement is not liable to challenge at his instance.
She has placed reliance in support of her contention on a judgment of the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1973 SC 964, Dr. Umakant Saran v. State of Bihar and others, where it was held that before a mandamus could be issued to compel the authority to do something, it must be shown that the aggrieved party has a legal right.
15.
Miss Tewatia contended that the age limit for departmental candidate for being considered for direct appointment to the post of Town Planner through UPSC was extendable upto 50 years and that the petitioner on his own admission competed the age of 55 years on 1st November, 1991, and was thus not eligible to apply for this post.
16.
I have given serious thought to this contention.
I find that apart from the fact that in the case before the Supreme Court in Dr. Umakant Saran (supra), appointments had already taken place, and the person challenging those appointments did not possess the requisite qualification in the nature of experience in teaching job because the post under reference was that of a lecturer in Surgery in a Medical College where teaching experience of three years was a necessary qualification, and the appellant there did not fulfil that requirement.
It was in that context that it was held that a person who is not even eligible, cannot be permitted to challenge the appointments that are already fait accompli.
17.
The present case is totally distinguishable one.
As per the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Chakradhar Paswan (supra), this one single post of Town Planner could not at all be treated to be a reserved post, and that the principle of first vacancy going to general category and the second vacancy in a subsequent recruitment year going to Scheduled Castes would be totally inapplicable to such a case.
The following observations made in that case are very pertinent :  "---------Such reservation was not in conformity with the principles laid down in the 50 point roster (sic) and was impermissible under Article 16(4) of the Constitution and clearly violative of the guarantee enshrined in Article 16(1) of equal opportunity to all citizens relating to public employment.
Clause (4) of Article 16 is by way of an exception or proviso to Article 16(1).
The High Court rightly held that the reservation of the post of Deputy Director (Homoeopathic) amounted to 100% reservation which was impermissible under Article 16(4) as otherwise it would render the guarantee of equal opportunity in the matter of public employment under Article 16(1) wholly elusive and meaningless."
In view of the categorical observations extracted above, it is clear that such a reservation would be unconstitutional and impermissible in view of the provisions of Article 16(1) of the Constitution.
It was further held in this very judgment :  "-----------Article 16(4) is an exception to Article 16(1) and Article 16(2) and therefore the power to make a special provision for reservation of posts and appointments is favour of the backward classes must not be so excessive which would in effect efface the guarantee of equal opportunity in the matter of public employment or at best make it illusory."
That being so, the impugned advertisement is clearly violative of the provisions of Article 16(1) of the Constitution guaranteeing equal opportunity to all in the matter of public employment.
As such it becomes liable to be quashed by the court, and the question of locus of petitioner or otherwise, ceases to be relevant.
18.
In view of the above, whereas the advertisement dated 28th March, 1992 is liable to be quashed and to that extent the writ petition succeeds, the question still remains as to what further directions to issue in the matter.
19.
On a consideration of the entirety of the facts in the case, inference is unavoidable to the effect that it is the laches on the part of the respondent-Corporation that has resulted in a situation rendering the petitioner ineligible due to over age.
I say so, because in spite of the fact that vacancy arose for the first time on 1st April, 1990, and in spite of the fact that in respondents' view the departmental candidates were not eligible for not having put in 7 years regular service; no steps were taken at the time to make a reference to UPSC for filling up to post by direct recruitment, but on the other hand, the other two officers who were senior to the petitioner in the post of Addl.
Town Planner, were allowed to hold current duty charge of the post and given ad hoc appointment before their retirement.
Discrimination against the petitioner is discernible from the record inasmuch as after the second officer's retirement on 31st December, 1991, there is no explicable reasons as to why the petitioner has not been given the same treatment, rather than being ordered to look after this post, much less to consider him for at least and ad hoc appointment, like his two seniors.
20.
Departmental file was requisitioned, and on going through the same I find that although there was a note put up by the dealing hand, in March 1990 itself, namely, even before the retirement of the incumbent Mr. DD Mathur, that reference be made to UPSC to take steps for filling up the post by direct recruitment; the senior officers side-stepped the issue and proposed instead that Mr. Malik be allowed to take current duty charge.
As already noted, he was subsequently recommended for ad hoc appointment through the UPSC.
After his retirement, Mr. Khurana's case was taken up likewise with the UPSC for ad hoc appointment shortly before his retirement.
It was only that after the Chief Secretary recorded a note as to why steps were not being taken to fill up the post on regular basis through the UPSC, that the process was started.
Even then, no sense of urgency was brought to bear on the matter and in spite of the fact that the Chief Secretary's note was dated 25.2.1991, and referred to in the file of the department on 831991, even then for the first time reference to UPSC was made only on 21101992.
The inference cannot be avoided that this was to ensure that the process of regular appointment did not start till the retirement of Mr. Khurana.
That was to be with effect from 31121991.
In this setting of facts, the petitioner has a legitimate grievance to contend that had the process for direct recruitment started well in time in due course, he would have certainly been eligible to apply, and then this age bar would not have stared him in the face, and that it was because of departmental lack of action, deliberate or otherwise, that has landed him in this situation.
21.
Be that as it may, in view of the fact that no reservation for a single isolated post can be made for Schedule Castes candidates and, if made would be unconstitutional, there is no option but to order striking down of the advertisement issued on 28th March, 1992.
22.
Mr. Gupta submitted that the petitioner was appointed as Addl.
Town Planner on ad hoc basis with effect from 151985 and that although he was confirmed on the said post with effect from 26.4.1988, but the entire period put in by him as Addl.
Town Planner is to be counted towards service in the grade of Addl.
Town Planner.
Mr. Gupta relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court to support his plea.
He cited 1984(2) SLR 555, GP Doval and others v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP and others, laying down that it is well settled that :  "---------where an officiating appointment is followed by confirmation unless a contrary rule is shown, the service rendered as officiating appointment cannot be ignored for reckoning length of continuous officiation for determining the place in the seniority list."
23.
To the same effect is a very recent judgment by a five judges bench of the Supreme Court in the case of The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, JT 1990(2) SC 264, reiterating the same view after detailed discussion of all the judgments of the Court on the subject, holding that :  "-------the period of continuous officiation by a government servant, after his appointment by following the rules applicable for substantive appointments has to be taken into account for determining his seniority..." 24.
The principle is, therefore, now well established that in case of an officiating or ad hoc appointment, maturing into a regular appointment, the entire period of service is to be counted as service in the grade.
25.
Miss Tewatia sought to distinguish the position by contending that these principles apply only for determining inter se seniority, but cannot be stretched to a case of promotion, where requisite condition was specific number of years, "in the grade as regular service," as was the case here.
26.
Mr. Gupta countered this, and argued that the respondents themselves, in the past, have been taking into account the period of ad hoc service, while considering departmental promotions.
He cited petitioner's own case by producing a copy of resolution No. 257 under the caption "Urgent Business No.
257."
A reading of this resolution reveals that the petitioner was being considered for ad hoc appointment for the post of Addl.
Town Planner with effect from 151985, taking note of the fact that he had been appointed to the post of Junior Town Planner, which was the feeder post for the post of Addl.
Town Planner, with effect from 8.1.1979.
Although the regular appointment in that post was with effect from 2681982, but after giving benefit of ad hoc service, the view taken was that Mr. Sethi could be considered to have become eligible for appointment to the post of Addl.
Town Planner with effect from 151985.
27.
It is thus manifest from this that the department interpreted the requirement of "five years in the grade on regular basis", for promotion to the post of Addl.
Town Planner, to be inclusive of the period spent by the incumbent on the post of Junior Town Planner on ad hoc basis, because it is obvious that in case the date of regular appointment as Junior Town Planner were to be taken which was with effect from 2681982, the petitioner would not have been eligible with effect from 151985 for being considered for the post of Addl.
Town Planner, as then he would not have completed five years service in the grade.
28.
It is pertinent to note that the requisite conditions for promotion to the post of Town Planner in this respect are identical, with the only difference that whereas for promotion from the post of Junior Town Planner to the post of Addl.
Town Planner, the requirement was "five years service in the grade rendered after appointment thereto one a regular basis"; it is seven years in the case of promotion to post of Town Planner.
29.
It is one of the most accepted principles of Interpretation of Statues as well as Statutory Rules, that the construction put on them by the framers of the rules is a very relevant factor.
I am supported in this view by judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of K.P.
Verghese v. Income-tax Officer, Ernmakulan and another, AIR 1981 SC 1922, where the speech made by Finance Minister while presenting the Budget was held to be extremely relevant, for the purpose of interpreting the intent of the amendment introduced to section 52(2) of the Income-tax Act.
It was held that :  "The rule of construction by reference to contemporanea expositio is a well established rule for interpreting a statute by reference to the exposition it has received from contemporary authority, though it must give way where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous.
Therefore, where the Central Board of Direct Taxes has issued circulars by way of explaining the amended provisions of Section 52(2), apart from their binding nature in view of Section 119 of the IT Act, they are clearly in the nature of contemporanea expositio furnishing legitimate aid in the construction of sub-section (2)."
30.
On a parity of reasoning, the meaning put on the intent of the rules providing for "five years service" for promotion to the post of an Addl.
Town Planner, firstly by the Commissioner, and then endorsed by the Committee, who are framers of the recruitment rules, is very relevant and in that view of the matter the respondent cannot now be heard to say that the requirement of seven years service in the grade on regular basis, in the post of Addl.
Town Planner for promotion to the post of Town Planner can only be service rendered after substantive appointment, when at the time of earlier promotion of the petitioner, period of ad hoc service was also taken into consideration.
31.
In view of the above, I am of my firm view that the respondents are obliged to treat the petitioner as eligible for promotion to the post of Town Planner and entitled to be considered as such.
32.
I, therefore, allow the writ petition and issue writ of mandamus quashing the advertisement issued by UPSC on 28th March, 1992 and direct the respondents to first consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Town Planner in accordance with rules.
33.
It goes without saying that in the event of the petitioner being not found fit for such promotion, after being considered for the same, then the respondent-Corporation shall be at liberty to fill the post by direct recruitment and make a reference to UPSC for the purpose, and then a fresh advertisement shall be issued without showing the post to be reserved one for Scheduled Castes, and thereafter fill it up in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Rules.
The writ petition stands disposed of in above terms.
The parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.