Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - These 12 petitions, viz. Nos. 10006, 11382, 11639, 10984, 12114, 10447, 12693, 10726, 10768 and 10589 of 1989 and 1168 and 2941 of 1990, are directed against the selection and appointment of 120 Headmasters.
The facts as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 2941 of 1990 may be briefly noticed.
2.
Public Service Commission, Punjab issued on advertisement inviting applications for 120 posts of headmasters.
After conducting a screening test, the Commission issued letters of interview to the successful candidates.
For the purpose of conducting interviews.
Committees consisting of a member(s) and two experts were constituted.
After the candidates had been interviewed by the different Committees, final result was published in the newspaper.
Ultimately, the selected candidates were ordered to be appointed by the Director Public Instructions (Schools) vide orders dated September 26, 1989.
The selection and the consequential orders of appointment have been challenged by the unsuccessful candidates on different grounds.
3.
A written statement was filed by the Deputy Director, (Schools Administration).
It has been inter alia averred that the selected candidates having been appointed against the vacant posts, the question of quashing the selections does not arise.
It has been further averred that the posts of Headmaster/Headmistress in Government High Schools were declared as Class-II posts vide notification dated April 8, 1987, which was published in the Government Gazette on May 1, 1987.
It is also the claim of the respondents that the petitioners having participated in the interviews are estopped from challenging the selection made by the Commission.
With regard to the averments on merits of the controversy, it has been stated that the Commission has to answer.
Originally, the Commission had not filed any reply to the writ petition.
4.
The matter was heard by me and in view of the fact that no written statement had been filed on behalf of the Commission, I had directed the Secretary of the Commission to appear along with all the record relating to the selection of Headmasters/Headmistresses on August 23, 1991, vide order dated August 7, 1991.
The Secretary, Mr. Dalit Rai Chaudhary had appeared with some of the record.
He had, however, not brought the complete record.
Details the record required were consequently clarified to the learned counsel appearing for the respondents and vide my order dated August 23, 1991, the case was adjourned to September 6, 1991.
Mr. Rajiv Raina, who had then appeared for the respondents had undertaken to produce the record on September 6, 1991.
When the matter came up for hearing on September 6, 1991, the Secretary of the Commission appeared and produced a sealed envelope.
It was found to contain the detailed master result sheets.
Still the required information was not available.
Accordingly, the case was adjourned to September 20, 1991.
The case actually came up for hearing on September 27, 1991.
Learned counsel for the respondents produced two documents.
First was photocopy of a letter dated August 23, 1991 which had been sent by him to the Chairman of the Commission.
This was taken on record of Civil Writ Petition No. 10006 of 1989 as 'Mark A'.
He also produced the proceedings of the special meeting of the Commission held on September 19, 1991.
This was taken on record as "Mark B".
He sought time to file affidavits on behalf of the Government and the Commission explaining the matter which had arisen during arguments.
The case was accordingly adjourned to October 25, 1991.
On this date, Mr. OP Goyal, the then learned Additional Advocate General, appeared on behalf of the Commission.
He prayed for another adjournment to enable the Commission to file an affidavit.
The case was accordingly adjourned to November 15, 1991.
The affidavit was actually filed in Court on November 28, 1991.
Thereafter, the case was adjourned from time to time to enable the learned counsel for the respondents to produce the record.
Even today, no record showing the criteria that may have been laid down by the Commission prior to the selection has been produced.
However, Mr. Varinder Pal Singh, appearing for the respondents has categorically stated before me that the criteria followed by the Commission is the same as mentioned the minutes of the meeting held on September 19, 1991, i.e. the marks had been apportioned in the ratio of 60 :40, i.e. 60 for academic and 40 for the viva-voce test.
It is on this basis that the selection had been made by the Commission.
5.
I have heard Mr. VK Jindal for the petitioners and Mr. Varinder Pal Singh for respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
Nobody has appeared on behalf of respondent Nos. 4 to 107.
Mr. VK Jindal has made three submissions.
He contends that the Governor of Punjab has framed regulations under Article 318 of the Constitution.
These regulations are called the Punjab State Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations').
Regulations 2(d) defines the Commission and Regulation 3 provides that "the Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four members appointed by the Governor; provided that the Governor may at any time increase the number of the members upto a maximum of five."
Relying on these provisions the learned counsel contends that the Commission at the relevant time consisted of the Chairman and only three members.
According to the learned counsel the constitution of the Commission was thus not in accordance with Regulations 3 and as such the entire proceedings conducted by the Commission are vitiated.
6.
He has further contended that the decision to constitute committee for making the selections was taken by the Chairman and not by the Commission.
Consequently, the action was wholly without jurisdiction as it was not a decision of the Commission, but was only of the Chairman.
7.
Thirdly, the learned counsel has contended that the allocation of 40% marks for interview while 60% for other matters provided the Commission with a totally arbitrary power which is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He has also raised an ancillary submission that the candidates had been considered by the different committees constituted differently.
Even the Committees were not uniformity constituted.
Some Committees had two members of the Commission while others had only one.
As such, all the candidates were not considered similarly.
On this premises, the learned counsel has contended that the entire selection is vitiated.
8.
On the other hand, Mr. Varinder Pal Singh, referring to the provisions of the Constitution has contended that the Commission was validly constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
He has further argued that the constitution of Committees was perfectly legal and valid.
As a large number of candidates had to be interviewed, according to the learned counsel, in the circumstances of the case, it was not possible for the Commission to consider all the candidates collectively.
Learned counsel has also contended that the allocation of 40% marks for interview was, in the circumstances of the case, perfectly legal and valid.
The Commission had to consider cases of major candidates who had already served as teachers/masters at different places and since the candidates appearing before the Commission were not raw graduates, the allocation of marks was perfectly legal and valid.
He has also submitted that there is no violation of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution merely because more than one member participated in the proceedings of one Selection Committee while in others there was only one member.
This was regulated according to the availability of the members of the Commission.
9.
As for the first point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, it is apt to notice the provisions of the Constitution.
Article 316 provides for the constitution of Public Service Commissions for the Union and the States.
Article 316 provides for the appointment and term of office of the Chairman and other members of the Commission.
Article 318 empowers the President and the Governor to frame regulations regarding the conditions of service.
A regulation framed under Article 318 can provide for the number of members of the Commission and their conditions of service.
It can also provide for the number of members of the Staff of the Commission as also their conditions of service.
However, the Regulations framed under Article 318 are in the nature of subordinate legislation and have to be interpreted keeping in view of the provisions of the Constitution.
Article 316(1-A) provides as under :-  "(1-A).
If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, those duties shall, until some person appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed by such one or the other members of the Commission as the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint for the purpose."
10.
A perusal of the above provision clearly shows that in case of the office of Chairman becoming vacant, the functions can be performed by such other member as the Governor of the State may appoint.
It is thus clear that mere vacancy in the Commission cannot be debar the Chairman and the remaining members from functioning.
If the contention raised by the learned counsel is accepted, the existence of a vacancy would render the whole Commission non-functional.
Such could not be the intention of the framers of the Constitution.
The regulation only provides the constitution of a Commission at a given point of time.
Normally, the Commission shall consist of the Chairman and four members.
This number can be increased by the Governor upto five.
However, the members of the Commission validly appointed are not debarred from functioning till such time as the vacancy is filled.
In this view of the matter, I am unable to accept the first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
11.
The learned counsel has then contended that the constitution of the Committees by the Chairman was wholly illegal.
He contends that it was the chairman alone who had constituted the Committees.
According to the learned counsel, it was the Commission which had to decide about the matter and since no decision had been taken by the Commission, the action of the Chairman in constituting the Committees vitiated the entire selection.
12.
A perusal of the proceedings of the special meeting of the Commission held on September 19, 1991, shows that the Commission has taken the view that the Chairman is competent to constitute the boards and nominate the members thereof.
It is further stated that the powers to constitute the board stands delegated to the Chairman.
This factual position has not been rebutted by the learned counsel for the petitioners by filing any affidavit on behalf of the petitioners.
13.
The Commission is a constitutional body.
It is the power of the Commission to regulate its internal functions.
No regulations, having been framed and none can possibly provide for all possible eventualities.
In such a situation, if the Commission takes a conscious decision to delegate any of its functions to the Chairman, the action cannot be said to be vitiated.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Commission, it has been averred that "the boards after conducting the interview of the candidates submitted their assessment report to the Commission and it was the Commission as a whole which made the final selection in accordance with the uniform criteria of selection already established."
It is thus clear that it was the Commission as a whole which made the final selection in accordance with the uniform criteria.
This factual position has also not been rebutted by the petitioners.
In this view of the matter, the constitution of the Committees by the Chairman cannot be said to have vitiated the selection.
14.
The third submission, however, has merit.
The Commission has admittedly allocated 40% marks for the viva voce test while 60% marks were allocated to academic record etc.
The percentage of marks that can be allocated for interview has been judicially considered by Apex Court in a number of cases.
There is a catena of decisions on the matter.
All these cases have been recently considered by a Division Bench of this Court in Ram Chander v. State of Haryana (Civil Writ Petition No. 16167 of 1991) decided on February 7, 1992.
Their Lordships were pleased on inter alia observe as under :-  "Applying the ratio of the decisions in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case and Mohinder Sain Garg's case the Court did not approve the allocation of one-thirds marks for interview.
We are aware of a decision of this Court in Des Raj v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) SLR 39, where, in the absence of a provision for the written test selection of candidates on the basis of their service record and allotment of 40 marks for viva voce test was upheld.
The Bench made reference to AK Yadav's case.
Somewhat similar view under like circumstances has also been expressed in Dhan Kaur v. State of Haryana & Ors., 1989(2) SLR 501 which in turn has relied upon another decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 4453 of 1988, decided on November 1, 1988.
The view taken is, in the absence of any criteria and the rules, the Selection Committee is empowered to devise any mode of selection.
In that case selection was based exclusively on the basis of interview and no written test was held.
The Court observed that the question of apportioning marks for written test and viva voce test did not arise.
It is true, as observed in certain decisions, that it may not be laid down as a hard and fast rule as to the appointment of marks between written and viva voca test for selection for appointment to a public office, yet the latest decision of the Supreme Court in Mohinder Sain Garg's and other cases, lay down that allocation of more than 15% marks for viva voce test is not a just and proper criteria.
In the light of these later decisions, explaining and applying the decision in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case and with which decisions we are bound, it may not be possible for us to hold that despite there being no written test in its true sense, but instead adopting allocation of marks for the educational qualifications, experience, etc. and then reserving 30% marks for interview including aptitude test is legally justified.
In the light of Mohinder Sain Garg's case (supra), decisions of this Court taking a contrary view cannot be said to be laying down a good law.
Our conclusions on this issue are that allocation of 30% marks for viva voce test which also includes test for aptitude vitiates the entire selection."
15.
The Division Bench concluded that the allocation of 30% marks for viva voce test vitiated the selection.
In view of this authoritative pronouncement, which I am bound to follow, the selection in the present case cannot be sustained.
Mr. Varinderpal Singh, however, submits that the judgment is distinguishable on the ground that their Lordships of the Division Bench were considering selection for the posts of Lecturers and Masters etc. and not those for the post of Headmasters.
A similar contention had been accepted by a Full Bench of this Court in Vikram Singh v. Subordinate Services Selection Board, which was a case of the recruitment of the Taxation Inspectors.
The decision of the Full Bench was reversed by the Supreme Court in Vikram Singh v. The Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, JT 1990(4) SC 528.
Their Lordships were pleased to take the view that the allocation of 285% of the total marks for interview was unreasonable and against the provisions laid down in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case.
Even in the present case, the marks allocated for interview were far in excess of the permissible limit.
On this ground alone, the selection and the consequential appointments of respondent Nos. 4 to 107 is vitiated.
16.
In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to examine the ancillary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners with regard to the consideration of the various candidates by different committees.
17.
Accordingly, these writ petitioners are allowed.
The selection as well as the appointment of respondent No. 4 to 107 is set aside.
In the circumstance of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.