VK Bali, J - The prayer in this application is for a direction to be issued to the petitioner to release the arrears of wages with effect from the date the applicant resumes his duties at such rate as similarly situated employees are drawing.
The Writ Petition has been filed by the Canara Bank against the order dated 27th July, 1989 passed by the Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Chandigarh vide which application filed by Paramjit Singh, applicant-workman under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was allowed.
Vide orders aforesaid, the petitioner was directed to pay arrears of salary for the period 20-3-1979 to 30.5.1979 amounting to Rs. 1,475/-.
The workman was allowed to join duty within a period of 30 days from the date of order failing which he was held entitled to the salary with effect from 191989.
The petition was admitted on 21121989 and implementation of award was stayed.
Paramjit Singh filed Civil Misc. No. 6262 of 1990 under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act wherein he prayed that he should be allowed wages.
On 5101990, the aforesaid application was disposed of by modifying the earlier order to the extent that the implementation of award was stayed subject to the condition of section 17-B of the Act.
Paramjit Singh was found entitled to wages from the date of filing of Writ Petition but the said wages were in accordance with the basic pay which was fixed way back on 20.3.1979. Letters Patent Appeal against the aforesaid interim orders was filed by Canara Bank which was dismissed on 2111992.
Compliance of orders modifying stay was done only on a contempt petition having been filed by Paramjit Singh.
As referred to above, the prayer of workman is that payment of wages as were fixed way back in the year 1979 is only partial compliance of the orders and that he should be got paid the wages which are being paid to similarly situated employees.
2.
This application has been resisted.
By way of the preliminary objections, it is maintained that Paramjit Singh accepted all the terms and conditions as contained in Annexure A1 which was issued to him after interim orders initially passed by this Court were modified and that being so, he could not dispute the terms and conditions on the principles of estoppel as also that application was filed by him under section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act for payment of the amount due to him and that said proceedings were in the nature of execution proceedings and, therefore, did not involve any right of the employee for adjudication and the corresponding liability of the Bank.
It is also pleaded that the Labour Court declined to pay the wages to Paramjit Singh because he was gainfully employed as an Advocate.
Against that part of the order, he too had to file the Writ Petition which was pending in this court.
In the Writ Petition, it is maintained that an important question is involved regarding the scope of Section 33-C(2) of the Act whether Section 17-B is applicable as in such cases there was no award given by the Tribunal directing reinstatement of the workman.
It is also maintained that the workman had himself tendered his resignation with a view to get the licence under the Advocates Act and, therefore, the principle of estoppel arises which is also the main point pending for adjudication in the Writ Petition.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner deserves the relief asked for by him.
In the application in question, the only prayer is for current wages which a workman is entitled to under the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act.
Such a right of the workman flowing from the Statute cannot be disputed.
The only question is as to at what rate the workman is to be paid.
An employee is always entitled to the wages that are prevalent at a given time and it is not disputed that the persons employed in the same job as the petitioner is, are getting far more wages than are being paid to the petitioner.
A Division Bench of this Court in P.G.I.
v. Presiding Officer etc., 1990(1) Recent Service Judgments 308 held that a workman is entitled to the same wages as the other persons similarly situated are getting under section 17-B of the Act.
In the aforesaid case like in the present, the workman was paid the wages which he was getting in the year 1979.
This view has been followed by RS Mongia, J in Groz Backert Saboo Ltd. v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT Chandigarh, 1991(2) RSJ 707 and in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda 1991(2) RSJ 730.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has cited a judgment of Supreme Court in Central Inland Water transport Corporation Limited v. The Workmen and another, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1604.
The said judgment is with regard to scope of proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act and it has been held that the same are in the nature of execution proceedings and that power of the Labour Court in such proceedings is limited.
This judgment has nothing at all to do with the prayer of the applicant contained in the present application and may have to do something with the main case.
5.
In so far as the contention of learned counsel with regard to estoppel is concerned, suffice it to say that the workman had absolutely no choice but for to join as he was clearly told that in case he does not join by a particular date in consonance with the orders passed by the Hon'ble High Court modifying the stay, the said order shall not be complied with.
6.
In view of what has been stated above, the petitioner is directed to forthwith pay to workman Paramjit Singh same wages which are being paid to the similarly situated persons doing the samne job as the petitioner is doing.
These wages shall be paid from 8.12.1989 and arrears be paid to the workman within a month from today.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case the Writ Petition is also ordered to be listed for hearing within three months.
Order accordingly.