Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution represents the third round of litigation between the parties.
There is a dispute regarding inter se seniority.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
There are two Thermal Units in the State of Haryana, one at Faridabad and the other at Panipat.
The unit at Faridabad started earlier than the one at Panipat.
The staff working in these two units was borne on separate independent cadres with no inter se seniority.
The petitioners herein were appointed at the Panipat unit while respondent Nos. 4 and 30 were appointed on different posts at the Faridabad unit.
However, it is the admitted position that the initial date of appointment on the work-charge establishment in the case of the petitioners was later than the date of appointment of the respondents.
It appears that in April 1983 the Haryana State Electricity Board which controls both the units decided to merge the cadre of the two units.
Actual merger took place w.e.f.
June 30, 1983.
A joint tentative seniority list which appears to have been prepared in anticipation of the merger of the two cadres was issued vide letter dated May 24, 1983.
The petitioners have not produced a copy of the seniority list issued with this letter.
However, a copy of the tentative joint seniority list issued vide letter dated July 21, 1983 has been produced as Annexure P11.
3.
A perusal of this document shows that the petitioners had joined service in the year 1979.
As against this, the respondents whose names appear from Serial No. 133 onwards, appear to have joined the work-charge establishment much earlier than the petitioners.
So far as Kashmira Singh, respondent No. 3 is concerned, even though his date of appointment is shown as November 19, 1981, it appears that he had joined service at Faridabad unit much earlier than that and had been transferred to Panipat unit in February, 1980.
His services were regularised vide order No. 376 dated November 16, 1981 and, therefore, this date has been mentioned in the list.
4.
Prior to the merger of the staff of the two units, the Chairman of the Haryana State Electricity Board has issued an office order dated October 19, 1978 under Rule 14 constituting a Selection Committee to recruit various categories of employees in the Thermal Power House, Panipat.
The Committee was competent to consider the members of the work-charge establishment already employed by the Board and the contractors at the Thermal Power Houses at Panipat and Faridabad.
It appears that the Board issued a circular No. 289/HSEB dated July 2, 1979 for the regularisation of the services of the work-charge employees.
In pursuance to this circular, the services of Thermal Operators/Thermal Supervisors (which were later on redesignated as Junior Engineers) and other lower categories of employees were regularised by the Chief Engineer, Thermal Power House, Panipat w.e.f.
September 6, 1979.
As a result, the services of the petitioners were regularised w.e.f.
the different dates from September 6, 1979 onwards.
The Chief Engineer Incharge of the Faridabad unit regularised the services of the Thermal Operators/Thermal Supervisors w.e.f.
August 29, 1980.
As the two units were having separate cadres prior to April 1983, no occasion for determining of inter se seniority or raising of any dispute with regard to the date of regularisation arose.
However, when the Board issued the tentative joint seniority list on the basis of the date of regularisation on July 21, 1983 (Annexure P11), various affected persons, including respondent Nos. 4 to 30, appear to have submitted representations.
Ultimately, in the year 1988, the respondents approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 9421 of 1988.
This petition was disposed of by the Motion Bench vide its order dated October 26, 1988 with the direction that the representation be considered and decided and appropriate orders be passed thereon within three months.
In pursuance to the directions of the Court, it appears that the Chief Engineer, Thermal Unit at Faridabad, passed an order dated July 17, 1989 by which the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 30 were regularised w.e.f.
September 5, 1979.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P.15 with this petition.
The present petitioners appear to have challenged this order through Civil Writ Petition No. 1047 of 1990.
The Bench disposed of the petition vide its order dated May 24, 1990, it was decided to give one more opportunity to the petitioners to be heard but the Chief Engineer.
Accordingly, the petitioners were heard again and vide order dated August 13, 1990 the General Manager, Panipat Thermal Unit, Panipat decided the matter.
By this order, the date of regulations given to respondent Nos. 4 to 30 vide order dated July 17, 1989 was upheld.
As a result, a decision to issue revised tentative seniority list, if not already done, was taken.
Aggrieved by the orders dated July 17, 1989 (Annexure P.15) and August 13, 1990 (Annexure P17), the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
5.
Separate written statements have been filed by the respondent-Board and the private respondents.
It is claimed that the respondents have joined the work-charge establishment prior to the petitioners and, therefore, they were entitled to be regularised w.e.f.
date earlier than the one on which the petitioners were regularised.
The respondents having joined service earlier than the petitioners, it is claimed that the action of the Board in undoing the injustice is absolutely legal and fair.
6.
I have heard Mr. SP Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners.
He contends that after the issue of the tentative joint seniority list in July, 1983, the petitioners have been promoted on March 13, 1989.
The petitioners have got a vested right and the respondents could not by an executive action change the date of regular appointment of the respondents with retrospective effect so as to divest the petitioners of a vested right.
He further submits that the action of the respondents is further vitiated by the long lapse of time inasmuch as the accrued rights have been taken away after the lapse of almost nine years.
Mr. Surya Kant has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioners.
He points out that the respondents were factually in the service of the Board prior to the petitioners since the year 1974-75 onwards and the regularisation of their services with effect from a date earlier than that of the petitioners is only a recognition of their existing right.
He further submits that there petitioners had, in fact, been representing continuously and when the Board had failed to decide their representations, they had even approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 9421 of 1988.
It was only in pursuance to the directions given by this Court that the final decision in their favour had been taken.
The respondents, have not caused any delay and, therefore, the action of the Board in undoing the wrong is absolutely justified and fair.
7.
As for the primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, the challenge is two-fold.
Learned counsel contends that on the regularisation of the services of the petitioners with effect from the dates mentioned in the tentative joint seniority list (Annexure P11), the petitioners had earned a vested right to seniority sand the date of appointment.
He submits that this right could not be affected at all unless there was a statutory provision authorising the competent authority to do so.
Learned counsel has placed a strong reliance on the decision in KD Vasudeva v. Union of India, 1971(2) SLR 487.
8.
A perusal of the record indicates that the services of the petitioners were regularised as may be seen from the tentative joint seniority list w.e.f.
the different dates from September 6, 1979.
These dates have not been changed even now.
The dates remain intact.
As for the inter se seniority between the petitioners and respondent Nos. 4 and 30, it may be mentioned that according to the petitioners, two seniority lists had been issued on May 24, 1984 and July 21, 1983.
Copies of these two documents are at Annexures P10 and P11.
A perusal of these documents shows that both the lists were tentative.
The authorities had, in fact, invited applications/representations from the persons against these lists.
They were subject to review in the light of the objection raised.
They could have been changed by the competent authority.
Accordingly, I am unable to hold that a tentative seniority list, which is subject to review and change in the light of the representations which may be submitted by the affected persons vests an inalienable right which cannot be interfered with by the authority.
On the facts and circumstances of the present case, I am unable to hold that the issue of the tentative joint seniority list led to the accrual of an indefeasible right in the petitioners.
9.
Equally so would be the position even with regard to the promotion made on the basis of the tentative joint seniority list.
When the very basis of promotion is tentative, what follows, the list cannot be final.
As and when the tentative list is finalised, the promotions will have to be necessarily reviewed.
The petitioners may have been promoted on the basis of the tentative seniority list prior to the respondents.
However, all promotions would in the nature of very things be subject to review in the light of the final seniority list that may be drawn up.
Such a promotion which is dependent on the finalisation of seniority list also cannot confer a vested right.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the petitioners did not have a vested right.
As a result, it is not possible to hold that the action of the Board suffers from a lack of the jurisdiction.
Even otherwise, I am of the opinion that the appointing authority has an inherent right to rectify mistakes, make retrospective promotions and undo wrongs.
This view finds support from the two Full bench decisions in Sunder Lal v. State of Punjab & others, 1970 SLR 59 and in the BK Bhalla v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 636.
10.
Mr. PS Patwalia relies on the judgment in KD Vasudeva's case (supra) to contend that there must be a statutory provisions authorising the competent authority to make a retrospective appointment and this is all the more so in a case where the vested rights are likely to be affected.
KD Vasudeva's case relates to the appointment by promotion of the members of the Provincial Civil Service to the Indian Administrative Service.
The promotion is governed by the rules called the IAS (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955.
Under these rules, it is necessary that the name of a member of the Provincial Service is borne on the select list before he can be appointed to the IAS The learned Judge had found as a fact that the names of certain officers were not borne on the select list from November 1, 1966 to February 22, 1968.
In spite of this factual position, the Government had appointed the said officers to the Indian Administrative Service w.e.f.
November 1, 1966.
As a result the seniority of certain officers was adversely affected.
The complaint of these officers was two fold.
Firstly the officers were not eligible for appointment to the IAS as their names were not borne on the list and secondly the Govt. had illegally affected their seniority.
It was in the context of this factual background that the learned Judge had held that every action must be supported by some legislative authority and retrospective appointment could not be made where vested rights like seniority were likely to be affected.
This judgment has been considered in various subsequent cases including BK Bhalla's case (supra).
I am of the considered view that the case has no relevance to the controversy that arises in the present case.
The respondents in the present case had joined service many years prior to the petitioners.
If a joint seniority list of the work-charge establishment was drawn up, the names of the respondents could have appeared much above those of the petitioners.
If their cases for regularisation were considered in that order the respondents would have been regularised with effect from earlier dates.
However, such a occasion did not arise as the cadres were separate.
It is only on the merger of the two cadres that the dispute arose and at that stage the competent authority was confronted with the situation where a person who had entered the service of the Board in the year 1974 or 1975 was declared junior to a person who had joined an identical post in the year 1970.
It is in order to undo this injustice that the competent authority issued the order dated July 17, 1989.
The decision in KD Vasudeva's case has no application to this peculiar situation.
11.
Equally untenable is the plea regarding delay.
A perusal of the record shows that respondent Nos. 4 to 30 had been submitted representations against the tentative joint seniority list.
When no heed was paid, the respondents approached this Court through a writ petition.
It was only in pursuance to the directions of the Court that the matter was considered and decided by the Board.
It is no doubt correct that after the merger of the two units, viz. Faridabad and Panipat Thermal units, the Board had taken considerable time in finalishing the dispute relating to the seniority.
However, this is not a solitary case where inter se disputes to seniority have gone on for a number of years.
The mere fact of delay on th part of the competent authority in deciding a dispute regarding inter se seniority cannot result in perpetuating the mistake and divesting it of its jurisdiction to finalise the list.
Mr. Patwalia has cited various decisions of the Apex Court in Robindra Nath v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 470; ML Cecil D'Souza v Union of India, AIR 1975 SC 1269 and MR Mudgal & Ors v. RP Singh and Ors, 1986(4) SCC 531.
These are the cases where the Court was considering the effect of delay on the part of citizen in approaching the Court for appropriate remedy.
The Court has never held that by the mere factum of delay the competent authority is divested of the right to finalise the seniority or to decide representations.
Accordingly, I find no merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners.
12.
Mr. Patwalia has also raised a contention that the Chief Engineer has no jurisdiction to assign a date of appointment to respondent Nos. 4 to 30.
A perusal of the opening paragraph of the order dated July 17, 1989 shows that the Chief Engineer has referred to an order dated February 8, 1989 by which the Board had directed the Chief Engineer to consider and settle on merits the claim of "petitioners in Civil Writ Petition - Vasudeva's case where the vested rights are likely to be affected.
KD 9421 of 1988 - Vir Bhan Ahuja and 26 others (JEs) v. HSEB on directions contained in Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court order dated 26101988."
A reference to the court's order dated October 26, 1988 shows that the representations submitted by Vir Bhan Ahuja etc. had to be considered.
The petitioners have neither produced the order dated February 8, 1989 nor anything else to show that Vir Bhan Ahuja and others have not made a claim with regard to the date of regularisation and consequential change of seniority.
Still further the petitioners themselves filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1047 of 1990.
This was disposed of vide orders dated May 24, 1990.
They agreed to the decision of the matter by Mr. RP Mehndirata, Chief Engineer.
The matter had actually been decided by that officer who has been then designated as General Manager.
Even otherwise, I am satisfied that if this dispute had to be settled in this Court, the decision would be same as the one arrived at by the respondents.
Consequently, I find no ground to interfere with the order passed by the authorities in the exercise of my writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
13.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.