Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - These two writ petitions viz. CWP Nos. 3298 and 16828 of 1989 by the same petitioner are directed against what may be called the aftermath of operation Blue Star.
The petitioner challenges the court martial proceedings which resulted in an order of punishment as also the action of the respondent in not promoting him to the rank of Brigadier for which he had been declared suitable in the year 1983.
Since C.W.P.
No. 16828 was filed later, the facts as stated therein may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was commissioned in the Indian Army on June 12, 1960 as a Second Lieutenant.
He was decorated with 'Wound Medal' in the year 1965 and was declared fit for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the year 1975.
He was actually promoted on September 29, 1976.
In January 1983, the petitioner was cleared for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
He was actually promoted on January 8, 1983.
While he was posted as Colonel, vide letter dated October 20, 1983 the petitioner was informed that he had been approved for promotion to the acting rank of Brigadier.
3.
The petitioner was posted as Colonel/Deputy Commandant, Sikh Regimental Centre (hereinafter to be referred to as the Centre) in January 1983.
In June, 1984 the Indian Army had carried out the operation Blue Star in Punjab.
Certain soldiers were upset.
There was unrest.
On hearing about it, the petitioner and his Commandant (Brig.
SC Puri) proceeded to the Centre.
The soldiers fired at them.
Brig.
SC Puri and the petitioner received multiple bullet injuries.
Brig.
Puri died.
The petitioner was admitted to the Military Hospital and placed on 'dangerously ill' list.
He received injuries in the chest, shoulder, leg and lower back.
The Prime Minister wrote a personal letter to the petitioner in September 1984 (Annexure P-2).
The Prime Minister observed that "the Nation is proud of young men like you who faced the grave dangers so bravely.
I hope and pray that God gives you strength and fortitude to bear the pain of the injuries you have sustained and that you recover speedily."
4.
A Court of Inquiry was ordered to investigate the circumstances that led to mass desertion by the Unit personnel of the Centre.
The petition appears as a witness during the Court of Inquiry.
The proceedings were completed on November 2, 1984.
Thereafter, a number of soldiers and Junior Commissioned Officers were tried by different Court Martial.
The petitioner appeared as a witness in some of those proceedings.
During all these proceedings, the petitioner avers that nothing was alleged against him.
However, in the year 1986, the petitioner received orders for his attachment under Army Instruction No. 106/60 with effect from May 1, 1986.
Finally, the petitioner was ordered to be court martialled on three charges under section 63 of the Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter to be referred as the Act).
A copy of the charge-sheet dated February 3, 1987 has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the Writ Petition.
The following three charges were levelled against the petitioner :-  "FIRST charge,  AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER  AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE, AA Sec. 63  in that he,  at Ramgarh, between 04 June and 10 June 84, while being Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre, improperly omitted to curb the simmering discontentment and mutinous tendency amongst the troops, as reaction to Operation 'Blue Star' in Golden Temple Complex, Amritsar, which led to a mutiny on 10 June, 84 in the said Centre.
Second Charge,  An Omission Prejudicial To Good Order And Military Discipline,  AA Sec. 63  in that he,  at Ramgarh, in view of Operation 'Blue Star' in Golden Temple Complex, Amritsar, between 04 June and 10 June 84, while being the Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre, improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures in the said Centre, as a consequence of which, on 10 June, 84, the kotes, magazines and canteen of the Centre were ransacked, prisoners, rescued from the quarterguard and the troops moved away from the Centre in commandeered vehicles.
Third charge,  AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER  AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE, AA Sec. 63  at Ramgarh, between 04 June and 10 June, 84, while being the Deputy Commandant and Security Officer of the Sikh Regimental Centre, when directly approached by late Sepoy Gurnam Singh of the said Centre with complaints against Army action in Punjab, improperly failed to take effective measures to prevent him from spreading rumors amongst the troops."
The Court Martial found that only the second charge was established.
The petitioner was acquitted of charges Nos. 1 and 3.
He was sentenced to suffer simple imprisonment for one year and to be cashiered from service.
The order was pronounced on June 1, 1987.
The proceedings of the Court Martial came up for confirmation before the Chief of the Army Staff.
The punishment awarded by the Court Martial was reduced to forfeiture of two years for the purpose of pension; forfeiture of two years past service for the purpose of promotion and severe reprimand.
The petitioner submitted a representation dated February 20, 1988 against this order of punishment.
A copy of this representation has been produced as Annexure P-10.
When nothing was heard in reply, the petitioner filed the present petition in December 1989.
The proceedings before the Court Martial as also the punishment awarded to the petitioner have been challenged on different grounds which will be presently noticed.
Besides challenging the constitutional validity of Section 63 of the Act, it has been averred that the charge No. 2 for which the petitioner has been punished is absolutely vague and there is no evidence in support thereof.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It appears to have been signed and verified by Lt. Col. AS Sidhu, Office of Staff Officer, Station HQ, Chandimandir.
A preliminary objection has been raised that no cause of action having arisen within the jurisdiction of this Court, the writ petition was wholly incompetent.
It has been further mentioned that the post confirmation petition submitted by the petitioner had been rejected by the Central Govt. vide their letter dated January 10, 1989.
It has been inter alia averred that on June 6, 1984 and June 8, 1964, the petitioner had held conference of officers/Junior Commissioned Officers of the Centre.
It has been further averred that on May 30, 1984 also, after the Sainik Sammolan the petitioner had told the troops that the situation in Punjab was not normal and that none should get perturbed on that count.
It has been further averred that "the petitioner having knowledge of the gravity of the situation and possible threat to the security in the centre, failed to ensure adequate security measures.
It was incumbent on the part of the petitioner, being an officer having sufficient service and in the know of the situation prevalent in the country at that time, particularly after the mutiny in 9 Sikh on 7/8 June, 1984 to ensure adequate security measures to prevent any similar incident in the SRC."
It has been further averred that after the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry, the GOC-in-C Central Command had recorded his opinion on November 29, 1984 and directed that the disciplinary action be taken against the petitioner and others.
Accordingly, a provisional ban on the promotion, posting, etc. of the petitioner was imposed on February 20, 1985 in accordance with the policy instructions issued by the Army Headquarters.
It has also been stated that the proceedings were conducted by the Court Martial in strict conformity with law and the petition submitted by the petitioner to the Central Govt. has been rightly rejected.
In regard to the petitioner's suggestion that there is no evidence in support of the charge of which he has been found guilty, the whole case has been stated by the respondents in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13.
The reply reads as under :-  "11, 12 and 13.
The contentions of the petitioner in these paragraphs are wrong and therefore denied.
A perusal of the GOM proceedings reveals that in regard to the second charge the prosecution has led evidence to show that the petitioner had held a security conference on 08 June, 84.
He had earlier held a conference of officers and JCOs on 06 June, 84.
These conferences were held soon after the accused had returned from Punjab in the last week of May where he had gone on annual leave.
Thus he was fully aware and had first hand information of the situation in Punjab that led to 'OP BLUE STAR'.
In any case, by 6/8 June, 84, it was known to the petitioner and other officers of the centre that an operation had been launched against anti-national and criminal elements, entrenched in Golden Temple.
On 30th May, 84, after the Sainik Sammelan, the petitioner had thought it fit to announce to the troops that situation in Punjab was normal and that none should get perturbed on that count.
Added to this situation was the activities of late Sep Gurnam Singh who had come to the residence of the petitioner twice to give vent to his apprehensions on alleged atrocities by the troops on innocent people.
All these matters indicate that the petitioner was aware of the gravity of the situation and the possible risk involved, or threat to the security.
Under such circumstances, any reasonable security officer which the petitioner was would take some added precautions, particularly with regard to arms, ammunition and the men.
Prosecution has led evidence through Maj Chatrath, the Adjutant to show that no extra precautions were taken at the centre inspite of this awareness and requirements.
6.
As against above evidence the petitioner explained by stating that he had done the needful under the circumstances by asking the officers and JCOs to be extra vigilant and had asked them to report any unusual and unnatural happenings.
The petitioner had asked the Coy Cdr.
to keep a watch over Sep. Gurnam Singh.
He had suggested a number of precautionary measures to the commandant, but the commandant had thought that most of those measures would create apprehensions in the minds of the troops and hence had turned them down.
The petitioner had no feed back from any source that there was any threat to the security and hence he had done all that was required under the circumstances.
The petitioner had urged that it was unfair to single him out and hold him responsible for the general and unexpected security lapses.
7.
The aforementioned material on the record on one OOM proceedings shows that the petitioner had not shown any foresightedness, imagination or initiative.
He had taken every thing for granted and the new situation created had no effect on his sense of responsibilities as security officer.
The only precaution the petitioner is seen to have taken is to brief the officers and JCOs to be extra-vigilant.
The unwarranted enthusiasm being deployed by a sepoy in the name of religious activities should have been duly taken note of by the petitioner and he could have taken him to task for having come to his house with a matter which was not of personal nature.
Thus, the petitioner more or less condoned activities of the Sepoy, who indeed exploited the situation to incite others in the name of religion.
Even if the petitioner failed to take note of those under currents in the centre, atleast as a prudent security officer, he should have thought of some contingencies that might arise on account of the happenings in Punjab to which he knew the troops to be extremely susceptible.
Thus the guards could be doubled, arms ammunition issued to each of the guards and the duty officer/JCO made available round the clock at the sensitive points like the Kote/Quarterguard area.
The petitioner should have also appointed some extra informants who could be relied upon and also kept some JCOs and NCOs stand by to meet any situation.
Such precautions taken on the guilt would have certainly given an early warning of the situation that is seen to have developed on the morning of 10 Jan. For doing so, the petitioner had sufficient reasons and time.
He is seen to have taken no such precautions.
In the alternative, the only other conclusion possible is that he knew every thing, but deliberately omitted to take precautions.
It may be that such precautions would sometimes really not have been put to real use, but then there was no harm in being cautions, when the situations warranted the same.
To that extent the omissions can clearly be seen to exist.
Under the circumstances, such conclusions were a matter of natural inference springing out of common sense, and general military knowledge.
If the petitioner had really put forward some of these salient measures for approval to commandant, and if the same were turned down by commandant, the petitioner as security officer would have been extremely concerned about it, and in the normal course should have made it an issue with the help of other officers.
In the absence of such natural human conduct, it must be taken that these were and are being put forward as after thoughts and under the protection of the death of the commandant.
8.
In view of the foregoing there is ample evidence on recorded of GOM proceedings to support the finding of guilty on the second charge."
Rest of the averments have also been controverted.
9.
I have heard Mr. Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has contended that section 63 of the Act gives totally unguided and unbridled powers.
It is vague and therefore suffers from the vires of arbitrariness.
Learned counsel has further contended that charge No. 2 of which the petitioner has been held to be guilty is totally vague and lacks in material particulars.
He submits that it was not possible for the petitioner to defend himself effectively as no precise charge had been levelled against him.
In any case, the counsel contends that there was no evidence at all in support of the charge and that the action of the respondents in punishing him is wholly untenable.
The learned counsel has then contended that the charge having not been approved and the court having not been convened by the competent authority, the entire proceedings conducted by the Court Martial are vitiated.
He has also contended that the proceedings are vitiated as the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity to cross examine witnesses and lead evidence during the Court of Inquiry.
Lastly, learned counsel has also raised the plea that the proceedings suffer from an element of bias.
The petitioner was one of the two Sikh officers who alone had been picked up for trial.
This, according to the petitioner was even violative of Articles 14 and 15 off the Constitution of India as he had been discriminated against on the basis of religion alone.
10.
On behalf of the respondents Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta has controverted the claim of the petitioner and contended that the provisions of the section 63 are legal and valid.
The charge was clear and precise and there was ample evidence in support thereof.
With reference to the record it was shown that the charge had been approved and the Court had been convened by the competent authority.
It is further contended that the petitioner had been duly associated with the Court of Inquiry.
He had actually cross examined the witnesses.
The allegation of bias or even a reasonable likelihood of bias has also been controverted.
11.
A perusal of the Act shows that various offences have been delineated in Chapter VI.
It starts with section 34.
Section 63 appears towards the end of the Chapter and provides as under :-  "63.
Violation of good order and discipline -  Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any Act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and military discipline shall on conviction by court-martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
The above provision is in the nature of a residuary clause.
It is impossible to imagine all possible situations and, therefore, the legislature in its wisdom has chosen to provide that any person who is guilty of any Act or omission which is prejudicial to the good order and military discipline can be tried and convicted by a court-martial.
Explanatory notes have been added to provide that as a result, a charge should not be preferred under this section where special provision for the offence is made elsewhere.
It has been further provided that an omission to be punishable must be wilful or culpable.
In note 3, it has been inter alia mentioned that negligence which results from "mere forgetfulness, error of judgment or inadvertence, in relation to a matter which does not rightly demand a very high degree of care, would not be judged blameworthy so as to justify conviction and punishment."
In note 5 it has been pointed out that making of frivolous complaint is not recognised as an offence under the Army Act "but the repetition of baseless complaints may amount to an offence under this section........." Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I am of the view that section 63 embodies a residuary provision.
It is meant to be invoked in cases where a particular Act is not covered under the offences specifically defined under the Act.
The provision does not offend either Article 14 of the Constitution or any other law.
As such, I find no ground to sustain the prayer made on behalf of the petitioner that Section 63 is itself unconstitutional.
12.
It may also be appropriate to notice that even though the learned counsel had initially raised to contention that the charge had not been approved and the Court had not been convened by the competent authority yet after Maj. Chitravanshi had produced the original record to show that in fact the competent authority had approved the charge-sheet as also the constitution of the Court, the learned counsel had not pressed this objection.
Accordingly, it is not necessary to consider the contention raised by the learned counsel.
13.
This brings me to the consideration of the contention that the charge No. 2 which had been levelled against the petitioner was vague, lacked in material particulars and as such the petitioner could not effectively meet it.
Along with it, the contention that there is no evidence in support of this charge may also be considered.
14.
I had asked the learned counsel for the respondents to produce before me the relevant material from the record.
He has produced before me a compilation (photo copies) containing the precise objections to the charge raised by the petitioner, the relevant extracted proceedings before the General Court Martial, the extracts from the statements of certain witnesses who appeared during the trial.
In this compilation, the document embodying the duties of Deputy Commandant, the security standing order of the Sikh Regimental Centre as also the extracts from certain statements recorded during the summary of evidence have also been produced.
All these documents pages 1-33 are placed on record and collectively marked as Mark 'A'.
15.
A perusal of these documents shows that the petitioner had moved an application under rule 30(4) for the amendment of the charges.
This application appears at pages 4 and 5 of the compilation Mark 'A'.
This application was considered by the Court Martial and the extract of the proceedings appears at pages 1 to 3 of the compilation.
The learned counsel who appeared for the prosecution at the trial, inter alia stated that the necessary omissions had been pointed out in the charges and that "the prosecution evidence would be led to prove as to what was expected of him and what he failed to do as required in the circumstances."
Accordingly, it was submitted that "the charges are not vague and the application of the learned defending officer is liable to be rejected."
On behalf of the petitioner, it was submitted that the charges "should be so clear stating the very culpable Act of omission and commission to enable the accused to defend himself.
A general statement as stated in the charges 2 and 3 that the accused failed to take security measures is not sufficient and against the basic rules pertaining to framing of the charges.
I, therefore, submit that the particular acts or omissions may be averred in the particulars of the charges to enable the accused to understand what he has to answer and where he has to defend."
The objection raised by the petitioner was disallowed with the observations that the Court decided to 'disallow' the objections.
As a result, the petitioner was called upon to meet the charge that he had improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures at the Centre.
The extract from the security standing order for the Sikh Regimental Centre has been produced and appears at pages 20-23 of the compilation.
Clearly, the Deputy Commandant viz. the petitioner was the Centre Security Officer and he had to be assisted by the Assistant Security Officer and the other staff mentioned in paragraph 2 of this order.
It is also clear tha the Centre Security Officer is responsible for the issue and revision of security standing orders from time to time.
Appendix 'G' to the security standing orders (at page 24 of the compilation) shows the Guards that have to be deployed at different places.
16.
After examination of the material on record, I am of the opinion that there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner had not deployed the guards in accordance with the requirement of the Security Order.
Consequently, it is clear that the Guards had been deployed in strict conformity with the security standing order.
Can the petitioner be still accused of having "improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures - ?"
Once the number of Guards has been duly prescribed and those Guards were actually on duty, it is not understood as to how the petitioner can be accused of having improperly failed to ensure adequate security measures.
What then in the default on the part of the petitioner ?
The charge is singularly silent about it.
However, at the hearing learned counsel for the respondents referred to the statement of Maj. ML Chatrath which he made prior to the trial at the stage of summary of evidence.
The extract produced by the respondents appears of page 29 of the compilation.
Maj. Chatrath had inter alia made the following statement on July 17, 1986 :-  "I would also like to mention that the Quarter GD and Magazine GD were required to be mounted with 8 pers and 4 pers with arms.
They were required to hold their weapons with them throughout their duty.
I have myself mounted on such GD during April 84."
From this, it was sought to be inferred that the petitioner had failed to double the number of Guards prescribed in Appendix G to the security standing order.
In this connection, it is relevant to notice that during the proceedings before the Court Martial, Maj. Chatrath who had probably by then become a time-scale Lt.Col.
appeared as PW-1.
An extract from his statement which has been produced by the respondents appears at pages 6 to 9 of the compilation.
A perusal of this statement does not contain any suggestion to the effect that the Guards ought to have doubled at the Centre.
Accordingly, it does not appear that Maj. Chatrath stood by the statement made by him at a stage prior to the actual trial.
Accordingly, the very basis on which the petitioner is sought to be accused of, failed to provide more Guards, cannot be sustained.
Reference was also made by the learned counsel to the statement of Sepoy Kashmir Singh to suggest that 3 rifles were deposited in the Kote.
This is also a statement made prior to the trial.
It is not clear as to what was the stand of this witness during the proceedings before the Court Martial.
A copy thereof has not been produced.
However, even this statement which appears at page 26 of the compilation does not suggest any negligence on the part of the petitioner.
17.
Besides the above, no reference could be made to any incriminating piece of evidence to show that the petitioner had failed to take adequate security measures.
As against this, the claim of the petitioner is that he had held periodic meetings with the officers, JCOs and other ranks.
He had also had a discussion with the Commandant (Brig.
SC Puri) in regard to various aspects relating to security in view of Operation Blue Star.
The petitioner claims to have suggested besides other things the doubling of guards.
He maintains that the Commandant had not agreed to the suggestions on the ground that "it may complicate the situation in the Centre as otherwise the situation was otherwise normal."
He avers that "as per the Commandant, these additional measures may create apprehensions in the minds of the men that something was amiss which may become a cause of resentment among them."
The extracts from the statements of witnesses produced before me do not show anything to the contrary.
In this connection, it may be noticed that Lt.Col.
ML Chatrath in his statement as PW1 has inter alia stated that on June 9, 1984 he "had a casual discussion with late Brigadier SC Puri wherein I apprised him about the Security Guard Strength of the Quarter Guard training Bn Guard and Magazine, Brig.
SC Puri did not give any direction in that regard."
Surely, if Brig.
SC Puri was not satisfied with the deployment of the guards, as mentioned by Lt. Col. Chatrath, he would have in all likelihood said so.
In my view, this is an inherent piece of evidence to show that the version given by the petitioner had held a meeting of the Security Cell on June 8, 1984 where he had briefed the members regarding the situation in Punjab.
The witnesses states that the petitioner had reiterated that "the appointment holders had to be very vigilant --."
He further states that the Deputy Commandant used to hold a conference of the officers and JCOs on every Wednesday.
One such conference was held on June 6, 1984 also.
In this conference "the accused did tell every body present in conference to be extra vigilant and report to him any unusual activities in the Centre.
The accused asked every one present in the conference whether they have notice anything unusual in the Centre that should be reported to him.
Thereafter, all officers and JCOs told him that the situation in the Centre was normal, and nothing worth was to be brought to his notice.
The accused had returned from annual leave in the last week of May 84.
The Centre Commandant had held a Sainik Sammelan on 30 May, 84.
During the said Sainik Sammelan, after the Centre Commandant had left, the accused informed the troops present there that he had returned from Punjab and everything was normal and no one should get perturbed---."
It is thus clear that even according to the evidence produced by the respondents, the petitioner was taking full care to ensure that there was no discontentment amongst the men he was commanding.
Further, a perusal of the extracts from the statement as produced in this compilation shows that a large number of men had come to the magazine, broken open the lock and looted the ammunition.
This appears to have happened suddenly.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he had taken the precaution to be personally present at the Gurdwara on the morning of June 10, 1984.
Surely, this conduct is not suggestive of any negligence on his part.
18.
In paragraph 18 of the petition, specific averments to show that the petitioner had suggested various security measures to Brig.
SC Puri, have been made.
In reply filed by Lt. Col. AS Sidhu, it has been stated as under :-  "18.
The contentions of the petitioner are wrong and therefore denied.
As already brought out in comments on paras 11, 12 and 13 there is ample evidence to support the finding of guilty on the second charge."
The reply to paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 has also been quoted above.
The above reply has been verified as true and correct "to the best of my knowledge and information as derived from the official record."
It is not understood as to whether the reply to para 18 is true to the respondent's knowledge or is based on information derived from the official record.
Surely, Lt.Col.
Sidhu had no means of personal knowledge.
It is not show that he was posted at the Centre at the relevant one.
No record has been produced to show that the averment made by the petitioner in paragraph 18 is false.
It appears that the respondents have got the reply signed from Lt. Col. AS Sidhu.
In the circumstances of the case, it would have been much better if the reply had been filed by a person who had either the custody of the record or was personally aware of the facts.
This has not been done.
In the circumstances of the case it appears to be extremely unsafe to rely on the averments made in the written statement.
19.
Even though, during the proceedings before the Court Martial, it was asserted on behalf of the authorities that the charge pointed out the omissions on the part of the petitioner and that "the prosecution evidence would be led to prove as to what was expected of and what he failed to do as required in the circumstances."
Nothing appears to have been done in the present case.
The commitment made before the General Court Martial does not appear to have been honoured.
Inevitably, I am led to hold that not only that no particulars were given in the charg-sheet, there is no evidence on the record to suggest that the petitioner had failed to do something which was expected of him.
The contention raised by learned counsel that the charge was vague and that there is no evidence in support thereof has to be upheld.
20.
I am conscious of the fact that it is not the function of the writ court to examine evidence especially when a formally constituted Court under the Army Act has examined the matter and found an officer to be guilty of a particular charge.
However, there is no gainsaying the fact that a writ court is competent to examine whether the charge is vague and lacking in material particulars and also as to whether or not there is any evidence against the officer.
In the present case, in spite of opportunity having been given, the respondents have not been able to point out any evidence in support of the charge.
Consequently, it has to be inferred that there is no evidence at all.
As a result, the finding of guilt and the order of punishment passed by the Chief of the Army Staff cannot be sustained.
These are accordingly quashed.
21.
In view of the above finding it is not necessary for me to examine the other contentions.
However, I must mention that the suggestion that there was a bias against the petitioner because he is a Sikh officer is totally unfounded.
Responsible officers would do well to eschew the temptation to make such suggestions.
22.
In view of the above finding, it is not necessary to notice the facts in Civil Writ Petition No. 3298 of 1989.
This petition had been filed by the petitioner prior to Civil Writ Petition No. 16828 of 1989 with a prayer that the respondents be directed to grant the rank of Brigadier to him.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been informed vide letter dated October 20, 1983 that he had been approved for promotion to the acting rank of Brigadier.
The only justification in not actually promoting the petitioner when various persons junior to him had been promoted in September, 1984 was that proceedings were pending against him.
Mr. Randhawa appearing for the petitioner submits that at that time there was nothing against the petitioner.
Be that as it may, the order of punishment itself having been quashed, the petitioner has to be restored to his original position as if the Court Martial proceedings had not intervened.
As a result, the respondents shall have to promote the petitioner with effect from the date a person junior to him was promoted to the acting rank of Brigadier.
It may be mentioned here that Mr. Randhawa had even submitted that the petitioner had been illegally reduced to the post of Lt. Col.
He had gone to the extent of submitting that in accordance with paragraph 7(c) of the Special Army Instruction No. 1/S/74, even the Chief of the Army Staff had not considered the petitioner's claim for re-appointment as Colonel.
This factual position was conceded by the learned counsel for the respondents.
However, in view of the fact that the order of punishment itself has been set aside and the petitioner has been found entitled to promotion with effect from the date an officer junior to him was promoted, it is not necessary for me to go into this matter.
23.
The writ petitions are accordingly allowed.
The order of punishment regarding forfeiture of service and pension and seniority as also the severe reprimand awarded to the petitioner are set aside.
The respondents are directed to promote the petitioner to the rank viz. Brigadier with effect from the date the person junior to him was promoted.
Consequently, reliefs in the nature of refixation of pay and arrears of salary etc. shall follows.
He is also held entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.
Petitions allowed.