Bhaskar Rao, J - The petitioner, Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (A.P.S.R.T.C.
), challenges in this proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution the award passed by the Additional Labour Court, Hyderabad, on 2531985 in ID No. 97 of 1983 whereby a driver of the A.P.S.R.T.C., removed from service was directed to be reinstated in service.
2.
The facts of the case in brief are : The respondent herein was working as a Driver of the A.P.S.R.T.C., and while so, the charge against him is, he operated an unauthorised trip from Naredcherla to Suryapet on the night of 161978, carried the passengers and collected fares from them without issuing tickets.
An inquiry, therefore, was initiated against him.
The respondent denied the allegations.
The management adduced evidence and ultimately in the domestic inquiry the respondent-driver was directed to be removed from service.
Pursuant thereto at the instance of the driver a reference was made to the Labour Court.
The respondent-driver filed a claim statement before the Labour Court and the Corporation filed its counter.
During the course of the proceedings before the Labour Court the respondent driver filed a memo requesting the Labour Court to decide the case "on quantum of punishment under Section 11(A) of the ID Act, 1947".
The Labour Court after considering the entire material on record set aside the order of removal and passed an ward directing reinstatement of the respondent-driver into service, as stated supra, by exercising the powers under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Challenging this award, this writ petition is filed.
3.
Mr. Reddappa Reddy, the learned counsel for the A.P.S.R.T.C., sought to assail the award by mainly contending that (i) the Labour Court erred in not affording the management/A.P.S.R.T.C., with an opportunity to adduce evidence before it in spite of a specific request made therefor and therefore the award is vitiated and liable to be set aside, and that (ii) even on merits the award made is against the evidence and other material on record.
4.
Mr. Bishapathi, the learned counsel for the respondent-driver, on the other hand, contended that the labour Court has ample power under Section 11-A of the Act and that in exercise of these powers, though the inquiry is not vitiated by reason of victimisation or unfair labour practice, on a reappraisal of the entire evidence and other material before the Labour Court directed reinstatement of the respondent-driver.
As regards the opportunity to adduce evidence, the learned counsel submitted that in view of the memo filed by the respondent-driver before the Labour Court that the case may be decided on the quantum of punishment under Section 11-A of the Act, the Labour Court did not find it necessary to call for further evidence being adduced by the A.P.S.R.T.C.
The learned counsel accordingly submitted that the award is perfectly valid and correct and that this Court will not interfere with the same by again reappraising the entire evidence to arrive at a different finding.
5.
Before deciding the rival contentions, it is necessary to note that Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act was incorporated in the statute by Act 45 of 1971 and it came into force with effect from 15121971.
Before insertion of the said provision the power of the Court to interfere with the decision of the management either in discharging or dismissing its employee was very limited, in that, it could interfere if only the domestic inquiry as vitiated either on account of unfair labour practice or victimisation, and that when once the domestic inquiry was proper and the conclusions were plausible the tribunal or court had no jurisdiction to sit in appeal and substitute its own judgment.
It had equally no power to alter the punishment imposed by the management if the misconduct of the employee was proved by a valid and proper domestic inquiry.
It is also noteworthy that even in cases where the domestic inquiry was invalid or improper, or even if no domestic inquiry was held, the employer was afforded with opportunity to adduce evidence before the tribunal or Court to justify its action and then the tribunal/court was deriving jurisdiction to decide the matter on merits.
Here also, once the tribunal accepted the evidence and held that the misconduct was proved, it had no power to interfere with the punishment imposed by the employer except in extraordinary circumstances where the punishment was not only severe but out of proportion to the fault or was so harsh and oppressive reflecting victimisation or unfair labour practice.
6.
In that prevailing background, the legislature has introduced Section 11-A of the Act, which reads :  "11-A.
Power of Labour Court, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of discharge or dismissal of workmen ----  Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court....for adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court....is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case may require : Provided that in any proceedings under this section the Labour Court....shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evidence in relation to the matter."
7.
The legislature has, thus, made a departure and empowered the labour Court to satisfy itself whether the misconduct is proved, in spite of the fact that the inquiry held was proper and also to interfere with the punishment imposed by the employer.
The Court can thus differ from the management both with regard to the finding of misconduct arrived at by it as well with the punishment imposed by it.
The powers so conferred are in conformity with the recommendations of the International Labour Organisation.
8.
It is in Workmen of FT & R Company v. The Management, AIR 1973 SC 1227 that the Supreme Court had the occasion to deal with the scope and ambit of Section 11-A for the first time after its insertion.
After an exhaustive reference to different decisions rendered earlier, the Supreme Court in paragraph 32 in the background of Section 11-A considered cases where an employer has held a proper and valid domestic inquiry before imposing the punishment.
While so considering, the Supreme Court distinguished the earlier position before incorporation of Section 11-A by observing :  "Previously the Tribunal had no power to interfere with its (management's) finding of misconduct recorded in the domestic inquiry unless one or other infirmities pointed out by this Court in Indian Iron & Steel Company Limited 1958 SCR 667 = AIR 1958 SC 130 existed........unless the finding was perverse or the punishment was so harsh as to lead to an inference of victimisation or unfair labour practice......the tribunal is now clothed with the power to reappraise the evidence in the domestic enquiry and satisfy itself whether the said evidence relied on by an employer established the misconduct alleged against a workman.
What was originally a plausible conclusion that could be drawn by an employer from the evidence, has now given place to a satisfaction being arrived at by the Tribunal that the finding of misconduct is correct.
The Tribunal is now at liberty to consider not only whether the finding of misconduct recorded by an employer is correct, but also to differ from the said finding if a proper case is made out........." 9.
Another change, as noted by the Supreme Court in Paragraph-38, brought in by Section 11-A is the power conferred on a tribunal to alter the punishment imposed by an employer.
In spite of the fact that the tribunal comes to the conclusion that the misconduct is established, still if the Tribunal is of opinion that the punishment of dismissal or discharge is not justified, it can interfere with the same.
10.
Adverting to the right of the employer to adduce evidence before the tribunal, the Supreme Court in paragraph-33 held that even after incorporation of Section 11-A with its proviso the employer has the right to adduce evidence either for the first time before the tribunal or as a supplementary measure to the one already adduced during the domestic inquiry.
The stage at which the employer has to ask for such an opportunity, as pointed out by the Supreme Court in its earlier judgment in DC & G. Mills v. LB Singh, AIR 1972 SC 1031, has been reiterated and accepted by the later decision in Workmen of FT & T Company (supra).
We shall, therefore, refer to the principles governing the stages available to the management to adduce evidence as summarised in paragraph-60 of the decision in DC & G. Mills (supra) case.
11.
The Supreme Court held that in cases where no domestic enquiry at all is held or even if held the management does not want to rely upon such inquiry, the management is entitled to adduce evidence before the tribunal to justify action.
In cases where the management wants to rely upon the domestic inquiry held and also intends to adduce additional evidence to supplement the domestic inquiry, then also the management is entitled to adduce evidence before the tribunal justifying its action.
In cases where the management seeks a finding on the validity of the domestic inquiry as a preliminary issue while at the same time relying upon the same and simultaneously asks for an opportunity to adduce evidence before the tribunal if the finding on the preliminary issue is against the management, then also the management is entitled to adduce the evidence asked for.
It is, however, very important to note that the management has to make a request for affording itself with the opportunity specifically before the proceedings are closed by the tribunal.
"If no such opportunity has been availed of, or asked for by the management" in the words of the Supreme Court, "the employer can make no grievance that the Tribunal did not provide such an opportunity."
It is further specifically made clear by the Supreme Court.
"......It is not its (Tribunal's) function to invite suo motu the employer to adduce evidence before it to justify the action taken by it."
Again a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Shankar Chakravarthi v. Britania Biscuit Company Limited, (1979) 3 SCC 371 held :  "The rights which the employer has in law to adduce additional evidence in proceeding before the Labour Court or Industrial Tribunal either under Section 10 or Section 33 of the Act questioning the legality of the order terminating service must be availed of by the employer by making a proper request at the time when it files its statement of claim or written statement or makes an application seeking either permission to take a certain action or seeking approval of the action taken by it.
If such a request is made.......the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal must give such an opportunity......But if no such request is made at any stage of the proceedings.
There is no duty in law on the Labour Court or the Tribunal to give such an opportunity.......There is no duty cast on the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court while adjudicating upon a penal termination of service of a workman.....to call upon the employer to adduce additional evidence to substantiate the charge of misconduct by giving some specific opportunity after decision on the preliminary issue whether the domestic inquiry was at all held, or if held, was defective, in favour of the workman."
12.
In this background to the principles laid down by the Supreme Court, we have to examine whether the complaint of the management that it was not afforded with an opportunity to adduce additional evidence to supplement the one already adduced during the domestic inquiry to justify its action in dismissing the respondent-workman (Driver) merits countenance.
The first and for most pre-requisite to afford the management with the opportunity is making of the request therefor by the management.
A perusal of the record before the tribunal discloses that in the counter filed by the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation it is prayed :  ".....this Hon'ble Court (the Labour Court) may be pleased to decide the validity of the domestic inquiry as a preliminary issue and if for any reason this Hon'ble Court comes to the conclusion that the same is not fair and proper the respondent (A.P.S.T.C.)
prays for an opportunity to adduce evidence before this Hon'ble Court (Labour Court) to justify the action taken against the petitioner."
From the request it is clear that the opportunity to adduce evidence, as sought for, is if only the Labour Court finds the fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry against the A.P.S.R.T.C., while deciding the said question as a preliminary issue.
The opportunity sought for is to adduce evidence in order to substantiate the validity, fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry simpliciter.
There is absolutely no request at any stage of the proceedings before the Labour Court to permit the A.P.S.R.T.C., to adduce additional evidence to supplement the evidence already adduced during the domestic inquiry in order to sustain its action in dismissing the respondent-Driver.
So much so, this is not a case where no domestic inquiry at all was held nor one where the management (A.P.S.R.T.C.)
does not want to rely upon the same.
In this case, as already noted, the respondent-driver did not dispute the validity, fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry and on the other hand he requested the Labour Court to decide the case on quantum of punishment in the light of Section 11-A of the Act, i.e. on a reappraisal of the entire material on record and on satisfying itself as regards the guilt or otherwise of the respondent-driver.
Inasmuch as the preliminary issue regarding the validity, fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry was not the subject-matter of challenge before the Labour Court, question of such an issue being decided against the A.P.S.R.T.C., and the consequent obligation to afford the A.P.S.R.T.C., with the opportunity to adduce additional evidence in regard thereto did not arise.
It is, of course, also not the case of the A.P.S.R.T.C., that though it sought for opportunity to adduce evidence in relation to the preliminary issue regarding the validity, fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry, it was not so permitted to avail of.
But the positive complaint of the A.P.S.R.T.C., is that it was not afforded with an opportunity to adduce additional evidence to supplement the one already adduced during the domestic inquiry to substantiate its action in dismissing the driver-respondent, for which there is no corresponding request made by the A.P.S.R.T.C., before the Labour Court.
As was repeatedly held by the Supreme Court, there is no duty cast on the Tribunal or Court to call upon the employer to adduce additional evidence to substantiate the charge of misconduct by giving some specific opportunity, in the absence of a request made therefor.
It is not its function to invite the employer suo motu to adduce additional evidence on the question of misconduct charged against the employee.
Pertinently at this juncture, we may refer to an occasion where the Delhi and Madhya Pradesh High Courts had taken the view that in cases where the Tribunal decides the preliminary issue regarding the validity, fairness or propriety of the domestic inquiry against the management, then the Tribunal should suo motu provide an opportunity to the management to adduce additional evidence to sustain its action taken against the workman-employee; the Supreme Court had reversed the said view in State Bank of India v. RK Jain, AIR 1972 SC 136 by holding it to be erroneous.
In view of the foregoing settled position of law, we have to hold that the management-A.P.S.R.T.C., cannot make a grievance that it was not afforded with an opportunity to adduce additional evidence to justify its action in dismissing the respondent-driver on the substantial question of misconduct as such, since there is no corresponding request made therefor by the A.P.S.R.T.C., before the Labour Court, except seeking opportunity to adduce evidence on the preliminary issue regarding the validity, propriety or fairness of the domestic inquiry, that too, in case the said issue is found against the management.
13.
No doubt, it is contended, by Sri Bikshapathi that in view of the proviso to Section 11-A, viz., the Labour Court shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evidence in relation to the matter, the management's right to adduce any further evidence has been taken away.
Dealing exactly with an identical contention, the Supreme Court in Workmen of FT & R Co (supra) held in paragraph-44 :  "44.
We are not inclined to accept the above contention of Mr. Deshmukh.
The proviso specifies matters which the tribunal shall take into account as also matters which it shall not.
The expression 'materials on record' occurring in the proviso, in our opinion, cannot be confined only to the materials which were available at the domestic inquiry.
On the other hand, the 'materials on record' in the Proviso must be held to refer to materials on record before the tribunal.
They take in--------- (i) the evidence taken by the management at the enquiry and the proceedings to the enquiry, or  (2) the above evidence and in addition, any further evidence led before the tribunal, or  (3) evidence placed before the Tribunal for the first time in support of the action taken by an employer as well as the evidence adduced by the workmen contra.
......It is only on the basis of these materials that the tribunal is obliged to consider whether the misconduct is proved and the further question whether the proved misconduct justifies the punishment of dismissal or discharge.
It also prohibits the tribunal from taking any fresh evidence either for satisfying itself regarding the misconduct or for altering the punishment.
From the proviso it is not certainly possibly to come to the conclusion that......the proviso deprives an employer of his right to adduce evidence for the first time before the tribunal."
In view of this decision of the Supreme Court, we rejected the contention advanced by the learned counsel.
14.
Mr. Reddappa Reddy, the learned counsel for the A.P.S.R.T.C., drew our attention to a decision of this Court rendered by a Division Bench in WP Nos. 874/86 and 794/86 dated 1531989, to which one of us, Bhaskar Rao, J, is a party, to support his contention that even in the absence of a specific request from the management, the tribunal is under a duty to afford the management with the opportunity to adduce further evidence to justify its action.
No doubt, this Court, while remanding the matter to the tribunal issued a direction to the Tribunal to decide it afresh after affording the management with the opportunity to adduce further evidence, though there was no request from the management for such an opportunity made before the Tribunal earlier.
But that direction was issued when the matter was not agitated in the light of the observations referred to by us of the Supreme Court in DC & G. Mills case (supra), Shankar Chakravarti's case (supra) and State Bank of India's case (supra).
For this reason, we cannot accept the contention of Mr. Reddappa Reddy.
15.
Mr. Reddappa Reddy, the learned counsel for the A.P.S.R.T.C., next contended that in view of the memo filed by the respondent-driver confining the inquiry to the quantum of punishment only, the Labour Court ought not to have gone into the merits relating to the misconduct, and could have at the worst reduced the punishment.
The contention no more survives in view of the introduction of Section 11-A into the statute.
Further, the driver in the memo requested the Labour Court to decide the case, no doubt, on the quantum of punishment, but at the same time in the light of 'Section 11(a) of the ID Act, 1947'.
As already noted in Workmen in Firestone Tyre (supra) the Supreme Court while considering the ambit and scope of Section 11-A of the Act pointed out that the Tribunal can set aside the order of dismissal or discharge, if the misconduct alleged, as such, is not found proved.
It is incidentally relevant to notice that in Janardhan Reddy v. A.P.S.R.T.C.
1990(2) APLJ 135, a Division Bench of this Court had the occasion to consider a similar memo to the effect 'Matter with regard to the quantum may be decided on the basis of the documents filed by him' wherein also the contention was similar to the present one.
While so considering, this Court held :  "If a workman desired the Tribunal not to go into the correctness or the findings arrived at in the domestic inquiry, the language of the memo must be clear and specific to that effect.
Merely because the workman says that he does not wish to produce any evidence and that the matter may be decided on the evidence on record on merely because he says that the case may be decided in accordance with Section 11-A or merely because he says that the "Matter with regard to the quantum may be decided on the basis of the documents filed by him", it cannot be said that the workman must be deemed to have asked the tribunal not to go into the validity or correctness of the finding of fact recorded in the domestic enquiry.
It is well settled that waiver of a right must be conscious act done with full knowledge of the consequences and must be strictly construed and a Court or Tribunal cannot deprive a person of any right, more so, the rights given under a piece of welfare and beneficial legislation unless such waiver is specific, clear and unless the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a conscious and deliberate waiver of such right."
The memo referred to as has been held by the Division Bench cannot be said to be acceptance of the findings of fact as to misconduct recorded in the domestic inquiry.
In view of this, we find no force in his contention advanced by the learned counsel.
16.
It is lastly contended by Mr. Reddappa Reddy that the Labour Court has not properly appreciated the facts and evidence involved in the case while deciding the matter in the light of Section 11-A of the Act and arriving at the finding that the respondent-driver was not guilty of misconduct.
At the outset, we may point out that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, as held by the Supreme Court in Sadhu Ram v. Delhi Transport Corporation (6), it is not for this Court to constitute itself into an appellate Court over Tribunals constituted under the special legislation, viz., Industrial Disputes Act, to read judicate questions of fact decided by the Tribunals.
Even otherwise also, we may state that the Labour Court has referred to the several documents involved in the matter one after the other exhaustively.
Referring to Ex. M1 (statistical return) relating to the date 4/5-6-1978 of the bus driven by the respondent, the Tribunal (Labour Court) found it to be of no relevance since the charged incident relates to 161978.
Ex. M-2 is again a letter dated 3778.
It refers to the information received by the Controller on 9678.
It has been commented by saying that why the letter was addressed in July, 1978 whereas the information received by the Controller was on 9678.
Ex. M-3 is a copy of the long-sheet relating to 4/5-6-78.
This document is of no use prove the incident dated 161978.
Ex. M-6 stated to be a confidential report refers to the statements recorded during the preliminary inquiry in the absence of the respondent and therefore they cannot form basis for being relied upon as against the respondent.
Ex. M-7 is the suspension order and has nothing to do with the proof of the incident as such Ex. M-10 calls for the explanation of the respondent.
The memo (Ex. M-10) also did not permit the respondent to have the documents relevant to be supplied to him as per his request in Ex. M-9.
Ex. M-12 is the statement of the respondent during the domestic inquiry and in that he denied the allegations levelled against him.
Adverting to the variance in the KMPL (number of kilo metres per each litre of petrol), the Tribunal found that the Driver is not expected to work-out the KMPL at the end of his duty on each day.
Therefore, the denial of knowledge as regards the variance in the KMPL and the omission in making any remarks in the log-book therefore is found to be of no consequence.
Even the conductor denied the allegation of unauthorised trip in his statement, Ex. M-13.
Ex. M-14 is the statement of another conductor which also does not support the allegation of unauthorised trip as having been operated.
The other statements, Exs.
M-15 to M19 also do not incriminate the respondent-driver.
Referring to the inquiry report, Ex. M-20 the Labour Court commented that though the Enquiry Officer relied upon the statements of witnesses referred to above, none of the statements speak to the fact that the respondent has conducted any unauthorised trip and there is not even a word in those statements about this fact.
Accordingly, the Labour Court has rightly, in our view, held that the inquiry report is not sustainable.
In view of this, we find no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the A.P.S.R.T.C., that the Labour Court has not properly reappraised the evidence touching the question of misconduct the respondent-driver.
17.
For the aforementioned reasons, we find no merit in this writ petition for our interference.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed, but in the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.