GC Garg, J - Petitioner in response to a prospectus published for admission to the Bachelor of Engineering course (for short called the course) at Government Engineering College, Bhatinda, Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar and other Engineering Colleges, applied for admission to the said course for which a competitive examination was conducted by Guru Dev University, Amritsar.
The Government of Punjab by letter dated August 28, 1987, Annexure P-5 reserved 2% of seats for admission to the course in favour of wards of the serving staff of Technical Education Department.
The petitioner applied for admission to the course against this 2% reservation being the daughter of Shri CL Kochher, Head of Department of Civil Engineering in Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar.
She secured 118 marks in the joint competitive examination conducted by the University for admission to the said course.
She was interviewed and placed at serial number 4 in the merit list Annexure P-7, meant for children of serving staff but was not granted admission though candidates lower in merit than her, i.e. mentioned at serial numbers 5, 8 and 10 were admitted to the course.
The action of respondents 1 to 3 in denying admission to the petitioner and admitting candidates below her in order of merit compelled her to file the present writ petition.
2.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing on November 17, 1989 when the following order was passed :  "Notice of motion for 22111989.
Dasti process only.
The petitioner be admitted at Jullundur forthwith."
As a result of the aforesaid order, the petitioner was granted admission to the said course which she has been continuing since then.
After filing of written statements, the matter was again considered by Division Bench and the writ petition was admitted to regular hearing.
The interim order dated November 17, 1989 was allowed to continue.
3.
Joint written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and a separate written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
The broad stand taken by the two sets of respondents for denying admission to the petitioner is that she was not eligible for admission to the course against 2% seats reserved for the wards of serving staff of Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar/Technical Education Department, Punjab as her father, employed in Mehar Chand Polytechnic Jalandhar, which was a privately managed institution and thus, was not covered under the reserved category and the facility of reservation of 2% of seats was available to the ward's of the Government staff of Technical Education Department.
It was further averred that candidates mentioned at serial numbers 5, 8 and 10 were granted admission on the basis of their inter se merit as they were the wards of serving staff of the Regional Engineering College/Technical Education Department, Punjab.
It was thus, denied that any candidate lower in merit than the petitioner was granted admission.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner very fairly and rightly conceded that reservation of 2% made in favour of wards of serving staff of the Regional Engineering College, Bhatinda and Jalandhar/Technical Education Department, Punjab was bad in law and no candidate except on the basis of merit could be admitted to the course.
Such a reservation for the wards of management and staff of an institute has been held bad in law by this Court in Pankaj v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 465 (P&H) : 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 711.
5.
A part from the above, I find that reservation of 2% of seats for admission in Polytechnics/Technical Institutions in the State of Punjab, by letter Annexure P-5 was made for the children of the serving staff of Technical Education Department.
The father of the petitioner cannot be said to be a member of serving staff of Technical Education Department, Punjab or a teacher in the Regional Engineering College, Bhatinda/Jalandhar as, admittedly, he is serving as Head of Civil Engineering Department in Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar.
The said institution is a private institution and run by a privately managed society though aided by the State Government to the extent of 95%.
For all purposes, this institution will remain a private institution and cannot be said to be a part of the Technical Education Department.
Thus, in my view, the petitioner was rightly denied admission against the reservation of 2% of seats for admission to the course.
The writ petition thus has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
6.
Faced with the above situation, learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that the petitioner who was admitted to the course in question as far back as in November, 1989 and who has already completed five semesters out of total eight semesters, and is studying in the sixth semester now, should be allowed to continue her studies and complete the course to which she was admitted under the orders of this court.
A question thus arises, whether the petitioner should be allowed to complete her course to which she was admitted under the order of this Court dated November 17, 1989.
Admittedly the petitioner has been pursuing her studies in the Engineering College since November, 1989 and she has already passed 1st, IInd and IIIrd semesters of the said course.
She has already appeared in the 4th and 5th semester examinations conducted by the University but the result of these two semesters is awaited.
She has been permitted to join 6th semester and pursuing her studies.
Results of 1st, 2nd and 3rd semester examinations have been declared by the University without any reservation and treating the petitioner as a regular candidate.
The admission of the petitioner was never treated as provisional either by this Court or respondents 1 to 3, and her results were declared even in the absence of any order of this Court.
The ex parte ad interim order directing to admit the petitioner to the course was later confirmed in presence of counsel for the respondents.
It has come on the record that before the petitioner was ordered to be admitted to the course by order of this Court on November 17, 1989, she had already joined a Diploma Course in Electronics and Electrical Communication in Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar.
Obviously, she abandoned the Diploma Course and joined the Engineering Course after the order of this court.
Had the ad interim order dated November 17, 1989, directing her to be admitted to the Engineering Course, not been passed, she would have continued her studies in the Diploma Course.
In such a situation the petitioner who got admission at the instance of the Court should not be made to suffer at this stage.
If now after period of about two and a half years, for which the petitioner has been constantly pursuing her studies, her admission to the Engineering Course, is cancelled, her whole future will be ruined.
Notwithstanding the conclusion arrived at by me above that the petitioner was not eligible for admission to the Engineering Course nor she had any legitimate claim to such admission, I allow the petitioner to continue her studies in the Engineering Course to which she was admitted under the order of this Court dated November 17, 1989 keeping in view that in some cases, this Court as also the apex Court, having found some admissions made against a particular reservation to be bad in law, allowed such students to complete their courses to which they were admitted, in the larger interest of justice.
Needless to mention here that the relief as referred to above has been given to the petitioner only keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and in larger interest of justice.
7.
In view of what has been observed hereinbefore, the writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.