HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed Finance Controller-cum-Chief Accounts Officer with the respondent-Corporation vide order dated 25th April, 1984 (Annexure P-1).
Vide order Annexure P-2 the post held by the petitioner was re-designated as General Manager (Finance) and the petitioner was duly confirmed against the said post.
In December, 1986 the petitioner resigned from the said post, but in March, 1989 he was 'compelled', as he puts it, to rejoin the same post, and the respondent-Corporation even treated this period of absence as one of extraordinary leave.
It has been averred by the petitioner that this work and conduct remained excellent, but nevertheless vide order Annexure P-5 dated 14th September, 1989, his services were.
terminated.
The aforesaid order has been impugned by way of this writ petition.
2.
It has been averred in the writ petition that the Corporation has adopted the Service bye-laws called the Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation Employees' Service Bye-Laws, and the relevant bye-law which deals with the procedure to be followed, where the services of a permanent employee are to be terminated simplicitor in bye-law 32 which is reproduced below :  "32 TERMINATION OF SERVICE :  The services of an officer or other employee of the Corporation unless otherwise specially agreed to, may be terminated by the appointing Authority :  i) in the case of permanent officer of other employee by giving three months' notice on either side or, in lieu thereof, pay of the period the notice falls short of three months ....................
It has been urged that the aforesaid bye-law is arbitrary and reliance for this argument has been placed on West Bengal State Electricity Board and others v. Desh Bandu, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 722, Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1571, and Shiv Kumar Bishnoi v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(4) SLR 286.
3.
In reply to the petition the stand of the respondent is that the work and conduct of the petitioner had been unsatisfactory and amongst other acts of misconduct he has been guilty of embezzlement and misappropriation.
It has been asserted that as the petitioner did not maintain the dignity and prestige of his office, it was thought fit to terminate his services in term of bye-law 32. ibid.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petition deserves to succeed in view of the judgments of the Supreme Court referred to above.
In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation's case the Supreme Court was construing Rule 9(1) of the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd, Service Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1979, which is reproduced below :-  TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT FOR ACTS OTHER THAN MISDEMEANOUR :  (1) The employment of a permanent employee shall be subject to termination on three months' notice on either side.
The notice shall be in writing on either side.
The Company may pay the equivalent of three months' basic pay and dearness allowance, if any, in lieu of notice or may deduct a like amount when the employee has failed to give due notice."
Thus it will be noticed that bye-law 32 ibid and Rule 9(1), quoted above, are almost similar and the Supreme Court held that Rule 9(i) was void as being opposed to public policy and also being ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India to the extent that if conferred upon the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation the right to terminate the employment of a permanent employee by giving him three months' notice in writing or by paying him the equivalent of three month's basic pay and dearness allowance in lieu of such notice.
It was also held that, besides being arbitrary and unreasonable, it ignored the rule of audio alterm partem.
The Supreme Court, however, maintained as good the right conferred upon the permanent employee by the clause to resign in the manner indicated therein.
While arriving at this conclusion, the Supreme Court placed reliance on West Bengal State Electricity Board's case (supra), in which a similar rule had been held to be bad.
Nearer home, the matter has once again been settled in a similar manner in favour of the petitioner in Shiv Kumar Bishnoi's case (supra).
5.
Mr. Jasbir Singh Chahal, learned counsel for the respondent, has urged that the ratio of the aforequoted judgments is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case, inasmuch as that the respondent is a company and, therefore, not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
This argument is without basis.
In some of the cases cited above, the employees therein were also employees of companies, who also qualified to be identified as State in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution and were, therefore, amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the Court.
It has been conceded before me that the respondent-Corporation herein is also a State in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition is allowed, bye-law 32, quoted above, in so far as it confers upon the Corporation the power to terminate the services of a permanent employee, is held to be arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and is quashed as such.
Resultantly, the order Annexure P-5, impugned in this writ petition, is also quashed.
I have been informed in Court that the petitioner would have superannuated on the 30th April, 1991, and in view of this fact, a direction is issued to the respondents to pay to the petitioner full back wages with interest at the rate of 12% per annum, from the date the amounts fell due to the date when the payments are actually made, for the period 14th September, 1989 to 30th April, 1991.
The costs of the petition, which are quantified at Rs. 5,000/- will also be paid to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.