VK Bali, J - This petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India calls in question the Punjab Labour (Class II) Service (1st Amendment) Rules, 1982, by styling the same as ultra vires Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
The consequential prayer of the petitioners is to quash the seniority list framed on the basis of said amendment vide which the respondents have been declared senior to the petitioners.
The facts giving rise to the writ petition may first be noticed.
2.
The petitioners joined the post of Inspector Factories by way of direct appointment from 11th August, 1,971 to 3rd July, 1973.
Admittedly, at the time of their entry in service, the method of recruitment, qualifications and other conditions of service for the post of Inspector of Factories were governed by rules known as Punjab Labour Service (Class I and Class II) Rules, 1955.
Respondent No. 5 who belongs to scheduled caste was also recruited along with the petitioners but when the merit list was prepared by the Punjab Public Service Commission, petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were placed at serial Nos. 2 and 4 whereas respondent No. 5 was placed at serial No, 5.
It is because of their placement by the Public Service Commission in the manner aforesaid that petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 claim themselves to be senior to respondent No. 5.
In so far as respondentNos.
3 and 4 are concerned, as per case of the petitioners they were not even qualified to be appointed to post of Inspector of Factories under the 1955 Rules for the reason that they did not possess essential academic qualifications prescribed under the statutory unless.
Whereas respondent No. 3 held a Degree of Chemical Engineering, respondent No. 4 had a Degree in Civil Engineering and as per 1955 Rules, the essential academic qualification for the post was a Degree in Mechanical Engineering/Electrical Engineering.
For the reason that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 could not be appointed under 1955 Rules, they were appointed to excadre post of Inspector of Factories (Chemical) and Inspector of Factories (Civil) in June, 1971.
3.
A provisional seniority list of Inspector of Factories came into being on 26th February, 1974, when the petitioners discovered that they have been assigned wrong seniority inasmuch as respondents No. 3 and 4 were shown above them.
Whereas the petitioners were laced at Sr. Nos. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12, respectively, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were placed at Sr. Nos. 4 and 5.
This necessitated a representation by the petitioners against the aforesaid tentative seniority list and the ground pressed into service for assigning higher seniority to the petitioners than respondent Nos. 3 and 4 was that the said respondents having been appointed against ex-cadre post, could not be included in the seniority list and in any case they could not be shown senior to the petitioners.
The aforesaid representation of the petitioners was accepted and in the final seniority list that came into being on 23rd October, 1974, they were shown senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
In the aforesaid final seniority list, the petitioners were also shown senior to respondent No. 5.
It requires to be mentioned here that in so far as respondents No. 3 and 4 are concerned they were brought into the cadre of Inspector of Factories from the date of issuance of the seniority list but inasmuch as the representation of the petitioners succeeded and they were shown senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4, they did not agitate the matter with regard to bringing of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 on the cadre of Inspector of Factories.
Two posts of selection grade Inspector of Factories were created and as per seniority, the name of petitioner No. 1 was recommended for appointment to one of the posts.
One post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories fell vacant with effect from 1st November, 1978, which was to be filled up by promotion from among Inspectors of Factories under the rules.
The case of petitioner No. 1 is that he was eligible for consideration to the said post but the Government in order to favour respondent Nos. 3 and 4 amended 1955 Rules with retrospective effect by introducing the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and Class II) (1st Amendment) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter to be referred as the 1978 Rules).
The said Rules were amended with effect from 12th February, 1970, and by virtue of the amendment brought about, the qualifications for the post of Inspector of Factories were amended to include "Civil and Chemical Engineering".
By virtue of these rules, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were also made eligible for appointment as Inspector of Factories with retrospective effect, i.e. from the date of their initial appointment.
It may be mentioned here that the initial appointment of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 is prior to all the petitioners.
Taking advantage of the 1978 rules, the State of Punjab passed an order appointing respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to the post of Inspector of Factories with retrospective effect and as a necessary corollary thereof, the seniority of the petitioners was changed by declaring respondent Nos. 3 and 4 senior to the petitioners.
The changed seniority list was challenged by the petitioners by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 5134 of 1978 which was allowed by this court vide orders dated 18th August, 1980.
The seniority list of 1974 was upheld senior and the petitioners were declared senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
Aggrieved, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 750/1980 which was pending at the time of filing of the present writ petition.
During pendency of the Letters Patent Appeal, however, Rules of 1955 were repealed and under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, a new set of rules known as Punjab Labour (Class II) Service Rules, 1982 (hereinafter called the 1982 Rules) were enforced with effect from 15th January, 1982.
Rule 7 which governs the method of appointment and the qualifications for the post of Inspector of Factories runs thus :-  "7.
Method of appointment and qualifications.
(1) Appointment to the Service shall be made in the manner as specified in Appendix 'B' to these rules.
(2) No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he possesses the qualification and experience specified against that post in Appendix 'B' to these rules.
(3) All appointments to the service by promotion shall be made by selection based on seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
4.
No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service by direct appointment unless he possesses knowledge of Punjabi language of Matriculation standard or its equivalent or passes test in Punjabi Language of Matriculation standard to be held by such authority as may be specified by Government in this behalf from time to time.
(Rule 7) APPENDIX 'B' Mode of appointment by Qualification for appointment by Sr. No.
Designation of the post Direct appointment Promotion Transfer Direct appointment Promotion  x x x x x x x 3.
Inspector of Factories 100% (a) Degree of a recognised university in civil Mechanical Chemical or Electrical Engineering.
Preferable Qualifications (a) Should have practical experience of at least two years in a workshop or manufacturing concern or Government undertaking in manufacturing process.
It is apparent from the reading of Rule 7 of the Rules and Appendix 'B' thereto that academic qualification for the post of Inspector of Factories were enlarged so as to include the Degrees in Chemical Engineering and Civil Engineering.
These rules were once again amended by Punjab Labour (Class II) Service (1st Amendment) Rules, 1982 (hereinafter called the amended 1982 Rules) by virtue of which two ex-cadre posts created on 12th February, 1970, on which date respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were appointed were also included in the cadre of Inspector of Factories with effect from the date of their creation.
In December, 1982, a fresh seniority list was circulated and obviously in the said seniority list, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were shown senior to the petitioners.
For the first time, respondent No. 5 was also shown senior to petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 as per said seniority list.
It is in the aforesaid facts and circumstances that the petitioners have challenged the vires of amended 1982 Rules by styling the same to be wholly illegal and against the provisions of Articles 14/16 of the Constitution of India.
The case of the petitioners is that as they have been shown senior to the respondents over a period of 13 years, they could not be made junior to respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5, adversely affecting their service career and that the amended 1982 Rules were framed only with a view of benefit respondents No. 3 and 4.
The exercise of power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India by respondent State is said to be on the face of it arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Articles 14/16 of the Constitution of India.
The next contention of the petitioners is that the rules could not be amended with a view to benefit one or two persons which might adversely affect the rest of the cadre.
Further contention of the petitioners is that rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India can only be made regarding recruitment and conditions of service of civil servants and inasmuch as the amended rules of 1982 neither provide for recruitment nor conditions of service and instead the said rules purported to confer a benefit on respondent Nos. 3 and 4 alone by converting their ex-cadre status into a cadre status with retrospective effect, the same could not be sustained.
Further contention of the petitioners is that the object of these rules is only to by-pass and efface the judgment of this court, reference of which has been given above.
Inasmuch as the 1955 rules were operative from the year 1970 and were repealed in 1982 only, the effect would be that there were no rules in the year 1970 until the 1982 Rules came into being and, therefore, no amendment could be made within the provisions of 1955 Rules as the same had already been repealed is the next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
With regard to respondent No. 5 who is a member of scheduled caste, the case of the petitions, is that he was only entitled to the sixth post.
The first post was given to one GS Saroya who too was a member of the scheduled caste.
Karam Singh, as per instructions Annexure P.7 could only be entitled to the sixth post and by giving him the fifth post he had been made senior to petitioner No. 1.
5.
This petition has been contested by all the respondents.
However, whereas respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed a separate written statement, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have filed another although the pleadings of both set of respondents are the same.
Respondent No. 5 has chosen not to file any separate written statement and has rather felt content to rely upon the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It shall, thus, be sufficient to refer to the pleadings of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 only.
In so far as facts are concerned, it is pleaded by said respondents that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were taken into services as Inspector of Factories (Chemical) and (Civil Engineering) on 3rd June, 1971 and 7th June, 1971, respectively, which is earlier to the appointment of all the petitioners.
In the requisition, on sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission for recruitment of five posts of Inspector of Factories, it was mentioned that one post is reserved for members of the scheduled castes.
Karam Singh, respondent No. 5, who admittedly belongs to scheduled caste was placed at serial No. 5 in the seniority list but the Public Service Commission had specifically directed that the seniority of scheduled caste candidates would be determined in accordance with the instructions issued from time to time and roster maintained by the Government.
The seniority point of respondent No. 5 is pleaded to be correct as the same is in accordance with the instructions of the Government that govern the field.
In so far as respondent Nos. 3 and 4 are concerned, case of the respondents is that they were not recruited particularly for any cadre or ex cadre vacancy but were taken into service on account of creation of two additional posts, i.e. (i) Inspector of Factories in Civil Engineering and (ii) Inspector of Factories in Chemical Engineering vide Punjab Government letter dated 12th February, 1970.
This was necessitated on account of different types of industries being established in the State.
For proper inspection of factories it was felt that Inspectors of Factories with qualification in Chemical and Civil Engineering should be recruited.
It is admitted that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were shown senior in seniority list dated 26th February, 1974 but the reason given is that they had joined the service earlier than all the petitioners.
On the representations made by respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the Government was of the considered view that a great hardship had been caused to them by showing them on ex-cadre posts even though they were also Engineering Graduates, held the same Class II status and enjoyed pay scales as all the petitioners did and also performed the same duties.
Keeping in view the hardship caused to respondent Nos. 3 and 4, 1955 rules were amended vide notification dated 11th September, 1978, and by virtue of the amendments brought about in the aforesaid rules Graduates in all the branches of Engineering were brought at par.
Filing of the earlier writ petition by the petitioners is admitted as also the result thereof.
However, it is mentioned that it was specifically observed in the earlier Judgment that respondents No. 3 and 4 were at a great loss in the matter of seniority, as their future was likely to be ruined on account of technical lacuna in the rules.
Taking clue from the aforesaid observations made in the judgment referred to above on appraisal of fresh representations filed by the said respondents during pendency of the letters patent appeal, the Government decided to consider the cause afresh and after considering the matter amended the rules which have now been challenged by the petitioners.
The action of the Government is defended on the ground that the post held by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in the cadre is in tune with the post held by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in the cadre is in tune with the post held by respondents No. 3 and 4 in the cadre is in tune with the observations made by this court in CWP 5134 of 1978 and the sole object is to remove the hardship and injustice caused to them.
It is denied that the said amendment had been brought about with a view to benefit respondents No. 3 and 4.
On the contrary, the action taken by the Government is stated to be based on equity and observations made by this court.
It is further stated that the amended rules are within the ambit of rules making power of the State Government under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and that the amendment made is not with a view to bypass he judgment of this court and is rather based on removing hardship and injustice.
The contention of the petitioners that there were no rules in force in the year 1970 is denied by the respondents and it is pleaded that the rules of 1955 continued to be in force till 21st January, 1982, when new rules of 1982 were introduced on 22nd January, 1982 Rules.
Rules of 1955 were revealed vide rule 19 of 1982 rules.
Rule 19 which is in the nature of a saving provision, inter alia, provides as follows :-  "The Punjab Labour Service Class I and II Rules, 1955, in so far as these are applicable to the members of the service are hereby repealed : Provided that any order issued or any action taken under the rules so repealed shall be deemed to have been issued or taken under the corresponding provision of those rules."
In so far as, the case of petitioner No. 1 with regard to his seniority over respondent No. 5 is concerned, it is pleaded that the said respondent has been shown senior to petitioner No. 1 on account of reservation policy.
The roster is stated to have been prepared with effect from 1st November, 1966, as it was not legally correct to prepare the same from a date earlier than the date of reorganisation of the State of Punjab.
Sh. GS Saroya, officiating Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories could not be mentioned in the roster as he and other candidates were appointed before 1st November, 1966.
For the reasons aforesaid in the roster maintained from 1st November, 1966, the first reserve point could not be filled by a member of the scheduled caste.
Respondent No. 5, i.e., Karam Singh, Inspector of Factories was given seniority tentatively against the first reserve point in accordance with Punjab Government instructions issued vide letter dated 19th July, 1969 (Annexure R.3).
In so far as the placement of petitioners and respondent No. 5 by Punjab Public Service Commission is concerned, it is pleaded that the Commission while recommending Karam Singh, respondent No. 5, had advised the Government that the seniority of scheduled caste candidates should be fixed according to the roster point reserved for them as per instructions issued by the Punjab Government from time to time.
6.
The first contention of Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that the declaration given in the amended rules of 1989 which says that the posts held by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 shall be deemed to be posts in the cadre of Inspectors as specified in the Appendix from the date of creation of said posts is not a matter that may even remotely relate to recruitment and conditions of service and that being so, the amendment to the effect aforesaid was beyond the purview of Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
For his aforesaid contention, the learned counsel relies upon State of Mysore v. Padmanabhacharya, 1967 SLR 8 SC and RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmaiah and another, 1972 SLR 94 SC.
It is true that a rule cannot be made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India which may have the effect of regularising an irregular appointment.
The proviso to Article 309 of Constitution lays down that it shall be competent for the Governor nor such person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State to make rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act by the appropriate legislature.
The question in the present case, however, is as to whether the amendment impugned in this petition can be said to be made under said rule which has resulted in appointment of certain Government servants and their services are regularised with retrospective effect when they were not eligible to be appointed at all.
In my considered opinion, if the answer to the aforesaid question goes in favour of the petitioners, the resultant effect would be to strike down the amendment brought about in 1982 rules.
The facts in Padmanabhacharya's case (supra) would go to show that a trained teacher who was also headmaster of a Government school was superannuated on the completion of 55 years of age.
He filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Mysore and the main contention raised by him was that Rule 294 (a) of the Mysore Service Regulations which prescribed the age of retirement of Government servants, had been amended with respect to trained teachers from April 29, 1955 and in the case of such teachers the normal age of superannuation was fixed at 58 years instead of 55 years and, therefore, the said trained teacher could not be retired at that age as it was against the Rule applicable to trained teachers.
The second question raised in the aforesaid case was with regard to legality of notification dated 25.3.1959 vide which a declaration was issued which reads as under :-  "Notwithstanding anything contained in Note 4 to Article 294 of the Mysore Service Regulation.
(Eighth Edition), Government Servants who have been retired from service on the attainment of the age of fifty-five, during the period between 7th day of June, 1957 and the 28th day of October, 1958 shall be deemed to have been validly retired from service on superannuation."
After discussing the Rule that governed the field, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India returned a firm finding that the retirement of Headmaster was against the Rules and in that light while considering the amendment by virtue of notification which has been re-produced above, it was observed that the rules relating to recruitment and conditions of service contemplated by the proviso to Article 309 was general in operation, though they may be applied to a particular class of Government servants.
But what this notification or rule does is to select certain Government servants who had been illegally required to retire and to say that even if the retirement had been illegal, that retirement should be deemed to have been properly and lawfully made.
Such a declaration vide notification which has been re-produced above could not be regarded as a rule made under the proviso to Article 309 inasmuch as it did not govern either the conditions of service or recruitment to a particular post.
In so far as RN Nanjundappa's case is concerned, again the facts of the said case would manifest that the petitioner had challenged the Mysore Education Department Service Rules published in the notification on 911967 and the rule that was specifically challenged to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India reads as follows :-  "Notwithstanding any rule made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, or any other Rules or Order in force at any time, Dr. T Thimmiah, BSc (Hons.)
PhD (Lond.)
F.G.S.
shall be deemed to have been regularly appointed as Principal, School of Mines, Oorgaum, Kolar Gold Fields, with effect from 1521958."
After considering the relevant rule that governed the appointment to the post under contention, again a firm finding was recorded that Dr. T Thimmaiah could not be appointed under the service rules.
Dr. T Timmaiah was in Class III service.
He was appointed to Class I and if it was a case of promotion, persons in the same grade and seniority and merit were to be considered.
The petitioner in the said case was senior to Dr. T Thimmaiah.
There were other persons also who were senior to him.
In the aforesaid background and in particular when the appointment of Dr. T Thimmaiah was in infraction of the rules or in violation of the provisions of the Constitution it was observed that illegality cannot be regularised under proviso to Article 109 of the Constitution of India.
As indicated above, it shall have to be fond out as to whether in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the initial appointment of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 was such that may be styled as illegal since inception.
The facts of the present case as have been fully detailed above and which may be again recapitulated go to show that on the representation of respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the Government looking into the hardships caused to them brought the ex-cadre posts into the cadre and made them permanent on 29121975.
Later on, vide notification dated 1191978, the rules were amended retrospectively with effect from February 12, 1970 so as to make graduates in Civil and Chemical Engineering eligible for appointment as Inspector of Factories.
This action of the respondent-authorities was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 5134 of 1978 and while dealing with the matter, it was observed by this Court that two posts of Inspectors of Factories (Civil Engineering and Chemical Engineering) were created as ex-cadre posts and they were included in the cadre only in the year 1974.
The stand taken by the State that these were initially cadre posts or they were retrospectively included in the cadre was not sustained as no order to that effect had been passed by the Government.
The amendment brought in the Rules whereby civil and Chemical Engineering graduates were made eligible for appointment as Inspector of Factories was also held to have not resulted in including the ex-cadre posts in the cadre posts.
It was further held that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were not members of the service and the ex-cadre posts till October 15, 1974 when the posts held by them were included in the cadre of the said service.
Before concluding the judgment, however, it was mentioned that by treating the two posts held by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as ex-cadre posts, a great hardship and injustice had been caused to them and that even though it was not possible in the proceedings of the said case to give any relief to respondent Nos. 3 and 4, they were advised to approach the Government to relieve them of the hardship by, confirming them from an appropriate date.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were taken into service as Inspector of Factories (Chemical and Civil Engineering) on 361971 and 7.6.1971 respectively.
They were taken into service on account of creation of two additional posts i.e. one Inspector of Factories Civil Engineering and the other Inspector of Factories Chemical Engineering vide Punjab Government letter dated 12.2.1970 and this was done on account of different types of industries coming up in the State.
Even though the posts so created on 12.2.1970 were not in the cadre of service yet by virtue of amendment impugned in the present petition, the same were deemed to be posts in the cadre of Inspectors of Factories as specified in Appendix A to the Rules from the date of creation thereof.
All that has been done by virtue of impugned amendment of 1982 Rules is to include the posts of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in the cadre of Inspectors of Factories from the date when the said posts were created.
Inclusion of certain posts in the cadre of a particular service cannot be said to mean that the initial appointment as such was illegal and irregular.
It is open to the authorities to change the cadres, including the posts of one cadre into another in the exigency of administration.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 also had degrees in Engineering.
They were getting the same pay scales and were admittedly appointed prior to the petitioners.
Inclusion of posts held by respondent No. 3 into cadre from the date when they were appointed was necessitated on account of extreme hardship caused to them.
7.
A Full Bench of this Court in "Gulab Singh Deputy District Attorney and others v. The State of Haryana and others," 1980(2) SLR page 561 on almost similar facts and on similar contentions raised by the petitioners of the said case held that in order to attract such an argument, it must first be factually or legally found the rules 9 and 19 are in essence valedictory and only if it is so, then alone the said contention could arise for consideration, whilst on the other hand if it is to be held that by virtue of the retrospective effect of rule 19, the promotion orders are in consonancer therewith, then it would be evident that these would be ipso facto valid and no question of validating or sanctifying them would arise.
The first and the primary question therefore, is whether in view of the accepted retrospectively of rule impugned in the present petition, the promotion orders of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 are to be deemed to be valid when passed.
After going through the amendment brought about in proviso to rule 3 of 1982 Rules, the answer to the question appears to me as plain and wholly in favour of the stand taken by the respondent-State.
The clause in question i.e. proviso to Rule 3 of 1982 Rules has been given effect retrospectively and it is evident that the said proviso is deemed to have been on the statute book with effect from 12th of February 1970 when respondent Nos. 3 and 4 came to occupy their respective posts.
The facts in Gulab Singh's case (supra) require to be briefly mentioned.
The petitioners of the said case had challenged Rules 9 and 19 of the Haryana State Prosecution Legal Service (Group A) Rules, 1979 on the anvil of Articles 14 and 16 and Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners of the said case were appointed as Assistant District Attorneys in December, 1972 which posts were designated as Deputy District Attorneys in May, 1976 and they claimed to have completed the period of probation successfully on different dates and also to have crossed the departmental efficiency bars.
At the time of their appointments, the conditions of service of District Attorneys and Assistant District Attorneys were governed by the Punjab District Attorneys Service Rules, 1960 and thereunder Rule 9 prescribed the qualifications etc. for recruitment to the service while Rule 12 laid down the method of determination of inter se seniority.
It was the petitioners stand that at the material time, there was a separate cadre consisting of Prosecuting Deputy Superintendents of Police, Prosecuting Inspectors and Prosecuting Sub-Inspectors and the persons recruited to this cadre were members of the Police Department and consequently governed entirely by the Punjab Police Rules.
The post of Assistant District Attorney carried much higher scale of pay than the Prosecuting Inspector and further had gazetted status whilst that of the Prosecuting Inspector was a non-gazetted post.
The petitioners challenged the promotion of respondent Nos. 3 to 7 of the said case as District Attorneys and it was pleaded that the aforesaid respondents were originally recruited as Prosecuting Sub-Inspectors and were much later promoted as Prosecuting Inspectors.
Whilst they were working in the latter posts, the Government in the year 1974 decided to abolish the cadre of Prosecuting Inspectors and to appoint them as Assistant District Attorneys.
In order to maintain the distinction between the two cadres, the Prosecuting Inspectors, on their appointment to the cadre of Assistant District Attorneys were designated as Additional Public Prosecutors, though the pay scale given to them was made identical with that to which the petitioners were entitled.
It was also specifically provided that the aforesaid respondents and others would be governed by the provisions of Punjab District Attorneys Service Rules, 1960.
In pursuance of this decision, identical letters of appointment were issued to the various Prosecuting Inspectors as also the Prosecuting Deputy Superintendents of Police.
In pursuance thereto, the aforesaid respondents joined as Assistant District Attorneys on or about April 1, 1974.
The claim of the petitioners was that inasmuch as respondent Nos. 3 to 7 joined the cadre of Assistant District Attorneys in April, 1974, they inevitably ranked junior to the petitioners as also other persons who had been appointed as such much prior to the aforesaid date in view of the governing provision of Rule 12 of the Punjab District Attorneys Service Rules, 1960.
Therefore, in the gradation list issued by the department, the names of five respondents found mention after those of the petitioners and in a separate category.
It was also highlighted that 1960 Rules did not provide for any post of Additional Public Prosecutors but as the pay scales and other conditions of service were identical, they were deemed to have been appointed to the cadre of Assistant District Attorneys.
It was also the stand of the petitioners that in any event, the five respondents were either ranked junior to the petitioners or were ineligible for promotion to the post of District Attorneys under the existing Rules (Emphasis supplied).
Reliance was placed on Rule 5 of the Punjab District Attorneys Service Rules, 1960 which inter alia laid down the method of recruitment in the case of District Attorneys.
The petitioners, therefore, made out in the aforesaid case that the respondents were promoted as District Attorneys in flagrant violation of the Rules.
During the pendency of the petition, the State of Haryana promulgated the Haryana State Prosecution Legal Service (Group-A) Rules, 1979 whereby the earlier 1960 Rules were repealed and in Rule 9 thereof, a specific provision was made to the effect that the recruitment to the service shall be made by promotion from amongst the Deputy District Attorneys and Additional Public Prosecutors in accordance with the slab mentioned in Appendix 'C' to the 1979 Rules.
A proviso was added to sub-rule (2) of Rule 9 and Rule 11 for the determination of seniority and lastly in order to validate some of the promotions, a special provision was made in Rule 19 to the effect that notwithstanding any other provisions, the Additional Public Prosecutors shall be eligible for appointment by promotion to the posts of district Attorneys immediately before coming into force of the 1979 Rules.
Rule 19 was in terms given retrospectivity and was deemed to have come into force on April 1, 1974.
In assailing the constitutionality of Rules 9 and 19, the main contention of petitioners was rested on Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
It was submitted that Rules 9 and 19 were intended to validate the promotion orders Annexures P4 to P6 which at the time of their passing were in patent contravention of the 1960 Rules and this, according to the learned counsel was an unauthorised and unwarranted exercise of power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
It was further contended that the validation of what was irregular or contrary to the existing law is within the scope of the legislature itself which has plenary powers but no rule framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India can do so and sanctify or make valid what at the material time was not legal.
It is significant to mention here that the petitioners of the said case placed reliance on State of Mysore v. Padmanabhacharya and others, 1967 SLR 8 SC and RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmaian and another, 1972 SLR 94 SC on which judgments as well, the learned counsel for the petitioners relied to canvass the case of the petitioners of this case.
The Full Bench dismissed the petition and rejected the point canvassed as has been full detailed above after relying upon decision of Supreme Court in Raj Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1975(1) SLR 774 SC and in particular the following passage from the aforesaid judgment :  "Once a law is given retrospective effect as from a particular date all actions taken under the Act even before the amendment was made would be deemed to have been taken under the Act as amended and there could be really no question of having to validate any action already taken provided it is subsequent to the date from which the amendment is given retrospective effect.
The question of the particular form of the validation would always depend on the circumstances of a case and no general formula can be devised for all circumstances.
It is enough to say that in the present case the action taken against the appellant was on a date subsequent to the date on which the amended rule takes effect and therefore that action being in accordance with the amended rule is legally a valid action and there is no need to have a validating provision in respect thereof".
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that the impugned amendment tantamounts to a declaration which has resulted into regularising an irregular appointment not touching the recruitment and conditions of service as envisaged under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India has, thus, no substance and, therefore, has to be rejected.
8.
The next contention of Mr. Patwalia that the impugned amendment is arbitrary and, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India has also no substance.
The arbitrariness is sought to be made from the fact that the amendment was brought about only to favour respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
As already mentioned in the earlier part of judgment, Supreme Court in RN Nanjundappa's case (supra) has clearly opined that rules relating to recruitment and conditions of service contemplated by the proviso to Article 309 are general in operation though they may be applied to a particular class of Government servants.
The records of the case would manifest unmistakably that proviso to Article 309 has been added simply with a view to ameliorate the lot of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 who had come into service prior to the petitioners and were yet shown as juniors to them.
The respondents-authorities moved though on the representation of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 but the same was in tune with inter parties, judgment reference of which has been given above.
9.
The third submission of Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners is that inasmuch as 1955 Rules were repealed in 1982 such a declaration could not be given or the same could be valid only from 15.1.1982 has also no force.
It is clearly made out that 1955 Rules continued to be in force till 15.1.1982 when new Rules were introduced on 22.1.1982 Rules of 1955 were repeated by 1982 Rules.
Rule 19 which was in the nature of saving provision clearly depicts that the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955, in so far as these are applicable to the members of the Service were repealed.
The proviso further states that any order issued or any action taken under the rules so repealed shall be deemed, to have been issued or taken under the corresponding provisions of those rules.
10.
Coming to the last limb of arguments of Mr. Patwalia with regard to seniority of the petitioners over and above Karam Singh respondent No. 5 who belongs to a reserve category, it shall be noticed that whereas Public Service Commission had placed petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 at Serial Nos. 2 and 4, respondent No. 5 was shown at Serial No. 5.
In the seniority list issued on 24121982, respondent No. 5 was shown above petitioner Nos. 1 and 2.
As per case of the petitioners, respondent No. 5 being a member of scheduled caste is entitled to the sixth post.
The first post was given to Shri GS Soraya who was also member of scheduled caste.
If the first reserve post as per roster is given to Shri GS Soraya, the sixth post as per instructions dated 24.3.1964 alone can go to respondent No. 5.
He has, however, been assigned the 5th post and it is for this reason that he has been made senior to petitioner No. 1.
As mentioned above, the reply of the respondents is that by giving effect to the reservation policy, roster was prepared with effect from November 1, 1966 as it could not be prepared earlier to the date of reorganisation of the State of Punjab i.e. November 1, 1966.
Shri GS Soraya, Officiating Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories could not be mentioned in the roster as he and other candidates were appointed before November 1, 1966.
Therefore, in the roster maintained from November 1, 1966, the first reserve point could not be filled by a scheduled caste candidate and Karam Singh respondent No. 5 was given seniority tentatively against the first reserve point in accordance with Punjab Government instructions issued on July 19, 1969.
It is further pleaded by the respondent that the Punjab Public Service Commission while recommending the name of Sardar Karam Singh alongwith other four candidates had advised tee Government that seniority of scheduled caste candidates should be fixed according to the point reserved for the scheduled caste candidates according to the instructions issued by the Punjab Government from time to time.
Instructions Annexure R3 would go to show that 20% vacancies are reserved for scheduled castes and 2% for backward classes and as per circular letter dated March 24, 1964 position Nos. 1, 6,11,16 and so on are reserved for these categories on the prescribed roster.
It is an admitted position that in the seniority list that was prepared as Annexure R2 Shri GS Soraya has been shown at Serial No. 1 whereas Karam Singh has been shown at Serial No. 5.
In the year 1974, Shri GS Soraya as per Annexure R2 was only officiating as Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories whereas his post was that of Inspector of Factories only.
Annexure R2, therefore, is in sharp contrast to the stand taken by the respondent authorities.
In case Shri GS Soraya was not to be shown in the seniority list for the reason that his appointment was prior to the re-organisation of States then in the joint seniority list as reflected in Annexure R2, there was no question to show him at Serial No. 1 and it is Karam Singh who should have been shown at Serial No. 1.
That apart, the respondents have not been able to convince me as to why it was necessary to show Karam Singh at Serial No. 1 simply because the appointment of Shri GS Soraya was prior to the re-organisation of States.
Admittedly, after re-organisation, GS Soraya was allocated to the State of Punjab and in the joint seniority list that had to be prepared, whereas the persons appointed after him were also to be mentioned, it is GS Soraya alone who should have been given first reserve point thus giving the second reserve point to other persons of that category at No. 6.
There are no basis pressed into service at the time of arguments which may show any justification whatsoever for excluding scheduled castes/scheduled tribe persons for the purpose of working out the roster if they were appointed prior to reorganisation and that being so, respondent No. 5 had to be given sixth reserve point.
Admittedly the Public Service Commission while recommending had shown him below petitioner Nos. 1 and 2.
That being so, respondent No. 5 cannot claim seniority over and above petitioner No. 1.
If he goes to sixth point obviously Shri SC Awasthy would come at Serial No. 5.
11.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the writ meets with partial success.
Whereas proviso to Rule 3 of 1982 rules is held to be intra-vires, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 are held to have been rightly assigned seniority over and above the petitioners and on that count, the petition is dismissed, on the other hand, however, the petition succeeds and petitioner No, I is held senior to respondent No. 5.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.