Kamlesh Sharma, J. (Oral) - This is a Regular Second Appeal at the instance of Union of India challenging the decree and judgment dated 1681980 of Addl.
District Judge, Mandi, whereby the decree and judgment dated 1111979 of Sub Judge, Sundernagar, was confirmed and the suit of the respondents-plaintiffs, Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh, was decreed.
2.
S/Shri Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh had filed a suit for declaration that their termination from the service of Beas-Satluj Link Project, Sundernagar, by the appellants-defendants vide order dated 24111976 passed by the Superintending Engineer, Beas-Satluj Link Construction Circle No. 2, Sundernagar, was bad and they continued to be in service and entitled to all consequential benefits thereof.
They were working as Drivers in the Beas-Satluj Link Project, Sundernagar.
In a case under Section 379 IPC (FIR No. 137 of 1975) they were convicted for the commission of theft of diesel oil from vehicle No. RL-165 by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mandi but were released on probation of good conduct for one year under section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act.
The case of S/Shri Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh was that their termination order was passed on conviction alone and the disciplinary authority had not applied its mind to the effect of their release on probation and also to the quantum of punishment to be imposed keeping in view the gravity of their mis-conduct.
The Union of India and others resisted the suit and took a number of preliminary objections.
One of the preliminary objections was that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
On merits, it was alleged that the impugned termination order was passed in accordance with law.
3.
The trial court decreed the suit for declaration and quashed the impugned termination order.
S/Sh.
Randhir Single and Kuldip Singh were declared to be in continuous service of Beas Satluj Link Project and entitled to their pay and allowance etc.
In appeal, the District Judge affirmed the decree.
Before the District Judge, findings of the trial court on Issue No. 5 alone were challenged and the findings on other issues were not disputed as mentioned in Para 5 of his judgment.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
One of the points raised by Sh. RL Sood, learned counsel for Union of India and others, is that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the present suit.
He submits that though this point was not urged by the counsel who appeared for the Union of India and others before the District Judge, yet, it being the point of jurisdiction, this Court is competent to go into it and examine the matter in view of the latest judgment of the Supreme Court in Jitendra Nath Biswas v. M/s Empire of India and Ceylone Tea Co and another, AIR 1990 SC 255.
On the other hand, Sh. DD Sood, learned counsel for Sh. Randhir Singh urged that the employment of respondents was not purely contractual but was also statutory.
They could file civil suit challenging their termination order alleging violation of Standing Orders and also Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and ask for decree of reinstatement as well as backwages.
He has tried to distinguish the judgment of Jitendra Nath Biswas (supra) on facts.
5.
In the above matter before the Supreme Court, the appellant was an employee of M/s Empire of India and Ceylone Tea Co and his service conditions were governed by contract and Standing Orders framed under Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act.
After taking into consideration Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court held :-  "It is clear that wherever the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is expressly or impliedly barred, the Civil Court will have no jurisdiction.
It could not be disputed that a contract of employment for personal service could not be specifically enforced and it is also clear that except the industrial law, under the law of contract and the civil law, an employee whose services are terminated could not seek the relief of reinstatement or back wages.
At best he could seek the relief of damages for breach of contract.
The manner in which the relief has been framed by the appellant-plaintiff in this case, although he seeks a declaration and injunction but in substance it is nothing but the relief of reinstatement and back wages.
The relief which could only be available to a workman under the Industrial Disputes Act."
Thereafter the learned Judges of the Supreme Court considered various provisions of Industrial Disputes Act and held :-  "It is therefore clear that this Act, i.e. Industrial Disputes Act not only confers the right on a worker for reinstatement and back wages if the order of termination or dismissal is not in accordance with the Standing Orders but also provides a detailed procedure and machinery for getting this relief.
Under these circumstances therefore there is an apparent implied exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court............." It is therefore clear that the scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act clearly excludes the jurisdiction of the civil Court by implication in respect of remedies which are available under this Act and for which a complete procedure and machinery has been provided in this Act."
6.
So far as the respondents-plaintiffs, S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh are concerned, they were employees of Beas Satluj Link Project, Sundernagar.
In Jaswant Singh and others v. Union of India and others, 1979(2) SLR 375 (SC), the employees of Beas Satluj Link Project, Sundernagar, were held to be employees of Central Government and it was observed that their conditions of service were primarily governed by the terms of their employment.
As such, S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh were also Central Government employees and their conditions of service were governed by the terms of their appointment besides certified Standing Orders.
It is not in dispute that S/Shri Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh were workmen as well as workcharged employees and were covered under the Industrial Law.
7.
They are entitled to protection under Articles 14, 16 and 311 of the Constitution.
Therefore the above referred case of Jitendra Nath Biswas (supra) is not applicable to present case in its full vigour.
Moreover, it is not fair and just to dismiss this case on the ground of jurisdiction and relegate the plaintiffs, who were terminated as far back as on 24111976, to the forum provided under the industrial law.
8.
The next point raised by Sh. RL Sood is that the termination order of S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh was in accordance with Standing Orders and there is no infirmity in them.
According to him, conviction by criminal court is by itself misconduct which entails dismissal/discharge without any notice.
The services of S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh were terminated under clause 16(b)(v) of the Standing Order.
Under Clause 17(b) of the Standing Orders, act of omission constituting mis-conduct have been enumerated.
Conviction in any court of law for any Criminal offence involving moral turpitude constitutes misconduct under sub-clause (xv) of Clause 17(b) of the Standing Orders.
It is further provided under clause 17(c) of the Standing Orders that an employee shall be liable to be dismissed/discharged if he has been found guilty of gross-misconduct, without notice or pay in lieu thereof and he will be disqualified for future employment on this project or any other Government Project.
9.
There is no dispute that S/Sh.
Randhir and Kuldip Singh were convicted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mandi for the commission of theft of diesel oil which involved moral turpitude and they were guilty of gross misconduct and could be dismissed under Standing Order 16(b)(v) without any notice to them.
In view of this Standing Order, there is no force in the contention of Sh. DD Sood, learned counsel for Sh. Randhir Singh that the disciplinary authority was required to apply its mind independently to the quantum of punishment to be imposed upon them.
When law is clear and it takes away the opportunity of notice or hearing, it cannot be said that principles of natural justice are applied and the employee is entitled to hearing.
10.
Sh. RL Sood, learned counsel for the appellants, has further pointed out that the disciplinary authority was not required to consider the effect to release of S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh on probation as it did not absolve them of their conviction.
He has placed reliance on Union of India and others v. Bakshi Ram, 1990(3) RCR(Crl.)
133 (S)C : 1990(2) SLR 65 (SC), wherein effect of release on probation was considered and it was held that :-  "Section 12 is thus clear and it only directs that the offender "shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attaching to a conviction for an offence under such law".
Such law in the context is other law providing for disqualification on account of conviction.
For instance, if a law provides for disqualification of person for being appointed in any office or for seeking election to any authority or body in view of his conviction, that disqualification by virtue of Section 12 stands removed.
That in effect is the scope and effect of Section 12 of the Act.
But that is not the same thing to state that the person who has been dismissed from service in view of his conviction is entitled to reinstatement upon getting the benefit of probation of good conduct.
Apparently, such a view has no support by the terms of Section 12 and the order of the High Court cannot, therefore, be sustained.
In view of the settled legal position, I find no force in the contention raised on behalf of Sh. Randhir Singh that the disciplinary authority was required to apply its mind to the effect of release of S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh on probation.
I hold that the disciplinary authority was right in straightaway dismissing them for the misconduct of their conviction by a criminal court as the stigma of conviction did not obliterate on account of their release on probation.
11.
Another point raised by Sh. DD Sood, learned counsel for Sh. Randhir Singh is that besides the Standing Orders, the terms and conditions of these employees were governed by Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
He placed reliance upon Union of India and another v. Tulsi Ram Patel, (1955)3 Supreme Court Cases 398 to urge that dismissal was not automatic after conviction and the disciplinary authority was required to consider whether it involved misconduct and what punishment would be proportionate to its gravity.
In Tulsi Ram's case (supra), the Court has observed :-  "Not much remains to be said about clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2).
To recapitulate briefly, where a disciplinary authority comes to know that a government servant has been convicted on a criminal charge it must consider whether his conduct which has led to his conviction was such as warrants the imposition of a penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be.
For that purpose it will have to peruse the judgment of the criminal court and consider all the facts and circumstances of the case and the various factors set out in Challappan case.
This, however, has to be done by it ex parte and by itself.
Once the disciplinary authority reached the conclusion that the government servant's conduct was such as to require his dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank he must decide which of these three penalties should be imposed on him.
This too it has to do by itself and without hearing the concerned governed servant by reason of the exclusionary effect of the second proviso.
The disciplinary authority must, however, bear in mind that a conviction on a criminal charge does not automatically entail dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of the concerned government servant.
Having decided which of these three penalties is required to be imposed, he has to pass the requisite order.
A government servant who is aggrieved by the penalty imposed can agitate in appeal, revision or review, as the case may be, that the penalty was too severe or excessive and not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
If it his case that he is not the government servant who has been in fact convicted, he can also agitate this question in appeal, revision or review.
If he fails in the departmental remedies and still wants to pursue the matter, he can invoke the court's power of judicial review subject to the court permitting it.
If the court finds that he was not in fact the person convicted, it will strike down the impugned order and order him to be reinstated in service.
Where the court finds that the penalty imposed by the impugned order is arbitrary or grossly excessive or out of all proportion to the offence committed or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case or the requirements of that particular government service the court will also strike down the impugned order.
Thus, in Shankar Dass v. Union of India this Court set aside the impugned order of penalty on the ground that the penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon the appellant was whimsical and ordered his reinstatement in service with full back wages.
It is, however, not necessary that the court should always order reinstatement.
The court can instead substitute a penalty which in its opinion would be just and proper in the circumstances of the case."
From the above observations of the Supreme Court, in the case of Tulsi Ram (supra), it is clear that penalty of dismissal could be imposed by the disciplinary authority without hearing the employee.
No doubt, judicial review against the order passed by the disciplinary authority is available but its scope is very much limited.
Since in the present case, it is provided in the Standing Orders that conviction involving moral turpitude is a mis-conduct for which dismissal/discharge is the penalty, there was no scope for the disciplinary authority to apply its mind independently to the quantum of penalty.
12.
In view of this, the appeal is allowed and the decree and judgment dated 1681980 of District Judge is set aside and the suit of S/Sh.
Randhir Singh and Kuldip Singh is dismissed.
In view of the peculiar circumstances of the case.
There is no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.