TN Singh, J - Plaintiff is the appellant whose suit has been dismissed as not maintainable.
2.
On 1971983, the suit was instituted praying, among others, for a declaration that plaintiff was only competent to hold the post of Deputy Registrar on and from 20.7.70 in Jiwaji University, Gwalior (respondent/defendant No. 1) and he was entitled to salary and other pecuniary benefits attached to that post from the said date from the defendant/respondent.
True, declaration was also prayed to void the appointment of defendant/respondent No. 2 as Deputy Registrar (Development) on and from 20.7.70 and to hold him liable to restore to defendant/respondent No. 1 all benefits that he had derived from that appointment.
In the written statement jointly filed by the two defendants/respondents not only the bar of limitation was pleaded, it was expressly pleaded that in view of the provisions of Sections 55 and 59 of the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyala Adhiniyam, 1973, for short, the 'Adhiniyam', Civil Court's jurisdiction to determine the "dispute" being barred, the suit was not maintainable.
On merits too, claim of plaintiff/appellant was rebuffed and his contention also repelled on facts that appointment of defendant/respondent No. 2 was invalid.
3.
Although a large number of issues were struck, as many as thirteen, by the impugned order, passed on 25886, decision was rendered on issue No. 12 only, holding the suit to be barred by Section 59 of the Adhiniyam which has given rise to this appeal.
It is necessary accordingly to extract in extent Section 59.
"59.
(1) Every salaried officer and teacher of the University paid by the University other than the Kulapati, the Registrar and other persons where services are secured on deputation, shall be appointed under a written contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy thereof furnished to the office of teacher concerned : Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in respect of persons whose services are secured on deputation or who are appointed in the Service created under sub-section (1) of Section 15-C  (2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any of its officers or teachers shall, at the request of the officer or teacher concerned or at the instance of the University, be referred by the Kuladhipati to a tribunal or arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the officer or teacher concerned and an umpire appointed by the Kuladhipati and the decision of the tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any Court of law in respect of any matter which is required by sub-section (2) to be referred to the tribunal."
4.
Appellant's counsel Shri Ramji Sharma, has pressed two contentions for any consideration in assailing the impugned order.
His first submission is that the Adhiniyam being enacted in 1973, the bar contemplated under Section 59 can have no effect on the cause of action that had arisen in 1970.
Secondly, counsel contended, one of the reliefs prayed in the suit could not be deemed barred and as such, the suit could not be dismissed in toto.
Shri Sharma urged that the declaration concerning validity of appointment of defendant/respondent No. 2 was beyond the purview of Section 59 and, therefore, the suit in that regard was not barred.
In support of that submission, he relied on the expression "at the request of the officer or teacher concerned", used in Section 59(2) and contended that defendant/respondent No. 2 only would come within the mischief of the provision contemplated under Section 59(2) which would not hit the plaintiff.
5.
In so far as the first contention is concerned, that has a short answer.
It is trite law, indeed embodied in sub-rule (2) of Rule 2 of Order 14, C.P.C., that question of jurisdiction of the Court, when raised in pleadings, is required to be decided by the Court and for that, as expressly contemplated under clause (b) thereof, "a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in force", has to be kept in view.
Evidently, the trial Court is required to refer to the law which is in force on the date when the suit was instituted, so the scope and ambit of the "bar" created by such a law, is to be determined with reference to the statutory provision.
Merely because the cause of action had arisen prior to the enactment of the law, trial Court's jurisdiction to determine the issue of maintainability of the suit is not ousted.
The jurisdiction of the Court to try the suit relates back only to date of institution of the suit and not beyond that.
Unless the "law" in question expressly contemplates provision to the contrary, the jurisdiction to try the suit is usually referable to the jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
The issue of trial Court's incompetence is to be correlated to the jurisdiction of the Court "to try all suits of civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred" as contemplated under Section 9, C.P.C.  6.
Legislature's constituent power to enact special Acts to deal with special subject matters and to provide a alternative forum for resolution of any dispute of a civil nature cannot be disputed.
In such cases, Civil Courts will have jurisdiction to examine the provision of special law to assess the scope of the subject-matter of the suit.
Such jurisdiction to undertake that enquiry cannot be related to the date on which cause of action for the suit is said to have arisen.
If enquiry into the subject-matter of the suit is entrusted by the special Act to a special forum, it shall be within the jurisdiction of that forum to determine if in relation to the cause of action agitated any relief can be granted by that forum.
In so far as the Civil Court is concerned, it is required to examine the purpose and scheme of the special Act and the scope of enquiry entrusted to the special forum.
See, in this connection, Secretary of State v. Mask, AIR 1940 PC 105; also Desika Charyulu v. State, AIR 1964 SC 807; Subbayya v. State, ibid 322; and Katikara v. Gyuatreddi, AIR 1974 SC 1069.
Indeed, by now it is well settled that having regard to the nature of dispute, if it is not cognizable by the Court in which it is instituted, either the suit has to be dismissed in its entirety or the plaint has to be returned to the plaintiff to agitate his claim at the forum having jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the suit.
See, in this connection, Topandas v. Gorakhram, AIR 1964 SC 1348 and Athmanathaswami v. K Gopalaswami, AIR 1965 SC 338.
7.
The ouster clause contemplated under Section 59(3) admits of no ambiguity and leaves no room for the contention of Shri Sharma being entertained.
It is expressly contemplated that "no suit or proceedings shall lie" in regard to "any matter" which is to be dealt with by the forum envisaged under sub-section (2).
The words, "shall" of sub-section (2) and "required" of sub-section (3), indicate the mandatory nature of the requirement contemplated under Section 59 for any "disputes" of the specified class to be dealt with not by Civil Court, but by a "tribunal" or through "arbitration".
True, sub-section (2) contemplates "dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any of its officers or teachers" and in the instant case, appointment of plaintiff as also of respondent No. 2 as per plaint averment itself came to be made under Resolution passed by the Executive Council of the University.
Indeed, it is the validity of the Resolution dated 2071990 of the Executive Council which the plaintiff has challenged in the suit.
It is equally true that the class of those "disputes" contemplated under sub-section (2) is referable to sub-section (1) which uses the words "written contract" as against the word "contract" used in sub-section (2).
8.
But, as appears from sub-section (1), through appointments under "written contract" are contemplated thereunder the provision does not affect appointments made otherwise, prior to the enactment of the Adhiniyam.
Advisedly, therefore, in sub-section (2), the word "written" is not used in order to include such cases of contract of employment of teachers and officers of the University made in the form and manner prescribed in sub-section (1) along with cases of employment made before the enactment of the Adhiniyam with the object of providing a single forum for resolution of all disputes of all classes of cases of such employment.
Indeed, the legislative intent in that regard is made clear by Section 2(v) of the Adhiniyam, which provides that "all appointments made" under repealed enactment, (namely, under Jiwaji University Act, 1963) are to be "deemed" as made under the Adhiniyam.
Therefore, it is difficult to accept the contention that the "dispute" which the plaintiff/appellant has raised in the suit instituted in regard to appointment of respondent No. 2 under Executive Council's resolution dated 2071970 is outside the scope of Section 59 of the Adhiniyam.
Section 2(v) is as much a part of the Adhiniyam as is Section 59.
It is question only of the identity of the "dispute" and about that suffice it to say this much that "any matter concerning any "appointment" of the specified class of employees would be a "dispute' which has to be decided in the manner contemplated under Section 59(2) and Civil Court's jurisdiction to decide that is barred under sub-section (3) thereof.
9.
In regard to Shri Sharma's second contention, that deserves to be summarily rejected because the language used in Sec. 59(2) admits no scope for that.
It cannot be contended in any manner that the plaintiff is not aggrieved by the appointment of respondent No. 2, made under the resolution aforesaid.
As pointed out earlier, it is his own case that not only he is entitled to be declared as the only competent person to hold the post of Deputy Registrar on 2071970 and to the emoluments and pecuniary benefits appurtenant thereto, he pleaded further that respondent No. 1 was not competent and was not qualified for that post.
Indeed, the two reliefs prayed by him are complementary and the plaintiff could have requested Kuladhipati to refer the "dispute" in respect of the twin reliefs claimed by him, to the tribunal, or for arbitration, for resolution of the dispute in the manner contemplated under Section 59 (2).
He could "request" not only for "dispute" concerning his non-appointment, but also about appointment of respondent No. 2 by which he was aggrieved.
By no stretch of imagination, the scope of Section 59 limited to any particular type of relief which the aggrieved can pray in the lis to be litigated at the "tribunal" or through "arbitration".
Be it noted in this connection, that in some cases the University itself may be the aggrieved person as reference by the Kuladhipati "at the instance of University" is also contemplated.
10.
However, decisions cited by Shri Sharma are to be referred to though I have found nothing therein as would support the contentions pressed.
Ganga Bai, AIR 1974 SC 1126 speaks of distinction between right of suit and right of appeal.
It is observed by their Lordships that any suit for its maintainability requires no authority of law and it is enough that no statute bars the suit.
In the instant case, as pointed out, specified bar under Section 59(2) of the Adhiniyam is contemplated which has made plaintiffs suit non-maintainable.
Anne Besant National Girls High School's case, AIR 1983 SC 526 concerns the scope of Section 9, CPC Their Lordships were not required to consider the question of any statutory bar in that case at para 5 of the Report, their Lordships held that it was competent for the Civil Court to decide validity of an order passed under the provisions of the Grant-in-Aid Code and indeed, that view was taken for the simple reason that no statutory bar in that regard was contemplated under the said Code.
Reliance even on Rai Kumar Bhargava, AIR 1988 SC 752 does not advance plaintiff's appellant's case any further.
The question agitated and decided therein was one of "implied bar" and not of an "express bar" as contemplated in the instant case, under Section 59 of the Adhiniyam.
11.
For all the aforesaid reasons, both contentions, urged by Shri Ramji Sharma fail and, accordingly, I find no scope for any interference with the impugned order as by the Court below.
The appeal fails and dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.