Mahinder Narain, J - By this writ petition Ms. Sushma Chawla, petitioner, seeks quashing of the order No. HPDO1/F-1201, dated 241991, passed by the respondent Indian Airlines, ignoring the claim of the petitioner to be appointed as Deputy Director, Finance, and promoting respondent No. 4 Shri NC Ghosh, and respondent No. 5 Shri V Kashyap as Deputy Director Finance.
2.
The petitioner states that she is an employee of the Indian Airlines, respondent No. 1, since the year 1971, having joined the service as Assistant Accounts/Audit Officer.
She earned a number of regular promotions, and became Assistant Finance Manager in 1979, and in July, 1988 became the Finance Manager in the scale of Rs. 2295-120-4355-125-4605.
The petitioner states that at present she is holding this post, and is the only woman executive in that grade.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that for the purpose of recruitment and promotion, respondent No. 1 had issued guidelines dated 6121988.
The said guidelines is appended as annexure "C" to the writ petition, and reads as under :-  INDIAN AIRLINES AIRLINES HOUSE NEW DELHI-11001.
Regional Director, IA : Western/Eastern/ Northern/Southern Region, Bombay/Calcutta/Delhi/Madras.
Director of Training, IA : CTE, Hyderabad.
Station Head IA : Hyderabad.
Secretary, IA : HQrs.
No. HPDO1/X-1100 Dated : 6121988.
Sub :- Guidelines on Recruitment & Promotion  It has been decided that for purposes of Selection/Promotion, last 3 years APAs would be considered as against the existing instructions of 2 years.
Further, it has also been decided that the weightage to be given to APAs in the interview would be 50% against the existing 30%.
The remaining 50% marks will be assigned to interview.
APAs in the new form used for officers including Engineering Executives and Executive Pilots, Engineers and Pilots will be rated as follows :-  i) Each year 'Outstanding' APA - 16 marks ii) Each year 'Good' APA - 10 marks iii) Each year 'Below Average' APA - 0 marks 'Below Average' rating on any factor will be considered as adverse entry.
APA in the form used for employees in erstwhile Grade will be rated as follows :-  i) Each year 'Outstanding' APA - 16 marks  ii) Each year 'Very Good' APA - 12 marks iii) Each year 'Good' APA - 10 marks iv) Each year 'Average' APA - 5 marks v) Each year 'Poor' APA - 0 marks 'Poor' rating on any factor will be considered as adverse entry.
Presently, employees who obtain 80% marks and above in a Selection are termed as 'Outstanding' and are given priority for appointment.
It has, now, been decided that the concept of 'Outstanding' rating in respect of those securing 80% marks and above will be done away with.
In other words employees securing 80% marks and above in a Selection will not be given any priority for appointment over those senior to them securing 60% marks and above.
The above instructions will apply to Selections/Promotions initiated after the date of this Circular.
This supersedes our letter No. HPDO1/X1100 dated 29th December, 1976.
Sd/- (Krishan Dev) Director of Personnel :  4.
The petitioner states that the next-post which was available to her for promotion, was in Grade 18 in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-100-3700 (pre-revised) and for that post the petitioner was asked to appear in interview on 1371990 vide a letter No. HPDO.1/F/120 dated 971990.
A copy of that interview letter is also annexed as annexure "D" to the writ petition.
Before the interview could be held on 1371990, this interview was postponed, and the petitioner was informed that the date of her interview will be intimated to her in due course.
5.
The petitioner asserts that on 381990, she was called for an interview for the post in the Finance Department in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-3700 (pre-revised), and that 8 candidates including the petitioner, appeared in the interview on the date fixed, and the second interview call letter dated 30.7.1990 was also issued to the petitioner.
6.
The petitioner has questioned the formation of the interview board and change in its constitution in this writ petition.
However, we think that it is possible to dispose of the present writ petition on the basis of consideration of the guidelines regarding recruitment and promotion dated 6121988.
7.
It is clear from the perusal of para 1 of the said guidelines that for the purposes of selection/promotion, last 3 years' Annual Performance-Appraisals are required to be considered.
It is the case of the petitioner that despite the requirement of the guidelines that the last 3 years' Annual Performance Appraisals are to be considered, last 3 years' Annual Performance Appraisals were not considered, which has resulted in selection of persons on the basis other than that mentioned in the guidelines.
8.
When the matter had come up before us at show cause stage on 2791991, we had passed the following order :-  The Guidelines on Recruitment & Promotion dated 6121988 have been shown to us, which are annexed as annexure "C" to the writ petition.
According to these Guidelines, last three years Annual Performance Appraisals are to be considered.
According to the counter-affidavit filed, the last two years' Annual Performance Appraisals are not available.
What is stated by Mr. Arun Jaitley is that the respondents have taken into account last three available Annual Performance Appraisals.
The Guidelines do not refer to the available Annual Performance Appraisals.
They require last three years' Annual Performance Appraisals.
In this view of the matter, Mr. Jaitley seeks some time to take instructions from the respondents in the matter, and advise.
He should make statement on the next date of hearing.
Case for 7101991.
9.
Since the point involved is short, on 21101991, we heard the matter with the consent of parties in full, and reserved orders.
10.
When we heard Mr. Arun Jaitley on 21101991, he frankly stated that there were no guidelines other than the one mentioned above, which altered the requirement of last three Annual Performance Appraisals to last available Annual Performance Appraisals.
Mr. Arun Jaitley said that whereas the Annual Performance Appraisals of the year 1987-88 was available for each of the candidates who were interviewed by respondent No. 1, the Annual Performance Appraisals relating to the years 1988-89 and 1989-90 were not available.
He further went on to state that the reason why the same were not available, was that because the Managing Director of respondent No. 1, Mr. R Prasad who was to write the Annual Performance Appraisals of all the candidates in his capacity as a Managing Director of respondent No. 1, had not written these Annual Performance Appraisals for the years 1988-89 and 1989-90.
He further stated that Mr. R Prasad had resigned in February, 1990, and the efforts made by respondent No. 1 to get the Annual Performance Appraisals written after his resignation, did not bear any fruit as he did not agree to, not did he write the Annual Performance Appraisals for the years 1988-89 and 1989-90 for all the candidates who were interviewed.
11.
The main plank of Mr. Arun Jaitley, arguing before us is that the guidelines dated 6121988 are mere guidelines, and do not bind respondent No. 1, and that in any event they do not confer any enforceable right on the petitioner, vis-a-vis the said guidelines, and in this context he referred to and relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as The said judgment of the Supreme Court, however, does not assist Mr. Arun Jaitley, as from reading para 13 thereof, it is clear that the Supreme Court had said that third parties are not entitled to take the benefit of the guidelines, inasmuch as they are of no statutory force.
In the instant case, the petitioner is not a third party.
She is an Officer of respondent No. 1, who was called for an interview, and was to be considered for the purpose of promotion to the post of Deputy Director Finance in accordance with the terms of the said guidelines.
As such, the principle enunciated by the Supreme Court relates, as it does, to third party's rights having the source in the guidelines, has no application to the instant case.
12.
Mr. Arun Jaitley relied upon the judgment reported as AIR 1971 SC 1920 (Kumari Regina v. St Aloysius Higher Elementary School and another).1978 (1) SLR 593 (VE Thomas v. State of Kerala and others), in which Hon'ble Mr. Justice V Khalid of the Kerala High Court (as he then was), considered the matter with reference to what material could be considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee, in the shape of confidential reports.
Justice Khalid was of the view that the guidelines in the matter before him, required consideration of "Confidential Report of Officers for at least 3 previous years ......".
Justice Khalid came to the conclusion that the use of the words "at least 3 previous years" did not preclude the Departmental Promotion Committee from looking into the Confidential Reports of a period in excess of three years.
In our view, this case does not assist Mr. Arun Jaitley also.
The reason is that whereas the guidelines of respondent No. 1 require consideration of last three Annual Performance Appraisals, the guidelines in the matter decided by Justice Khalid required consideration of minimum of at least 3 previous years Confidential Reports.
In the present case, the only material which can be considered, is the last three Annual Performance Appraisals.
The Judgment reported as 1978(1) SLR 593, therefore, does not help Mr. Arun Jaitley.
13.
Mr. Arun Jaitley then referred to the judgment reported as AIR 1967 SC 1264 (IN Saksena v. The State of Madhya Pradesh), in which it was stated that a memorandum of the Government of India raising the age of compulsory retirement to 58 years, not being gazetted, did not confer any rights on the appellant, as the memorandum itself postulated incorporating amendments in Fundamental Rule 56 in due course.
The Court came to the conclusion that the said memorandum was merely an executive instruction, and not a rule within the meaning of Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
This case does not help Mr. Arun Jaitley, inasmuch as in this case the appeal preferred by the appellant against his premature retirement at the age of 55 years, was held to be illegal, and the appellant succeeded for the reason that the Government memorandum was only an executive instruction, and the Courts hold that the appellant was entitled to continue in service till he attained the age of 58 years, and as he had already attained the age of 58 years during the pendency of the appeal, he could not be put back in service.
The Court held that the appellant would be entitled to such benefits as may accrue to him by virtue of the success of the writ petition.
14.
Mr. Arun Jaitley next referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court, reported as JT 1989(2) SC 338 (Narendra Kumar Maheshsari v. Union of India & ors.), which case involved consideration of certain guidelines which have been issued by the Controller of Capital Issues.
The petitioner was relying upon the guidelines, but the Court came to the conclusion that as the guidelines of the Controller of Capital issues were not statutory in character, these guidelines are not enforceable.
The Supreme Court held that the guidelines represented a policy, and, held that a policy is not law.
This case also does not help Mr. Arun Jaitley, inasmuch as respondent No. 1 (??)
has itself chosen to act in accordance with its guidelines, and which guidelines have been published and known to the employees who can have reasonable expectation that these guidelines shall be acted upon.
In the instant case, the other parts of the guidelines regarding interview marks had been acted upon by respondent No. 1, but for the reasons of non-availability of the Annual Performance Appraisals, the provision of looking at the last 3 Annual Performance Appraisals could not be given effect to.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the guidance dated 6121988 are merely for internal guidelines and have no enforceability.
15.
Another judgment which has been referred to by Mr. Arun Jaitley is reported as (1988) 4 SCC 364 (JR Raghupathy & others v. State of AP & others), which is to the effect that this Court ought not to give any direction which has the effect of directing that it is the petitioner who should be promoted and appointed to the post of Deputy Director Finance and that what can be said by the Court is that the selection made is bad.
16.
It was not disputed by Mr. Arun Jaitley that the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 4 and 5, who have been promoted.
It is clear from what his been stated above, that respondent No. 1 has not got the benefit of the Annual Performance Appraisals of the last 3 years at the time when the petitioner and others were interviewed.
17.
The contention of Mr. Arun Jaitley before us is that respondent No. 1 has not acted mala fide, inasmuch as it has treated all the persons who were interviewed, alike by considering the Annual Performance Appraisals, as were available to respondent No. 1 and keeping the same in view the interview board considered the Annual Performance Appraisals of the petitioner for the years 1985-86, 1986-87 and 1997-88.
In other words, what Mr. Arun Jaitley urges is that the last Annual Performance Appraisals must be read as last available Annual Performance Appraisals.
This would mean addition of words "available" to the words which are used in the guidelines dated 6121988.
We do not think that use of the word "available" should be added to the guidelines already issued.
Firstly, for the reason that as contended by counsel for the petitioner, Mr. R Prasad who was the Managing Director of respondent No. 1, and.
who was to write the Annual Performance Appraisals, was available for making the Annual Performance Appraisals for the period 1987-88 and 1988-89, as the Annual Performance Appraisals are to cover the period from April to 31st March next of each year.
It is not disputed that Mr. R Prasad was available for writing up the Annual Performance Appraisals for the period April, 1987 to 31st March, 1988, for writing up the Annual Performance Appraisals for the period April, 1988 to 31st March, 1989.
He chose not to do so.
The fact that he did not do so, cannot be used against the petitioner, and adopt another criteria without laying down guidelines for the respondent itself.
In view of the fact that Mr. R Prasad resigned only in February, 1990, and the Annual Performance Appraisal was to be written for the period upto 31st March, 1990 for a substantial period of time, Mr. R Prasad, had he been so minded as Managing Director of respondent No. 1, could have written up the Annual Performance Appraisals.
He chose not to do so.
He chose not do so, even after the request was made by respondent No. 1 to prepare the Annual Performance Appraisals for the period 1987-88, 1988-89 and 1989-90 even after his resignation.
We are of the view that a guideline which has been issued by respondent No. 1 for the purpose of selection and promotion of its employees to higher post, and to bind till such time as these guidelines are replaced by another set of guidelines.
Another set of guidelines, other than the guidelines of 6th December, 1988, have not been issued.
Till such guideline is issued, it binds respondent No. 1.
18.
Respondent No. 1 has taken into account, as stated by Mr. Arun Jaitley Annual Performance Appraisals for the year 1985-86 and 1986-87.
These Annual Performance Appraisals, according to the petitioner, are still Annual Performance Appraisals, as on the basis of the said Annual Performance Appraisals, benefits have already been given to the employees who were entitled to the benefits upon considering of such Annual Performance Appraisals.
As such, he rightly contends that these Annual Performance Appraisals represent material which has already been acted upon, and in the circumstances of the instant case, have become irrelevant material for the purpose of considering further promotion of the petitioner and the persons like respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
It is further contended that inasmuch as irrelevant material has been taken into account by respondent No. 1 in promoting some of the employees, such promotions have to be struck down.
This proposition of respondent No. 1 is in accord with the judgment of the Supreme Court, reported as AIR 1966 SC 1197 (Shitla Sahai Srivastava v. General Manager, North Eastern Railway, Gorakhpur).
19.
In addition to what is stated above, it would be pertinent to highlight that the last three Annual Performance Appraisals which should have been considered for the purpose of selection to the higher post of Deputy Director Finance under the guidelines framed by the government have not been written due to lapse and fault of respondent No. 1.
The employees cannot be made to suffer on account of lapse/fault of the administrative authorities, as one cannot take advantage of, or rely upon one's own default.
The procedure evolved by respondent No. 1 vide which the last three available Annual Performance Appraisals were considered for the purpose of selection, is, therefore, not only arbitrary but unreasonable and as such selection cannot be upheld.
20.
For the aforesaid reasons, the petitioner is entitled to succeed, and the orders passed by respondent No. 1 on 241991, promoting respondent Nos. 4 and 5 as Deputy Director Finance are set aside.
Civil Writ No. 1227 of 1991 is disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.