VK Jhanji, J - The present writ petition has been directed against the Award dated 191989 published in Punjab Government Gazette on 2.11.1990 (Annexure P-15) passed by the Labour Court, Amritsar.
2.
Petitioner joined service as a cook in Punjab Mental Hospital, Amritsar with effect from 1071978.
He was served with a charge-sheet dated 2161984 which reads as under :-  "You have been absent from duty without any prior intimation on 1541984, 2341984, 2151984 and 1161984 till date.
You are habitual of remaining absent from duty without leave earlier also."
3.
Petitioner was asked to submit his defence indicating whether he accepts truth of the charges and whether he deserves to be heard in person.
However, along with the charges, no list of charges of documents was sent.
One Dr. Ajaib Singh was appointed as Enquiry Officer to go into the aforesaid charges.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report dated 3071984 (Annexure P-5).
In the report, he inter alia held that the petitioner has been guilty of negligence of remaining wilfully absent from duty for the period mentioned above.
He also held that the petitioner also remained absent from duty during the previous years ie 1983, 1982 and 1981.
4.
On receipt of the report, the management called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why his services should not be terminated.
Petitioner, in reply to the show-cause notice, informed the Medical Superintendent who is his appointing and punishing authority that the show-cause notice issued to him is illegal as neither any enquiry was held nor an opportunity of hearing was given to him.
In his reply, he also made a reference to letter dated 26.7.1984 (Annexure P-3) vide which he informed the Medical Superintendent that Dr. Ajaib Singh had called him in his office and made him sign on a writing in Punjabi language.
In that letter, he also stated that the contents of the writing were not read out to him and he was not aware what was written there because he is not conversant with the Punjabi language.
On receipt of his reply, Medical Superintendent, vide letter dated 2381984 Annexure P-8) again called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why his services should not be terminated.
Petitioner was asked to appear in person on 2781984.
Petitioner, in response to this letter, reiterated his position as stated in the letter dated 981984 (Annexure P-7).
5.
The employer accepted the report and dismissed the petitioner from service vide order dated 491984 (Annexure P-10).
6.
Petitioner thereafter raised an industrial dispute contending that he never made any confessional statement and the alleged confessional statement was got signed from him by the Enquiry Officer without even disclosing as to what was contained in the said statement.
He also challenged the validity and legality of the termination of his services.
The respondent filed written statement to the claim made by the petitioner.
In the written statement, it was stated that a fair and proper enquiry was conducted against the petitioner.
His services were terminated only after the Enquiry Officer found him guilty of negligence for remaining absent from duty.
7.
Labour Court, Amritsar, decided the reference against the petitioner after holding that the termination of the petitioner is based on his own admission of absence and it cannot be said that he was not given a fair and adequate opportunity to defend himself.
8.
Petitioner has impugned the Award dated 191989 of the Labour Court in this writ petition questioning the correctness, validity and legality or the Award.
9.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent contended that this court should not interfere in the finding of the Labour Court who after appreciating the entire evidence on record, decided the reference against the petitioner.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the Award of the Labour Court cannot be sustained in law because the same is based on no legal evidence and the findings are based on conjectures and surmises.
The enquiry against the petitioner also suffers from non-application of mind and stands vitiated.
Admittedly, when the petitioner was served with the charge-sheet (Annexure P-1), no list of charges of documents in support thereof was sent to the petitioner.
Enquiry Officer was appointed on 18.7.1984 but no intimation whatsoever was given either by the employer or by the Enquiry Officer of his appointment.
Nothing has been brought on the record by the employer to show that the petitioner was ever informed as to when Enquiry Officer is going to start the enquiry against the petitioner.
Petitioner was also served with charge-sheet indicating the dates on which he remained absent from duty but Enquiry Officer in his report has taken into consideration some other dates also for which the petitioner was never served with any charge-sheet nor the same was the subject-matter of the enquiry entrusted to the Enquiry Officer.
Labour Court though has decided the reference against the petitioner after holding that the petitioner admitted his guilt yet has failed to go into the manner in which the petitioner's confessional statement was extracted.
Admittedly, petitioner vide letter dated 26.7.1984 informed the Medical Superintendent the manner in which he was made to sign on a document.
He has stated in his own words as under :-  "On 20.7.84 Dr. Ajaib Singh Sandhu, S.M.O.
called me in his office and got from me signature at 2/3 places at Punjabi written language (which neither can I write nor can I read) by saying that this is formalities of enquiry and I shall be informed the next date by letter.
That when I told him to tell him the contents he refused and said that I shall not sign I shall be ousted and got my signatures under intimation and misrepresentation.
I, therefore, request you that the contents of which my signatures have been obtained I am not aware of the same and nor I know the language of the contents and it shall not be binding upon me.
That I request that documents be appointed and my next date of enquiry be informed."
This letter was brought on the record by the employer on the file of the Labour Court but I fail to understand as to how and on that material the Labour Court gave a finding that the confessional statement was made by the petitioner on his own violation.
Enquiry Officer, while appearing as MW-1 admitted before the Labour Court that on the record, at Page 15-16, the writing is not in the hand of the workman.
Though he tried to explain that the writing is in the hand of Jagan Nath whom he had brought for assistance, yet he had to admit that he never recorded the presence of Jagan Nath on the record.
He also admitted that in his report some of the dates of absence are mentioned which are other than those stated in the charge-sheet.
Thus, it is evidently clear that Enquiry Officer extended the scope of his enquiry which was not the subject-matter of the enquiry before him.
This is clearly in violation of the principles of natural justice as the Enquiry Officer was not entitled to take into consideration the facts extraneous to the enquiry which never formed the subject-matter of the charge-sheet served upon the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer also admitted that no notice was issued to the petitioner for appearing before him.
However, he stated that the office of the Medical Superintendent must have written to the workman to appear before him but no such letter was produced before the Labour Court.
Labour Court, in Para 7 of the order, has taken into consideration para 3 of the written statement in holding that the workman remained absent on more than a dozen occasions between 3101979 and 1431984 and thereafter he remained absent upto 18.7.1989 and at times, for a spell of days.
However, I find that no such averment was made by the workman in the written statement which has been placed on the record as Annexure P-17, I fail to understand as to how the Presiding Officer, Labour Court gave such a finding when the same has not been mentioned in the written statement.
11.
The Punishing Authority, while calling upon the petitioner to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service, did not send the enquiry report.
This action of the Punishing Authority cannot be sustained as the same is in clear violation of the principles of natural justice.
For this, I find support from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) S.C.C.
500 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
111.
12.
Labour Court, in his order, though has taken notice of the fact that the absence from duty of the petitioner was converted into extraordinary leave vide letter dated 26101984 (Annexure P-11), yet has failed to take into consideration the effect of granting of extra-ordinary leave.
The office order dated 26101984 has been placed on record as Annexure P-11.
Vide this letter, petitioner was granted extraordinary leave without pay and allowances for the period he remained absent from duty which admittedly was the subject- matter of the enquiry and the charge-sheet.
Once the Authority decided to grant him extraordinary leave without pay and allowances for the period he was found absent, then it nullifies the very basis of the charge for this proposition, I find support from the judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court reported in AIR 1976 A.R.
75 (G Papaiah v. Assistant Director Medical Services) wherein it was held as under :  "Whether it is an extraordinary leave, ordinary leave, leave on pay, leave on half pay, medical leave or casual leave, nonetheless it is a leave.
The kind of nature of leave is not material but the substance of the matter is that the petitioner was granted leave, when once leave is granted to a public servant, in respect of a particular period, it must be considered that he is permitted to absent himself from duty for that period.
In such a case, it is not permissible or open to the employer or any other authority to proceed against the public servant for absenting from duty for the same period and punish him.
The employer, either private or public cannot blow hot and cold.
The authorities should have refused to grant leave of any kind to the petitioner and then proper enquiry and after affording reasonable opportunity to him.
When once leave has been granted, it cannot be said that the petitioner had absented himself from duty and thereby made himself liable to be punished."
13.
For the reasons recorded above, I find that the termination of the services of the petitioner was in clear violation of the principles of natural justice and cannot be sustained in law.
Consequently, order dated 491984 (Annexure P-10) of the Labour Court is set aside and respondent No. 2 is directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith with continuity of service.
Counsel for the respondent has failed to bring to my notice that the petitioner, during the period his services stood terminated, remained gainfully employed.
In absence of any material to that effect, I have no option but to hold that the petitioner shall also be entitled to full back wages which shall be paid to the petitioner within six months from today.
However, it shall be open to the management to proceed against the petitioner in accordance with law.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.