Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who was a Paratrooper, was charged alongwith certain other persons with the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder for causing the death of Shri Kezang Dehdul and Shri Tshering Dorjee.
The General Court Martial found him guilty.
It proposed the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year and dismissal from service.
This sentence was duly confirmed by the appropriate authority and promulgated on September 26, 1984.
The petitioner's challenge to the findings of the General Court Martial and the punishment awarded to him having failed, he has approached this court through the present writ petition.
Mr. HS Hooda, learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the impugned orders primarily on three grounds.
He has contended that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is contrary to the provisions of Section 73 of the Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
He has further contended that the impugned orders do not assign any reason and are as such vitiated.
Lastly, he has contended that the Chief of the Army Staff had failed to consider the representations submitted by the petitioner.
These contentions have been controverted by Major SK Aggarwal, who has appeared for the respondents.
After regular trial before the General Court Martial, vide orders dated June 28, 1984 (Annexure P16), the petitioner was awarded the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year and dismissal from service.
The findings and sentence were confirmed by the Confirming Authority vide orders dated, September 22, 1984.
The order was duly promulgated vide Annexure P17, on September 26, 1984.
Simultaneously, the petitioner was informed that an aggrieved person could address a petition to the authority empowered to confirm the finding or sentence of the court martial and after confirmation to the General Government, the Chief of the Army Staff or any authority superior to the command of the confirming authority.
Vide representation dated December 27, 1984 Annexure P19), the petitioner had made a petition to the Chief of the Army Staff against the order and findings of the Court Martial.
Vide letter of June, 1985 (Annexure P.21), the petitioner was informed that his petition "dated 10 December, 84, addressed to GOC-in-C Eastern Command after due consideration has already been rejected and you have already been informed vide HQ Eastern Command letter No. 201440/224/A1 dated 23 April, 85 through District Jail, Rohtak."
In view of this position, the petition dated December 27, 1984 was returned in original to the petitioner.
Subsequently, vide letter of November 14, 1985, the petitioner was called upon to send his petition as "Chief to Army Staff has directed that your petition be reviewed despite your having exhausted legal right to redress."
The petitioner appears to have submitted a representation.
However, vide letter dated May 22, 1986, the petitioner was informed as under :-  "1.
Reference your petition dated 27th Dec, 84.
2.
Since your earlier Post-confirmation petition against the findings and sentence of CGM has already been rejected by GOC vide Eastern Command you have exhausted legal right for appeal.
No action is being taken on your fresh petition."
It is in the background of this factual position that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties have to be examined.
The relevant provisions contained in sections 71, 72 and 73 of the Army Act, 1950 deserve to be noticed.
Section 71 enumerates the punishments.
These range from death sentence to stoppage of pay and allowances.
Section 72 inter alia provides that a Court Martial may award alternative punishments.
Section 73 regulates the combination of punishments.
These provisions have been considered by a Division Bench of the Madras High Court in R Shanmugam v. The Officer Commanding 65 Coy ASS Supply (Type B) For St George, Madras and others, 1984(1) S.L.R.
108.
It was held as under :-  "The power to award alternative punishments by the Court Martial is contained in section 72 of the Act and by that section, the Court Martial is empowered either to award the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in sections 34 to 63 of the Act to be punishable, or in lieu thereof, any one the punishments lower in the scale set out in section 71 of the Act regard being had to the nature and decree of the offence.
Then section 73 of the Act enables the Court Martial to award a combination of the different punishments referred to section 71 of the Act.
The sum and substance of section 73 of the Act is that a Court Martial may award either in addition to or without any other punishment, the punishments mentioned in clause (d) or clause (e) of section 71 of the Act and any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses (f) to (i) of that section.
Section 73 of the Act really vests a power in the Court Martial to choose and award a combination of the punishments enumerated in section 71 depending upon the nature and degree of the offence.
In the instant case we find that the appellant had been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three months under section 71(c) and has also been dismissed from service under section 71(c) of the Act.
This would, therefore, be a combination of punishments under section 71(c) and 71(e) of the Act, which in our opinion is permissible under section 73 of the Act.
Having regard to the plain intendment of the section, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant cannot be accepted."
Respectfully following the above view, I hold that the action of the respondents in awarding the penalty of dismissal alongwith a sentence of imprisonment to the petitioner does not violate any of the provisions of the Act.
Equally untenable is the second contention that the authorities were required to pass a speaking order.
In fact, this matter is concluded by the judgment of the Supreme Court in Som Dutt Datta v. Union of India and others, AIR 1969 SC 414, wherein their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :-  "There is no express obligation imposed by Section 164 or by Section 165 of the Army Act on the confirming authority or upon the Central Government to give reasons in support of its decision to confirm the proceedings of the Court Martial.
Apart from any requirement imposed by statute or statutory rule either expressly or by necessary implication, it cannot be said that there is any general principle or any rule of natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and in every case give reasons in support of its decision.
Such orders cannot, therefore, be held to be illegal for not giving any reasons for confirming the orders of the Court Martial."
So far as the third contention is concerned, it appears that the Army authorities have been vacillating.
Vide letter dated September 26, 1984, the petitioner was informed that he could submit a petition against the order of sentence.
He actually submitted a representation dated December 27, 1984.
A copy of this representation dated December 27, 1984.
A copy of this representation is at Annexure P19.
Vide letter dated April 15, 1985, a copy of which is at Annexure P.20, the petitioner was informed that his case was still under examination.
Vide letter of June, 1985, his representation was returned to him on the ground that the post-confirmation petition dated December 10, 1984 had already been rejected.
Soon thereafter, vide letter of November 14, 1985, the petitioner was called upon to resubmit his petition.
However, on May 22, 1986 (Annexure P24) the petitioner was again informed that his earlier post-confirmation petition had already been rejected and, therefore, no action was being taken on his petition.
The Chief of the Army Staff appears to have directed that the petitioner's case "be reviewed despite your having exhausted legal right to redress."
This is apparent from the letter dated November 14, 1985, a copy of which is at Annexure P.22.
Once this decision had been taken, the representation submitted by the petitioner deserved to be considered and decided on merits.
This has not been done.
In fact, no action was taken on the representation on the ground that the post-confirmation petition had already been rejected.
The decision had been taken by the Chief of the Army Staff after the rejection of the post-confirmation petition.
Consequently, the representation submitted by the petitioner deserved to be considered and decided on merits.
It would be fair and proper if the appropriate authority places the petition dated December 27, 1984 before the Chief of the Army Staff for his consideration and decision on merits.
It would be appropriate if the matter decided expeditiously.
The writ petition is allowed only to the extent that the order dated May 22, 1986 (Annexure P24) is quashed and respondent No. 2 is directed to decide the representation submitted by the petitioner.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.