KP Bhandari, J - This is a writ petition filed by a Tehsildar against his compulsory retirement by the Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Haryana vide order dated 20th July, 1986 (Annexure P17).
The order was passed by the Financial Commissioner acting under the provisions of rules 25(2)(c)(i) and 25(2)(i)(a) of the Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932, which reads as under :-  NOTICE  Whereas I am of the opinion tha it is in the public interest to retire Sh. VD Gaur, Tehsildar, from service after his attaining the age of fifty five years.
Now, therefore, I, in pursuance of the provisions contained in rule 25(2)(c)(i) and 25(2)(c)(i)(a) of the Punjab Tehsildari Rules 1932, as amended vide Haryana Government Notification No. GSR 4/Const./Art.
309/Amd (i)/75, dated the 10th January, 1975 hereby give to Sh. VD Gaur, a notice of three months from the date of receipt of this communication, on the expiry of which, he shall stand retired from service under the State Government of Haryana.
Sd/- Financial Commissioner, Revenue  Haryana" dated the 20th July, 1986.
Chandigarh.
It is averred in the petition that the petitioner was selected as 'A' Class Naib Tehsildar as a direct appointee on 1st October, 1955, on which post he served for about nine years and on the basis of his excellent work he was promoted as Tehsildar on 9th January, 1964; that his record of service has been excellent throughout and he earned several commendation certificates, appreciation letters merit certificates, rewards, medals and cash awards during his service career which are Annexures P.1 to P.13 to this writ petition and speak for his efficiency, merit and honesty.
2.
The petitioner was conveyed report for the year 1984-85 (Annexure P15) on 681985 by the Financial Commissioner.
However, it was stated therein that the revenue work of the petitioner was not up to the mark and his reputation was not good about honesty.
The petitioner submitted this representation against the said report on 13th August, 1985 (Annexure P18).
The representation of the petitioner was pending when he was compulsorily retired.
It is alleged in the writ petition that the order of compulsory retirement was not justified by statutory rules and it could not be passed until the representation was decided by the competent authority.
It is also pleaded that the order of compulsory retirement on the basis of the adverse report regarding integrity amounts to removal from service.
It is further the stand of the petitioner that the report for the year 1984-85 is not based on facts; it is arbitrary the remarks having been given on non-existent material and, therefore, the reports are liable to be expunged.
3.
The State has filed written statement through Sh. SP Bhatia, Joint Secretary, Revenue Department, Haryana Government, broadly justifying therein the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
It is stated that the representation was disposed of vide order Annexure 'A' to the written statement.
The petitioner filed replication by means of CM No. 806/1987 controverting the allegations made in the written statement and reiterating the stand as given in the writ petition.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties at great length and perused the documents on the file.
I directed the State counsel to produce the Annual Confidential Reports file of the petitioner and the file concerning his compulsory retirement.
These files were perused.
5.
A perusal of the record produced by the State shows that the Financial Commissioner Revenue referred the case of the petitioner to the officers committee with the recommendation that the petitioner should be retired compulsorily.
A memorandum containing a summary of the annual confidential reports earned by the petitioner (Annexure R.1) was forwarded by the office of the Financial Commissioner Revenue to the officers committee which considered the case of the petitioner and the proceedings of the officers committee in this regard are Annexure R.2.
6.
The representation submitted by the petitioner against the adverse A.C.R.
was decided by the Financial Commissioner on 4.4.1986.
It is the stand of the State that a copy of the order of the rejection of the representation was communicated to the petitioner.
However, the petitioner contests this and of the respondents.
He has stated in this replication that he did not receive a copy of the order of rejection of the representation.
Office file shows that a copy of the order was sent to the petitioner at his Narnaul address on l4.11.1986 through a registered letter.
7.
The adverse report in the present case given by the Financial Commissioner and the representation too was decided by the Financial Commissioner.
It has been argued by the learned counsel of the petitioner that according to Haryana Government instructions contained in Consolidated Instructions regarding Confidential Reports, the representation against the adverse remarks should be considered by highest authority.
Reliance placed on the following instructions :-  "The highest administrative authority means the appointing authority.
However, in respect of Class I and Class II government employee, the 'highest administrative authority' means the appointing authority or the authority to whom representation against the punishment of censure lies under the existing rules of the department concerned for a particular officer, which is higher.
If in any case, the highest administrative authority himself the (sic) whose adverse remarks are communicated, the term 'highest administrative authority' should mean the next higher authority."
Admittedly, in the present case the adverse report was recorded and conveyed by the Financial Commissioner vide order Annexure P15.
It may be highlighted that according to Appendix 'A' of the Punjab Tehsildar Rules the appeal and the revisional power against the order of the Financial Commissioner in the matter of awarding punishment to Tehsildar is vested in the State government.
So, it is apparent that the authority higher than the Financial Commissioner is the State Government.
In a democratic set up the powers of the State Government are exercised by the Minister Incharge to whom the functions are allocated under the rules of business made by the Governor under Article 166 of the Constitution.
The next highest authority to the Financial Commissioner is the Minister Incharge.
A perusal of the above instructions shows that the representation in the present case should have been placed before the Minister Incharge for orders.
It was argued by the State counsel that under the standing orders, the Minister can delegate his functions, and for that reason, the matter was disposed of by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue himself.
In my considered view in the present case the purpose of the instructions is that the representation by the employee concerned should be considered by the authority higher than the one which conveyed the adverse remarks.
Admittedly, in the present case the adverse remarks were recorded by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue.
According to the above instructions it was obligatory on the part of the respondents that the representation should have been placed before the Revenue Minister for disposal.
This representation could not be decided by the Financial Commissioner.
In this view of the matter, the decision of the Financial Commissioner disposing of the representation has got no validity.
According to the aforesaid instructions, it was obligatory for the respondents that the representation should have been disposed of by the highest administrative authority which in the present case was the Minister Incharge, because in the present case the adverse remarks were recorded and conveyed by the Financial Commissioner.
So, for all legal purposes until the representation made by the petitioner was finally disposed of by the Minister in charge it shall be deemed to be pending and will acquire finality only after necessary orders have been passed by the Minister in charge.
It has been laid down by the Supreme Court that if representation against adverse remarks is pending, adverse report should not be taken note of while retiring the government servant.
Should this be done, the order of compulsory retirement is liable to be set aside as held in Mohinder (Mrs.) Librarian v. The State of Haryana, 1989(4) SLR 92 and Baidyanath Mahapatra v. State of Orissa, 1989(4) SLR 220.
Recently, the Supreme Court has gone to the extent of holding that if the time for submission of the representation against adverse remarks has not expired, even then such a report cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of compulsory retirement (See S. Maheswar Rao v. State of Orissa, 1989(4) S.L.R.
226).
In this view of the matter I am of the firm opinion that in the present case when the officers committee took the decision regarding the impugned retirement of the petitioner, at that time the representation filed by the petitioner against the adverse entry for the year 1984-85 was pending, and therefore, the said adverse report could not be taken note of for the purpose of his retirement.
In addition to this, the representation against adverse report, according to the State Government instructions, can only be disposed of by the highest authority which in this case is the Minister in charge who has passed on orders on the representation till the moment.
Consequently, the representation made in this case will be deemed to be pending.
Thus, taking an overall view of the case, I am of the opinion, that the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner is wholly illegal, ultra vires and null and void.
8.
The case was put up before the officers committee on 2nd July, 1986.
A copy of the memorandum prepared by the office of the Financial Commissioner for the officers committee (Annexure R.1) shows that it contains a brief summary of the ACRs relating to the petitioner from the date he started his career up to date.
A perusal thereof clearly shows that throughout his service, his record has been good or very good.
It is only at the fag end of his career i.e., during the year 1984-85 that the petitioner was given adverse report.
According to the Govt. instructions (Para 13) for the purpose of assessment of record of an officer, all letters of appreciation/commendation certificates issued to the Govt. servant, if any, should be placed on file.
The relevant instructions read as under :-  "Nature of documents/communications which need be placed on Personal Files - Besides the confidential reports on the work and conduct of an officer, copies of documents/communication specified below should be placed on the personal files :-  (a) all order imposing any of the penalties prescribed under Rule 4 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, or Rule 3 of the All India Service (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1954, as amended from time to time; (b) all communications conveying adverse remarks; (c) those letters of appreciation which deal with the outstanding nature of performance of an officer on an overall assessment of his work and conduct during the year in the light of the remarks recorded in his confidential reports; (d) ........... (e) ........... (f) ........... (g) ........... 9.
A reference to para 13 of the instructions clearly shows that all letters of appreciation which deal with the outstanding nature of performance of an officer on an overall assessment of his work and conduct should be placed on record.
These instructions further lay down that to facilitate the assessing of an officer's worth, on the basis of his personal file, the good and bad remarks should be sidelined with red and blue pencils, respectively, while putting up the personal files in cases of promotion, disciplinary action, pension etc. A large number of appreciation letter, merit certificates, rewards, models etc. which the petitioner earned do not find any place in this memorandum.
10.
The effective decision in this case was taken by the officers committee.
The Financial Commissioner is also a member of the officers committee.
11.
It was obligatory on the part of the Financial Commissioner to include all letters of appreciation, merit certificate, medals etc. earned by the petitioner during his service in the memorandum.
The memorandum sent to the officers committee did not indicate the complete picture of the career of the petitioner.
Consequently, the case of the petitioner was not properly presented before the officers committee.
It was obligatory for the respondents to highlight the career or record of service of the petitioner in the form of appreciation letters, merit certificates, medals, rewards, etc. won by the petitioner for making a fair assessment of the case by the officers committee.
Since the memorandum did not at all contain the commendation certificate earned by the petitioner, the officers committee was completely misled in the matter and for that reason the committee agreed to the impugned action against the petitioner.
So the proceedings of the Review Committee are vitiated.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If an officer is compulsorily retired on the basis of his confidential report according to which his integrity has been doubted, action on the basis of such a report will be considered to be an action by way of punishment.
Supreme Court has taken a similar view in Jarnail Singh v. State 1986(2) U.JS.C.
235 and A.I.R. 1986 SC 1626.
In Jarnail Singh's case, the services of an ad hoc employee were terminated on the basis of the adverse report regarding his integrity and their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the impugned action was by way of punishment and the services could not be terminated without following the procedure laid down in Article 311 of the Constitution.
The petitioner's case is on a better footing.
He is a permanent employee of the government and services have been terminated by way of compulsory retirement on the basis of a solitary report in which his integrity has been doubted.
This case, in my opinion, is fully covered by the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh's case (supra).
As the report for the year 1984-85 is the sole basis of the compulsory retirement of the petitioner, no such action could be taken without following the mandatory produce laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Admittedly, no such procedure was followed in the present case and therefore, the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner was passed in clear contravention of the provisions of Article 311(2),  13.
The report for the year 1984-85 was not conveyed to the petitioner and therefore, according to Government instructions, the same could not be taken note of.
14.
In April 1985, the Commissioner, Ambala Division, inspected work of the petitioner vide Annexure P4.
There is nothing in the detailed inspection report which may reflect adversely upon the efficiency of the petitioner as a revenue officer or cast any stigma on his integrity; rather during the same period on 15th August, 1985, the petitioner was awarded an appreciation letter by the Deputy Commissioner, Narnaul, for completing Shajara of Town of Narnaul.
During the same period on 1st May, 1985-86, the Deputy Commissioner issued a merit certificate to the petitioner for his outstanding performance in the Red Cross, Family and Child Welfare and Small Savings.
Again in 1984-85, the petitioner was given an appreciation letter for the commendable work done by him for the family planning programme.
If there was anything affecting the reputation or integrity of the petitioner, surely some mention would have been made by the Commissioner in his inspection note.
Nothing is said in the inspection report that any member of the public made any complaint against the petitioner.
Moreover, in the government instructions, vide para 4, it is clearly mentioned that if an office is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt, this opinion should generally be fortified by reason which should be in the possession of the reporting officer.
No such reasons have been indicated in the report nor have these been disclosed to the petitioner.
So, the report was recorded by the officer in clear contravention of mandatory provisions of para 4 of the Consolidated Instructions.
It is laid down in the instructions that the purpose of writing the annual report is to give guidance to the officers so that they may remove their defects.
No such attempt was made in the present case to give any advice to the petitioner in this behalf during the year in question.
So, in my opinion the report which has been recorded in this case was clearly in contravention of the mandatory provisions of the rules.
According to the scheme of the rules, when an adverse confidential report is recorded it should be conveyed and the officer given an opportunity to represent against the same.
When the reasons are not disclosed in the report, details of the complaint have not been given, the particulars and names of the persons who made any complaint against the petitioner have not been disclosed, the petitioner has been completely denied an opportunity to represent against such a report.
In order to give proper opportunity of representation against the adverse report, it is necessary that the report should be written in accordance with Government instructions and particularly in case of reports against integrity the same should be fortified by reasons and the material on the basis of which they have been recorded should be disclosed to the employee concerned so that he may have the right to represent.
By not writing the report in accordance with the Government instructions and not disclosing the material on the basis of which the adverse report was formed, the Government servant is denied the opportunity of representation against the same and, therefore, such reports have got no value as the same have been recorded in complete contravention of the mandatory provisions of the instructions, as also the principles of natural justice.
It is very unjust, unfair and arbitrary to condemn the Government servant and doubt his integrity without giving the reasons and the material as required by the instructions, So adverse report for the year 1984-85 is liable to be expunged.
15.
The petitioner also challenged the validity of the Government instructions which permit the Government to retire a Government servant even on the basis of a remote or solitary report concerning his integrity.
The power to compulsorily retire the Government servant is to be exercised in public interest.
It is incumbent that for assessing whether the Government servant should be allowed to continue in service, the Government has to come to the conclusion that the officer is a dead wood.
The power is intended to be exercised only to chop off the dead wood.
For this purpose it is necessary that the entire service record of the officer should be reviewed.
Precisely for this reason the instructions of the Haryana Government provide that if 70% of the reports of the officer are good, he should be allowed to continue beyond 55 years of age.
But an exception has been made in the case of report concerning the integrity of the Government servant.
According to the instructions, even a remote or a solitary report doubting the integrity of the Government servant is enough to retire him from service.
Recently, the Supreme Court in Hans Raj v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1985 S.C. 69 has laid down that an officer cannot be compulsorily retired on the basis of stray entry.
In the present case, the overall record of service of the petitioner is satisfactory.
There is only one stray entry on the basis of which the petitioner had been compulsorily retired.
In my opinion, reliance on such an entry is not enough to retire the Government servant prematurely.
In my opinion, these instructions run contrary to the statutory rules according to which on a review of the record, the Government has to come to the conclusion that it would be in the public interest to retire the Government servant.
This opinion can be formed only if the entire record of service of the Government servant is reviewed.
This opinion can be formed only if the entire record of service of the Government servant is reviewed.
The servant record in the form of ACRs contains the views of different officers under which the Government servant had the opportunity to work and their respective views.
The Government servant cannot be retired merely on the basis of a solitary or remote report affecting his integrity, because such an action will be just arbitrary.
16.
The instructions do not provide that stale or stray entries should not be used against Government servant.
A Division Bench of this Court in 1989(3) SLJ 110(SN), JV Gupta and Amarjeet Chaudhary, JJ, held that the Government servant cannot be allowed to retire on the basis of an adverse report regarding his integrity if such a report was recorded ten years ago.
Amarjeet Chaudhary, J, took the same view in 1989(5) SLR 343.
So, in my view the instructions are too widely worded and an officer cannot be retired just on the basis of a solitary remote report regarding his integrity.
Retirement on the basis of such a report would amount to removal from service and, therefore, these instructions would clearly be violative of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution as these instructions provide for compulsory retirement without any enquiry.
I am further of the view that these instructions are also arbitrary, unfair, unreasonable, capricious and discriminatory.
The main instructions provide for a review of the entire service record of the Government servant, and if on such a review it is found that 70% reports of his are good, he shall not be retired.
On the other hand, if there is any adverse report regarding the integrity of the Government servant, one such single instance is enough to retire the Government servant.
In my opinion, the instructions are arbitrary and discriminatory and, therefore, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
17.
In the present case, the petitioner submitted representation against the adverse report but the said representation was rejected by three words order i.e. "considered and rejected".
In a case where the competent authority considers a representation against the integrity report, it is not sufficient to dispose of the representation by a non-speaking order.
This Court in Lalit Kumar Gupta v. State of Haryana, 1988(5) S.L.R.
9 agreed with the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in MS Sharma v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1981(3) S.L.R.
760, disapproved such practice and quashed the order disposing the representation by a non-speaking order.
In the present case also, the order dated 11.4.1986 shows that the representation against the adverse report was disposed of by a non-speaking order.
For this reason also, the report for the period from 1984-85 cannot be taken into consideration for compulsorily retiring the petitioner from service.
A Division Bench of this Court in 1989(1) Northern Law Reporter 328 has taken the view that if the overall grading of the Government servant's performance is average, describing the entry of such an officer as doubtful integrity is not enough for compulsorily retiring him from service.
As already discussed, in the present case, the entire service record of the petitioner is very good except a stray entry in the report for the year 1984-85.
So, in my view, the petitioner could not be compulsorily retired on the basis of the said report.
In this case, the service record of the petitioner shows that the earned Very Good reports besides a number of appreciation letters, awards and merit certificates etc. but the reviewing authority did not take into account all this.
The review in the present case seems to be on extraneous consideration, and for that reason also the impugned order of compulsory retirement is bad in law.
18.
The power of compulsory retirement is an extraordinary power conferred on the Government to be exercised only sparingly in appropriate cases.
The Government servant at the age of 55 years is at the crucial stage of his career.
The period of service at 55-58 years is very important from the point of view of the Government servant as he has to settle his children during this period.
This power should be exercised only in rare cases where it is established that the officer concerned is a deadwood and deserves to be chopped off.
The power should be exercised very carefully keeping in view the principles laid down by the Supreme Court from time to time.
19.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is set aside.
It is held that the petitioner always remained in service as Tehsildar and shall be deemed to have retired on attaining the age of 58 years.
Accordingly, he shall be entitled to all arrears of pay and allowances alongwith interest @ 12% pa. besides all retirement benefits, including leave encashment and enhanced pension, gratuity etc.
The arrears of pay and allowances granted above along with interest thereon shall be paid within a month from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.