VK Jhanji, J - The present revision has been filed against the orders of the Courts below restraining defendant-petitioners from implementing transfer order issued vide Memo.
No. R. 2454/CA.
VI dated 26th July, 1988 transferring respondent from Equine Breeding Stud Farm, Hisar to Headquarters Western Command, Chandimandir.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that the respondent was appointed as Stenographer Grade-III on 1521982 and was posted at Equine Breeding Stud Farm, Hissar.
Respondent vide order dated 26.7.1988 was transferred from that place to Headquarters, Western Command, Chandimandir.
In her place, Dharam Singh, Stenographer Grade-II was transferred from Headquarters, Western Command Chandimandir.
Dharam Singh is senior most Stenographer Grade-II and his promotion and transfer was approved by Departmental Promotion Committee.
Respondent, instead of joining at Headquarters, Western Command, Chandimandir, filed suit for permanent injunction restraining defendants (petitioners) from implementing the order.
It was alleged in the suit that the transfer has been made on the asking of Brig.
KL Uthup and Col. Bhasker Singh, Deputy Commandant.
Plaintiff also alleged that Col. Bhasker Singh misbehaved with her and when she rebuked him, he threatened to take revenge.
Along with the suit, an application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151, Civil Procedure Code was also filed for grant of ad interim injunction.
3.
The suit as well as the application was contested by the defendants.
In the written statement, it has been stated that the post of Stenographer at Equine Breeding Stud Farm, Hissar is for Stenographer Grade-II and the plaintiff being Stenographer Grade-III was transferred to Headquarters, Western Command, Chandimandir and Dharam Singh, Stenographer Grade-II was posted at Hisar on the basis of approval made by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
Defendants have further stated that promotion-posting orders are purely administrative.
It was also denied that Brig.
KL Uthup or Col. Bhasker Singh ever misbehaved with the plaintiff.
4.
The trial Court granted ad interim injunction mainly on the ground that the plaintiff being unmarried girl needs protection of her parents and no loss will be caused to the defendants if she is retained at the present place of posting.
5.
Defendants filed appeal before the first appellant Court and the first appellate Court vide order dated 13.10.1990 dismissed the appeal.
This is how defendants have filed the present civil revision challenging the orders of the Court below.
6.
It is not disputed that the post of Stenographer at Equine Breeding Stud Farm, Hisar is meant for Stenographer Grade-II and on the promotion and transfer of Shri Dharam Singh, Stenographer Grade-II, plaintiff was transferred from Hisar to Headquarters, Western Command, Chandimandir where there only vacancy of Stenographer Grade-III was existing.
Chandimandir is the nearest possible station from Hisar.
7.
The Court below while granting ad interim injunction took into consideration that the plaintiff is an unmarried girl and needs protection of her parents.
No doubt, grant of injunction is essentially equitable relief.
The grant or refusal of ad interim injunction ultimately rests in the sound judicial discretion of the Court to be exercised in the light of the facts and circumstances in each case.
The Court while granting such relief is to take into consideration the following guidelines :-  (i) that the plaintiff has a prima facie case for trial; (ii) it is necessary to present irreparable loss or injury which normally cannot be compensated in terms of money; and (iii) the balance of convenience is in favour of the lone seeking such relief.
8.
In the present case, the Courts below while granting ad interim injunction have not taken into consideration these pre-requisite conditions.
It is well settled principle of law that normally the Courts should not interfere in the matter of transfers.
It is the prerogative of the authorities to transfer an employee from one place to another.
For this proposition, I am supported by a Division Bench ruling of this Court in Ashok Arora v. Union of India and others, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 513, wherein it has been held as under :-  "9.
As has been consistently held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court, transfer in a Government Service is an ordinary concomitant and incident of service, an employee who is appointed in a particular cadre of transferable posts, his transfer from one place to another is an ordinary incident of service and it does not result in alteration of any condition of service to his disadvantage.
The transfer is a normal feature in service and no one has a right to remain at a particular post or for a particular period.
The norms or the policy is for the guidance of the Officers authorised to effect and regulate the transfers.
Immunity against transfers would amount to gagging the right of the administration to administer any right of the employer to get work at the time and place of his choice and according to the administrative exigencies of the employer, which he wants to meet.
The above observations of ours find support from B. Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka and others, 1986(4) S.C.C.
131."
9.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that the order transferring the plaintiff has been passed on extraneous consideration and when both the Courts below have exercised discretion in granting injunction this Court should not interfere in revisional jurisdiction.
For this proposition, he has relied upon Mohammad Thekkethil v. The Director of Panchayats and others, 1982(2) S.L.R.
390; Dr. Damodaran v. State of Kerala and others, 1982(1) SLR 563 and Umesh Chand Tiwari v. State of UT and others, 1988(1) S.L.R.
409.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the plaintiff have no application to the facts of the present case.
In Dr. Damodaran's case (supra), the order of transfer was interfered with because in the facts and circumstances of that case it was found that the transfer was for extraneous or irrelevant consideration and was as a measure of punishment.
In Umesh Chand Tiwari's case (supra) the transfer order was quashed because it was not made for administrative exigency or in public interest but was for oblique motive.
In Mohammad Thekkethil's case (supra), it was held that the order of transfer can be interfered with only if it is arbitrary or passed for extraneous reasons.
10.
The Courts below granted injunction in favour of the plaintiff only on one consideration of her being unmarried girl who needs protection of her parents and it will not cause any irreparable loss or injury to the defendants if she is allowed to be posted at Hisar.
Merely because the plaintiff is an unmarried girl is no ground for Courts to interfere in the matter of transfer.
The plaintiff was transferred because the post of Stenographer at Equine Breeding Stud Farm, Hisar was only meant for Stenographer Grade-II whereas the plaintiff was Stenographer Grade-III.
The defendants while transferring the plaintiff took into consideration of her being an unmarried girl and therefore she was transferred to Chandimandir which is the nearest possible station.
There is no proof, even prima facie, in respect of allegations made against Brig.
KL Uthup and Col. Bhasker Singh that they ever misbehaved with her or the transfer order was made on their behest.
This Court can certainly interfere under Section 115 Civil Procedure Code if it is satisfied that the Courts below have not taken into consideration the well settled principle of granting ad interim injunction.
On the facts and circumstances of this case, I find that this is a fit case where interference is called for in the revisional jurisdiction.
Consequently, I allow the civil revision with costs and set aside and the orders of the Courts below.
Appeal allowed.