GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate from this Court to finalise his pension case and release the same in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The undisputed facts as emerging from the pleadings of the parties briefly are :-  The petitioner was holding substantively the post of Block Development and Panchayat Officer (for short 'BDPO').
He was compulsorily retired vide order dated August 13, 1974.
Vigilance inquiry was pending against him.
The department did not proceed with the same and instead issued orders of compulsory retirement.
The pension and other benefits have been denied to him on the ground that compulsory retirement tantamounts to removal from service and as such, the petitioner is not entitled to pension.
3.
The defence taken by the State indicates the illegal, unjust and callous attitude of the functionaries of the State.
Order of compulsory retirement is made in public interest.
The right to be in public employment is a right to hold it according to rules.
The right to hold it is defasible according to rules.
The rule speaks of compulsory retirement in public interest.
The government servant in such a case does not lose the benefit which a government servant has already earned.
Compulsory retirement simpliciter does not amount to removal, termination or reduction in rank under Article 311 of the Constitution of India or under the service rules.
It is in fact according to the terms and conditions of the service rules.
Compulsory retirement is not a punishment because the Government servant does not lose the terminal benefits already earned by him.
In State of Haryana v. Inder Parkash Anand and others, A.I.R. 1976 Supreme Court 1814, the apex Court while dealing with the effect of compulsory retirement simpliciter after referring to Sham Lal v. State of UP, A.I.R. 1954 Supreme Court 369 held thus :-  "It, therefore, follows that compulsory retirement simpliciter does not amount to dismissal or removal or reduction in rank under Article 311 or under the Service Rules.
It is in fact compulsory retirement in accordance with the terms and conditions of service."
The antiquated notion of pension "being a bounty, a gracious payment dependent upon the sweetwill or grace of the employer not claimable as a right, has been swept under the carpet by the decision of the Constitution Bench of the apex Court in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar and others, A.I.R. 1971 Supreme Court 1409 and the apex Court held thus :  "We are of the opinion that the right of the petitioner to receive pension is property under Article 31(1) and by a mere executive order the State has no power to withhold the same.
Similarly, the said claim is also property under Article 19(1)(f) and it is not saved by sub-Article (5) of Article 19."
This view was again followed in State of Punjab and another v. Iqbal Singh, A.I.R. 1976 Supreme Court 667 wherein it was held thus :-  "Although in the grounds of appeal, it has been urged by the appellants that the Full Bench decision of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in KR Erry's case (AIR 1967 Punjab 279)(FB) (supra) is not in accordance with law as superannuation pension is a bounty and is given only as an act of grace, that ground is no longer available to the appellants in view of the decision of this Court in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, (1971)2 SCC 330, where it was held that pension is not a bounty payable on the sweetwill and pleasure of the Government and the right of a Government servant to receive it is property under Article 31(1) of the Constitution and the State cannot withhold the same by a mere executive order.
It was further held in that case that the claim to pension was also property under Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution and was not saved by clause (v) thereof.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants has, however, made a feeble attempt to urge that no opportunity to show cause was required to be given to the respondent before passing the order imposing the cut in his superannuation pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity under clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 64 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules (Pension Rules), as the order was an administrative order and the case, did not fall within the purview of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It has been further contended by learned counsel for the appellants that it was the judgment of this Court in M. Narasimachar v. State of Mysore, (1960)1 SCR 981 and not the judgment in State of Punjab v. KR Erry & Sobhag Rai Mehta, AIR 1973 SC 834 which governed the present case.
We regret we are unable to accede to these contentions."
In the light of these authorities/decisions which have been rendered much before the filing of written statement in this Court on April 4, 1986, the defence taken in the writ petition is palpably unwarranted.
The conduct of the respondents cannot be countenanced.
I am leaving the matter at this.
4.
The petitioner is entitled to payment of gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, as held by the apex Court in D V Kapoor v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1923.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition succeeds with costs.
Counsel fee assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to :-  i) finalise the pension case of the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order; ii) pay arrears of pension as assessed to the petitioner with interest @ 12% per annum : iii) pay gratuity, as payable, under the Payment of Gratuity Act, to the petitioner if not paid within the aforesaid period with interest @ 12% per annum; and iv) release difference in salary during the period he remained under suspension which was not allowed to the petitioner, with interest @ 12% per annum.
Petition allowed.