AS Nehra, J - This regular second appeal has been filed by the defendants-appellants against the judgment and decree dated 2981987 passed by Additional District Judge, Amritsar, by which the appeal filed by the defendants-appellants was dismissed and the judgment and decree dated 1061987 passed by the trial Judge was upheld.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the plaintiff- respondent Ganga Ram was serving as Accounts Clerk in the Irrigation Department when he was dismissed from service because of his conviction in a criminal case, which was upheld by the High Court.
On the basis of this conviction, the dismissal order was passed against the plaintiff-respondent on 391990.
Later on, however, it was decided to issue show cause notice before reverting/dismissing the plaintiff-respondent.
This order was set aside by the Civil Court on 1241983.
The State filed an appeal against the judgment and decree dated 1241983 of the trial Court, which was dismissed by the Court of Additional District Judge Amritsar, on 2991984.
The learned Additional District Judge held the dismissal order as void ab initio and non est.
It was alleged by the plaintiff-respondent that the Superintending Engineer again issued a show cause notice without supplying copies of enquiry report, suspension order and other papers and the plaintiff-respondent was dismissed from service without any opportunity having been given.
It was also alleged by the plaintiff-respondent that the order of dismissal was void, illegal, arbitrary, without jurisdiction, unconstitutional, mala fide and inoperative in law and, therefore, it should be set aside.
During the pendency of the present suit, the plaintiff-respondent reached the age of his superannuation on 3131987 and, therefore, the perpetual injunction, asked for by him was not granted.
3.
The defendants-appellants filed written statement on 11111986 in which they, besides taking preliminary objection that the suit was not maintainable, stated that the plaintiff-respondent had not come to the Court with clean hands and that notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was not valid.
The defendants-appellants also denied the allegations of the plaintiff-respondent on merits, alleging that the plaintiff-respondent had been dismissed by a competent authority and the defendants-appellants had a right to dismiss the plaintiff-respondent on the basis of his conviction.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration that order dated 1171985 passed by Superintending Engineer, dismissing the plaintiff from the service, is arbitrary, illegal, null and void ?
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to perpetual injunction, as prayed for ?
3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mandatory injunction, as prayed for ?
4.
Whether the present suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
5.
Whether the valid notice under section 80, C.P.C., was served on the defendants ?
6.
Relief.
5.
After recording evidence and hearing both the parties, issue No. 1 was decided by the trial Court in favour of the plaintiff-respondent and so were issue Nos. 3 and 4.
Issue No. 2 was decided by the trial Court in favour of the defendants-appellants as the plaintiff-respondent had retired from service.
The trial Court held the suit to be properly instituted as the necessary notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure had been given by the plaintiff-respondent.
The suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent was decreed by the trial Court on 1061987 and it was held that the order dated 1171985 passed by the Superintending Engineer dismissing the plaintiff-respondent from the post of Accounts Clerk, is arbitrary, mala fide, void, without jurisdiction, illegal, unconstitutional and inoperative against the plaintiff-respondent.
The defendants-appellants were directed by the trial Court to release all the dues and not to withhold the pensionary benefits etc. of the plaintiff-respondent.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 1061987 of the trial Court, the defendants filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, on 2981987.
6.
The learned counsel for the defendants-appellants has argued that the dismissal order of the plaintiff-respondent had been made by the competent authority in accordance with the Rules because the Superintending Engineer is competent to dismiss Accounts Clerks, Sub Divisional Clerks and Assistant Clerks according to Appendix 'B' referred to in Rule 15(1) of the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Circles Clerical State Service, Class III, Rules 1955.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has argued that the Appointing Authority of the plaintiff-respondent is the Chief Engineer and not the Superintending Engineer as the plaintiff-respondent was promoted to the post of Accounts Clerk by the Chief Engineer and it was only the Chief Engineer who could have dismissed him from service.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent placed reliance upon the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, wherein the Appointing Authority has been defined in Rule 2(a) as the authority competent under these Rules to impose on Government employees any of the penalties specified in Rule 5.
In other words, it is necessary that the Punishing Authority must be the Appointing Authority.
Rule 5 of the aforesaid Rules provides only the nature of penalties but not the designations of the authorities who could impose different types of penalties provided and defined in the aforesaid rule.
7.
The learned lower Courts have held that the plaintiff-respondent had been appointed by the Chief Engineers and the Superintending Engineer had no authority to dismiss the plaintiff-respondent.
8.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has argued that the authority to order removal or dismissal will have to be determined with reference to the requirement of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India and one of these requirements is that the authority that orders, the dismissal or removal should not be one subordinate in rank to that by which the civil servant, in question, was appointed.
Admittedly, the Superintending Engineer was competent to promote the plaintiff-respondent but the order of promotion was passed by the Chief Engineer.
In this view of the matter, the Chief Engineer alone could dismiss the plaintiff-respondent from service.
Therefore, the dismissal order dated 1171985 passed by the Superintending Engineer is illegal and void.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.