VK Jhanji, J - This order of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petitions 771 of 1984, 398 of 1984,399 of 1984 and 913 of 1984.
2.
The petitioners in all the four writ petitions were employed with Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the Board) as T Mate (work charged employees).
Admittedly, all the petitioners had completed more than 240 days in service when their services were terminated.
This gave rise to an industrial dispute and the matter was referred to the Labour Court under section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
3.
The Labour Court, after taking into consideration the entire evidence led by the parties to the dispute, gave a finding that termination of services of the petitioners could not be held to be justified and proper as the Board had not complied with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act inasmuch as the retrenchment compensation was not paid at the time when the petitioners were served with termination notice.
However, while granting relief the Labour Court ordered that the petitioners shall be entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service but without back wages.
The petitioners were denied back wages on two counts : that though the petitioners were served with one month's notice but the retrenchment compensation was sent through money orders but the petitioners had refused to accept the same; secondly, that they were employed only for a specific work and after the work had come to an end, their services were terminated.
The petitioners have challenged the Award of the Labour Court denying them back wages by way of these four writ petitions.
4.
Mrs. Surjit Bindra, Senior Advocate, counsel for the petitioners has vehemently argued that once the Labour Court had come to a firm finding that retrenchment of the petitioners was illegal inasmuch as the provisions of Section 25-F(b) of the Act were not complied with, then the order being void ab initio, the Labour Court ought to have granted not only reinstatement but also the back wages to the petitioners.
In support of her contention that where back wages are not paid simultaneously with the serving of notice of termination, then the order of termination is void ab initio, she has placed reliance on M/s. National Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. The State of West Bengal and another, AIR 1967 SC 1207 and Narotam Chopra v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court and others, 1988(4) SLR 388.
She has further submitted that once the order of termination is found to be void ab initio, then the normal relief to be given in such cases is not only the reinstatement with continuity of service but also the back wages.
In support of her this contention, she has placed reliance on Hari Palace v. Labour Court, Rohtak, 1980 Lab.
IC 123, M/s. Hindustan Tin Works v. Its Employee, AIR 1979 SC 75 and Surinder Kumar Verma v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi, AIR 1931 SC 422.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the Board, Miss Surjit Kaur Taunque, Senior Advocate, has contended that back wages can be denied in presence of exceptional circumstances and in the present case the Labour Court having found two exceptional circumstances i.e the petitioners were employed for specific work and their services were terminated on the completion of the said work and they having refused to accept retrenchment compensation which was sent to them through money orders, the order of the Labour Court does not suffer from any infirmity and is absolutely in accordance with law.
In support of her contention she has placed reliance on Chandu Lal's case, AIR 1985 SC 1128.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I find that these petitions must succeed.
Admittedly, when the services of the petitioners were terminated, they were served with one month's notice of termination but retrenchment compensation was not paid to them.
The retrenchment compensation was sent to them through money orders.
A mere perusal of Section 25-F(b) of the Act shows that the petitioners who were in employment for more than 240 days, then their services can be terminated only after being served with one month's notice along with retrenchment compensation.
Admittedly, in the present case, retrenchment compensation was not paid simultaneously with the service of the notice of termination.
The Supreme Court in the cases of M/s. National Iron and Steel Co Ltd. (supra) and Narotam Chopra (supra), has held that where the provisions of Section 25-F are not complied with, then the order is void ab initio.
7.
The contention of learned counsel for the respondent that the petitioners were denied relief of back wages because of the presence of exceptional circumstances is devoid of any merit.
As I have already noticed that retrenchment of the petitioner was not in accordance with the law and there was a clear violation of mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
The order of termination being illegal and void ab initio, it cannot be said that the sending of retrenchment compensation through money order is an exceptional circumstance.
8.
The normal rule is that where the order is found to be void ab initio, then the workman must not only be ordered to be reinstated but also be paid back wages.
It was incumbent on the Board to have complied with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act by paying retrenchment compensation to the petitioners simultaneously along with the order terminating their services.
This cannot be said to be a technical mistake as observed by the Labour Court.
9.
The second circumstance which was taken into consideration to deny back wages to the petitioners was that their services were terminated on the completion of the work.
This also cannot be said to be an exceptional circumstance.
If the services of the petitioners were not required, then the Board ought to have complied with the mandatory provisions of the Act in paying retrenchment compensation while terminating the services of the petitioners as provided under Section 25-F of the Act.
In Chandu Lal's case (supra), the Supreme Court held that when ordinarily the order of termination is quashed, then the workman is to be reinstated in service with full back wages.
However, discretion has been vested in the Tribunal in the matter of awarding relief according to the circumstances of the case.
In the present case, the petitioners cannot be made to suffer because of the lapse on the part of the Board.
10.
The Labour Court having not exercised the discretion in accordance with the well settled principle of law, this Court can, in exercise of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, give relief to the petitioners.
To deny back wages to the petitioners will be clearly unjust, unfair and inequitable.
In view of this, I allow the writ petitions.
The order of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioners shall also be entitled to back wages from the date of order of their termination till the date of their reinstatement.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.