VK Bali, J - The facts which are either admitted or proved on record would go to show that Mrs. Satwant Khera was initially appointed as a Sanskrit Teacher on March 2, 1973 for a period of six months on ad hoc basis.
Mrs. Kamlesh Manocha was also appointed as Sanskrit Teacher on January 29, 1968 as well on ad hoc basis; whereas Mrs. Usha Rani was appointed as Sanskrit Teacher w.e.f.
May 25, 1972 in Sohna.
All the three petitioners in this case held the post upto March 31, 1973, September 11, 1973 and September 24, 1973 respectively when their services were terminated.
It was a mass strike of teachers in the State of Haryana w.e.f.
February 12, 1973 which continued upto March 9, 1973.
Admittedly, they (the petitioners) did not go on strike.
The State Government took a decision in the year 1975 that those teachers whose services were terminated after the strike of 1973 and who possessed the qualification of BA, B.Ed.
with Sanskrit be reappointed.
In consequence of the decision of the Government, respondent No. 2 asked the District Education Officers to send the particulars of such teachers.
It is sufficiently reflected from letter dated November, 1975, Annexure P-1.
Besides, the Haryana Government in the year 1976 also took a general policy decision to accommodate by reappointing all such teachers, who fulfilled the basic qualifications and who had not participated in the strike of 1973.
Paragraph 11 of the aforesaid policy decision is as follows :-  "Those BA, B.Ed.
teachers who had no combination of subjects should be appointed as Sanskrit Teachers at Rs. 200/- fixed pay in accordance with Directorate letter No. 631-Estt-III-(G)13/1-68-CDI-III(3) dated 1141969."
It shall be relevant to mention here that all the petitioners possess the degree of BA, B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a subject; whereas petitioner No. 3 also possess a degree of MA in Sanskrit.
By giving effect to this decision, the petitioners were appointed as stipendary teachers in the subject of Sanskrit vide orders dated 9th and 10th of November, 1976 which orders were issued by the District Education Officer, Gurgaon.
The relevant extract of the letter aforesaid is at Annexure P-2.
Later, the Government came up with the decision to regularize the services of stipendary teachers.
This decision of the Government was given effect to so far as petitioner No. 1 is concerned vide Annexure P-3.
With regard to other petitioners similar orders were passed.
The appointment of the petitioners as also others was challenged by way of writ petition in this Court.
The grouse of the petitioners in that case mainly centred around the fact that unemployed persons registered with the Employment Exchanges had not been considered while giving appointments to the petitioners and others who did not participate in the strike.
That Writ Petition was allowed by this Court on August 28, 1979 and in consequences thereof the services of the petitioners were deregularised vide order dated April 18, 1980.
Although it is true that this Court allowed the petition, but the ground that prevailed was not with regard to the petitioners and others not holding the minimum qualification, but the same was on account of the fact that unemployed persons were not considered at the time of the appointment of petitioners and others.
No sooner, the appointments of petitioners were cancelled, in pursuance of the judgment referred to above a spate of petitions on behalf of the petitioners and others numbering 80 were filed in this Court and on variety of reasonings the order of deregularisation was challenged.
All the petitions were decided together and the judgment was recorded in C.W.P.
No. 1561 of 1980 on July 30, 1980, Annexure P-5.
In paragraph 5 of the judgment, it was mentioned that "the case of 24 teachers and 16 masters, who, according to the learned Advocate General, are not qualified to get their services regularised and whose names he is not able to indicate, shall be considered on merits as a mention is being made before us if they are petitioners in the petition which are being disposed of if it is so done, their case shall be reheard."
It is clear from the judgment mentioned above that in case after considering the matter on merits all or any of the persons stated to be lacking qualifications were to get adverse orders, they could ask for reopening of the case in the said petition itself.
Taking strength from the observations made by the High Court in Writ Petition referred to above, the respondents after considering the case of the petitioners on merits, decided to terminate their services on the solitary ground that they did not fulfil the requisite qualifications of Sanskrit Teacher, which qualifications were spelt from the relevant instructions.
It is this order which instead of being agitated by reopening the earlier case has been challenged by way of separate Writ Petition in this Court.
2.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contends that the impugned orders terminating the services of the petitioners after so many years of continuous service are wholly illegal and have caused total injustice to the petitioners.
The action of the respondents is arbitrary and against Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Mr. Patwalia further contends that the present was not a case of concealment of facts at the time of seeking appointments.
The qualifications of the petitioners were well-known to the authorities and no misstatement was made at any stage while seeking the appointments.
He further contends that even though the petitioners may not be answering strictly the qualifications as spelt out from instructions the same in their case shall be deemed to have been waived on account of solitary fact that they came to be employed or re-employed keeping in view the devotion to duty that they had exhibited while restraining from joining the strike.
It was specifically mentioned in the various policy decisions referred to above that the qualification required for such teachers who had not joined the strike was to be BA, B.Ed and therefore, any extra qualification made out from the instructions by necessary intendment were deemed to have been waived.
The Government thus, was conscious of the qualification of the petitioners and even though in the orders of appointments no specific relaxation was mentioned, the same shall be implied, contends the counsel.
His further contention is that the order Annexure P-7 terminating the services of the petitioners is violative of principles of natural justice, inasmuch as no reason was disclosed nor the petitioners were offered any opportunity of hearing.
It is further made out by the learned counsel that a number of other persons who also possessed the same qualifications which the petitioners had were working in the State of Haryana.
Some instances have been quoted in paragraph 17 of the petition and on the basis of the said averments, it is contended that there is no distinction in the case of persons who were continuing in the job without holding the requisite qualifications as that of the petitioners.
It is a case of hostile discrimination between citizens equally situate and on that account too the impugned orders deserve to be set aside as they violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
A perusal of written statement shows that the main plank of the respondent to defend the cause of the petitioners is that for women S.T.C.
training is absolutely necessary, whereas the qualifications of the petitioners is BA with Sanskrit BEd.
The aforesaid necessary qualification is made out from paragraph 12 of the letter issued by the Director Public Instructions, Haryana bearing No. 2/7-80-E-II(4), dated April 28, 1980 and inasmuch as the petitioners were not possessing the requisite qualification prescribed for the post as made out from the aforesaid letter, the respondents were justified to terminate the services of the petitioners.
On the question of discrimination the stand of the respondents is rather interesting.
The averments made in paragraph 17 of the written statement do not controvert the specific instances cited in the corresponding paragraph 17 of the petition.
However, it is contended that insofar as Melu Ram was concerned he too was BA with Sanskrit BEd., but he was recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, whereas Raghubir Singh was recommended by Haryana Public Service Commission.
It is further made out in the said paragraph of the written statement that the circumstances under which such persons were appointed were not known to the respondents and it was possible that the Government might have relaxed qualifications in their case in view of non-availability of qualified candidates.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the entire record carefully, I am of the considered view that the petitioners have been caused untold hardship and miseries.
They temporarily came to occupy the posts earlier in 1973, but in any case from November, 1976 they are in continuous service.
There is no denying the fact that they were confirmed vide Annexure P-3 on January, 1979 as also that termination of their services vide Annexure P-7 was stayed by this Court at the time of motion hearing.
It is thus crystal clear that all the petitioners have continuously worked for a period of about 14 years.
The facts and circumstances under which they came to be appointed would also go to show that by and large they were benefited on account of their devotion to duty at the time of crisis.
Mr. Patwalia seems to be justified in contending that even though the appointment letters do not show any relaxation in the qualification but the same has necessarily to be inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case fully narrated above.
The Government was conscious while appointing the petitioners that they are as a matter of fact being awarded for their upholding the cause of education for which alone they exist.
It would have been very difficult for them to resist the call of strike given by their colleagues yet they continued attending to their duties when the teachers of the entire State had gone on mass strike.
It is, thus, clear that the Government was conscious while appointing them that they have to be benefited and even though there is no order specifically relaxing the qualification in the appointment letters the same shall be deemed to relaxed.
Besides, the petitioners at no stage suppressed the facts or misled the Authorities while seeking the appointment.
Whatever the qualifications the petitioners held, was well known to the Authorities.
It shall be inequitable at this later stage for the State to turn round and confront the petitioners with lack of requisite qualifications and to throw them out of the job.
The Apex Court in case titled as Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation cited in Judgments Today 1989(4) SC 54 in para 6 observed as follows :-  "The main controversy centres around the question whether some petitioners are possessed of the requisite qualifications to hold the post so as to entitle them to be confirmed in the respective posts held by them.
The indisputable facts are that the petitioners were appointed between the period 1983 and 1986 and ever since they have been working and have gained sufficient experience in the actual discharge of duties attached to the posts held by them.
Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
In our view, three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
5.
The observations of the Supreme Court do support the claim of the petitioners.
On the ground of discrimination as well, I think the petitioners' case stands on a solid wicket.
The stand of the State does not reflect any distinction between the case the petitioners and those who have been mentioned in paragraph 17 of the petition.
The relaxation of the qualifications in the case of said persons is not known that what the State wants the Court to believe is that the orders for relaxation must have been passed.
The said stand of the State is too conjectural and cannot be accepted.
For all the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
Order Annexure P-7 is quashed.
The petitioners shall be deemed to be in continuous service from the date they were employed and they shall be deemed to be confirmed from January 1, 1979 when they were first confirmed by the Government.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.