Sunanda Bhandare, J - The petitioner was enlisted as a Senior Non-Commissioned Officer in the Recruiting Organisation of the Indian Army on 20th January, 1962.
Later on he was promoted as Naik on 12th May, 1963 and further as Havaldar on 2nd September 1969.
The petitioner was transferred to Gurkha Recruiting Depot (hereinafter referred to as G.R.D.)
and Record Office, Ghoom (West Bengal) (hereinafter referred to as RO Ghoom) attached to 5 Field Ordinance Depot as Clerk (General Duty).
By virtue of being Clerk (General Duty) as a part of his duty the petitioner bad to perform the office duties in the Ration Section directly reporting to the Store Holder and Head Clerk Subedar AK Gurung.
The petitioner was responsible for preparing the documents of ration stores of G.R.D.
& RO Ghoom.
On a complaint made by Naib Subedar KKS Nair of 80 company A SC (Sup.)
who was the Junior Commissioned Officer, a court of inquiry was convened in G.R.D.
& RO Ghoom.
to inquire into allged misappropriation of certain stores by the petitioner, Subedar AK Gurung and Captain BN Deka and four others in respect of certain transaction of 6th September 1974.
Since during the pendency of the inquiry Subedar A K Gurung was declared to be absconding, the petitioner alongwith Captain B N Deka was tried under Section 69 of the Army Act by a General Court Martial on the charge of committing a civil offence, that is to say, criminal conspiracy contrary to Section 120 - B of the Indian Penal Code and on two other charges of dishonest misappropriation of property contrary to Section 403 of the Indian Penal Code.
The charge sheet enumerated the following three charges:  Against Accused Nos. 1 and 1.
Committing a civil offence, that is to say, criminal conspiracy, contrary to Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code.
in that they together:At Jalapahar, on or about 6th Sept 1974 alongwith JC-48501 Sub.
AK Gurung of the same unit (another accused since absconding) conspired amongst themselves to draw rations from the Supply Point, Jalaphar, in order to dishonestly misapprorpriate the same, the property belonging to the Government.
Against Accused No. 2 only 2.
Committing a civil offenc that is to say, dishonest imsappropriation of property, contrary to S. 403 of the I.P.C. in that he:at Jalapahar on 6th September 1974 alongwith JC-48501 Sub.a.K Gurung of the same unit (another accused since absconding) prusuant to te conspiracy referred to in the first charge, collected the under mentioned quantities of rations form Supply Point Jalaphar and dishoneslty misappropriated the same, the propertybelonging ot the Government:- a. Atta 3250 Kg.
Value Rs. 5120-05 b.
Rice 4000 Kg.
Value Rs. 5707-60 c. Sugar 1300 Kg.
Value Rs. 2655-38 d Oil Hydre 660 Kg.
Value Rs. 7438-20 9210 Total 20921-23.
Against Accused No. 2 only 3.
Dishonestly misappropriating property belonging to the Government in that he:at Jalapahar, between 2 April, 1974 and 24th October, 1974 alongwith JC-48501 Sub.
AK Gurung (another accused since absconding dishonelsty misappropriated the undermentioned quantities of rations (fuel), the porperty belonging ot the Government:- a Kerosene Superior 1223310 Ltrs Value 124778 b. Firewood 4127.000 Kgs.
Value 26000 c. Charcol 150.000 Kgs.
Value 44.25 d Steam Coal 23710.000 Kgs.
Value 242198 Total 397401.
The petitioner, pleaded not guilty to the charges.
The petitioner was acquitted of charges 1 and 3 i.e. he was acquitted of the charges of conspiracy.
however was held guilty of the second charge with the exception of the words "pursuant to the conspiracy" referred to in the said charge and sentenced:  (a) To be reduced to the ranks (b) To suffer rigorous imprisonment for 2 years; and (c) to be dismissed from the service: Being aggrieved by the order of sentence and the conviction by the Court Martial the petitioner filed a pre-confirmation appeal under Section 54 of the Army Act.
The confirming authority however passed an order under Section 160 of the Army Act on 15th April, 1977 to re-consider and revise the finding of the court martial on the first and second charge i.e to recorder the charge of conspiracy which was held not proved against the petitioner and the other co-accused and consider the second charge in the light of the revision.
After the revisional order, the Court Martial was reconvened however" the Court Martial adhered to the original findings in regard to the first and second charges.
The petitioner, thereafter filed a post confirmation appeal to the Chief of Army Staff as provided under Section 164(2) of the Army Act on 3rd December 1977 which was dismissed by the Central Government on 18th April, 1979.
After the order of confirmation of sentence, the petitioner underwent whole of the sentence.
However, after he came out of the jail, on reading a report appearing in the Indian Express of 13th November 1981 in respect of some case, filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
It was contended, by the learned counsel for the petitioner that once the charge of conspiracy had failed, the charge of misappropriation cannot be sustained unless it is proved that the petitioner came in innocent possession of the goods.
Learned counsel submitted that this was an essential jurisdiction Section 403 of the Indian Penal Code.
There is no evidence that the petitioner was in possession of the goods alleged to be misappropriated by him and, therefore, the finding of the Court Martial being against evidence deserves to be set aside.
Learned counsel relied on Tilak Raj Kohli v. State, 1970 Cri LJ 1691 and WE Gardner v. Ukha, 1937(38) Cri.
LJ 48 in support of the contention that to prove a charge of misappropriation, it is necessary to prove that the goods were in innocent possession and she relied on Swarn Singh & Another v. State of Punjab & others, AIR 1976 SC 232 and RS Bhagat v. Union of India, AIR 1982 (Delhi) 191 in support of the contention that if the decision of the Court Martial is based on no evidence, this Court while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can interfere with such a finding.
It was contended that the case of the prosecution was that the petitioner alongwith Captain BN Deka and Subedar AK Gurung who were the stock holders of the ration, entered into a criminal conspiracy to draw ration from the Supply Point, Jalapahar in order to dishonestly misappropriate the same.
On 6th September 1974 they misrepresented to the supply point, Jalapahar that the ration was required to meet a heavy unexpected influx of recruit which had arrived suddenly and since the unit driver was not available for taking the van to the Supply Point, Captain BN Deka who was accused No. 1 in the first charge drove the van to the Supply Point.
On reacting there, Captain B N Deka remained in the driver's cabin whereas Subedar AK Gurung and the petitioner drew the rations on loan on the undertaking that an emergent demand would be forwarded next day to cover the issue.
The loan voucher was signed by Subedar AK Gurung on behalf of the unit and by Subedar K K S Nair on behalf of the Supply Point.
Subedar A K Gurung authorised the petitioner to collect the rations and sign the gate pass.
Since it was not possible to carry all the ration in one trip.
J C O Incharge at the supply Point was requested for a vehicle from the Supply Point.
While the ration was being weighed, Subedar AK Gurung left the Supply Point leaving behind at the petitioners alongwith Subedar KK S Nair.
Thereafter all items of ration except rice were loaded in the unit van and accused No. 1 Captain B N Deka drove the unit van alongwith the ration.
Captain A. K Gurung sat in the body of the unit van.
The remainder of 40 bags of rice were loaded by the petitioner in the Supply Point vehicle which was driven by Mr. MRK Nair.
This rice was carried to GXD & R0.
Ghoom where they were unloaded Mr. M R K Nair was the driver who was examined as PW I by the prosecution.
He stated that when the jeep of Supply Point alongwith the rice reached GRD & RC Ghoom, the rice was not unloaded for some time.
Since he had to return back to the Supply Point, he asked some one who looked like a Major what to do with the rice He was asked to go and have a cup of tea.
In the meanwhile, Subedar A K Gurung arrived at the spot and during the time Mr. MR K Nair was away for a cup of tea, the rice was unloaded from the vehicle and stored in the store room.
Since on the next day, Subedar A K Gurung did not send the emergent demand as promised and on being reminded about the emergent demand, he evaded to send it thereafter as well, Subedar K K S Nair instructed his NCO to deduct a portion of the ration issued to the unit from subsequent indent submitted by the unit on 27th September 1974.
3.
On perusal of the evidence on record I find that the main part is attributed to have been played by Subedar AK Gurung and the petitioner had no role to play excepting accompanying the vehicle in which the rice was loaded and signing the gate pass.
The evidence of PW 1 Subedar KK S Nair who admits to be in charge of the Supply Point indicates that he had issued the gate pass on the instructions of Subedar A K Gurung.
He has categorically stated in his statement that he was persuaded by Subedar AK Gurung to issue him the ration on loan and in good faith he instructed the ration N C O to issue the ration on the basis of loan voucher.
The loan voucher was signed by Subedar A K Gurung as a token of evidence receiving the ration mentioned therein which was countersigned by P.W.1 Subedar K K S Nair.
The original copy of the loan voucher was handed over to Subedar A K Gurung and its duplicate was kept by Shri SC Ghatak.
All the items were issued on loan vouchers and its weighing was also done in the presence of Subedar AK Gurung and Mr. S C Ghatak.
He has stated that it has been the practice to issue rations on the basis of loan vouchers and even in the past such rations were issued and later on adjusted The second crucial witness is PW2 Mr. M R K Nair who drove the vehicle in which the rice bags were carried He stated that:"I brought the vehicle to the ration stand on G.R.D.
& RO Ghoomand waited for the stores to lye unloaded The man of the working party, however went, away without unloading.
Havaldar YN Sharma who was dressed civil dress had also gone away.I spotted a major standing near the `Q' Stores and requested him to expedite the unloading of the vehicle.
In the stores, I met Subedar A K Gurung who had been visiting the Supply Point.
I requested him to get the bags unloaded He sent me with an OR.
to the Canteen for a cup of tea and when I came back, I found that the bags had been unloaded in the meantime.
I had observed some grains of rice scattered in the body of the vehicle.
Thereafter, I informed Subedar AK Gurung that I was leaving and brought the vehicle to Supply Point.
"Thus after the vehicle reached G.R.D.
& RO Ghoom.
the petitioner had left and he had nothing to do with the goods thereafter.
It was Subedar A K Gurung who was requested unload the bags of rice from the vehicle.
The third important witness is PW8 Mr. Dil Bahadur Gurung Store man who has stated that the rice was stacked in the store room under the, supervision of Subedar AK Gurung who later on locked the store room.
In fact, it appears from the evidence that the petitioner signed the gate pass and travelled in the vehicle only on instructions from his superior officer Subedar A K Gurung.
If Sub.
AK Gurung and the driver of the vehicle carrying the goods are found to be not guilty of charge, I fail to see how the petitioner can be held guilty.
The whole story of the prosecution is that these goods were stacked in the store room under the supervision of Subedar AK Gurung and once they had reached G.R.D.
& RO Ghoom the petitioner had nothing to do with the goods.
There is no evidence to prove that the petitioner actually came in direct possession of the said goods.
Undoubtedly in order to prove a charge of misappropriation the accused must be proved to be in innocent possession of the goods alleged to have been misappropriated Since there is no evidence on record to prove that the ultimate possession was with the petitioner the charge of misappropriation cannot be sustained against him particularly when all the accused were acquitted of charges 1 and 3 and the charge of conspiracy was held not proved In fact, it appears that this was the reason why the confirming authority had itself recommended the revision of the verdict of the Court Martial in respect of charges 1 & 3.
4.
In the result, the petition is allowed The orders dated 8th, July,1977, 12th July 1977 and 18th April, 1979 are set aside as being against evidence on record The petition will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No costs.