VK Bali, J - How casually some times without caring to go into the Rules governing the field and even by departing from common sense, the case of a citizen is dealt with, would be evident from the facts of this case.
2.
Petitioner, whose date of birth is June 3, 1958, was enrolled in the Indian Army on March 30, 1975 having been found medically fit in all respects and in category 'AYE' by the competent authorities and was sent for training of Telecommunication Mechanic trade in the E.M.E.
(Electrical and Mechanical Engineering).
After three years of successful training in the said trade, he passed out from the training centre.
It is pleaded that the work of the Telecom Mechanic trade is of highly technical nature and involves testing of equipments, wireless and other sound prone equipments of high frequency waves, electronic devices and requires high precision and that are used in the widely laid down communication system.
Due to continuous testing of the equipments while repairing, overhauling and testing of which involved high sound thunder and busting with loud voice, petitioner felt some trouble in his ears and reported sick in the M.I.
Room and was kept under treatment.
As the trouble started aggravating, he was shifted in Hospital where he was treated for few months and downgraded two category 'CEE' and was sent back to his unit for performance of normal duties.
After return he continued to perform his duties and thereafter again the disease aggravated due to discharge from his ears which, it is stated, directly impaired his hearing power.
He was re-admitted to Military Hospital and remained there for considerable period and ultimately when it was found that the disease was uncontrollable, he was downgraded to Medical Category 'EEE' permanent with 40% disability and the disease was diagnosed as 'Sensory Neural Deafness' (both ears) and in consequence of the recommendations of the Invaliding Medical Board, he was found medically unfit for further service in the Army and was invalidated out of Military Service on August 23, 1981.
It is pleaded that he was assured by the authorities, both, Medical and Unit as well that he would be granted disability pension and all papers would be sent to his nearest pension disbursing officer after sanction of the same by the CDA(P) but he did not get any reply.
Later on, in the month of November, 1981, he was intimated by the record office concerned that his claim regarding disability pension had been rejected for the following reasons :-  "(i) that the disability is not attributable to Military service;  (ii)does not fulfil the following conditions, namely, it existed before or arose during Military service and has been or remains aggravated thereby."
Petitioner was advised to file an appeal within a period of six months which was also rejected and thereafter the second appeal also met with the same fate.
It is in the wake of circumstances, referred to above, that the petitioner has been constrained to approach this Hon'ble Court in this petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him disability pension with effect from August 24, 1981 with all other consequential benefits.
3.
Mr. Sehgal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner, contends that it is not disputed that petitioner when joined Army had no disability whatsoever and in fact initially he was categorised in medical category known as 'AYE' by the competent authorities.
It is only on account of nature of work that he had to do, that he had become disabled to serve the Army and this disability was directly attributable to military service, contends the learned counsel.
Petitioner, thus, it is canvassed, was entitled to disability pension as envisaged under Rule 173 of the Pension Regulation of Army Rules, 1961 (Part-I).
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos1 to 3, it has been admitted that petitioner was employed in the trade work in normal working conditions alongwith other personnel and it is pleaded that there were no high sound thunders and loud voice.
Petitioner did not make any request nor he reported sick till December 26, 1980 for any disease of ears.
He was admitted to Military Hospital, Deolali on December 27, 1980 with diagnosis 'Sensory Neural Deafness Bilateral'.
He was placed in low medical category CEE temporarily for six months.
He was again admitted to Military Hospital, Deolali on April 7, 1981 for re-categorisation and was transferred to Command Hospital, Pune on April 10, 1981.
A duly constituted Medical Board of the doctors was held on May 23, 1981 and it was declared that invaliding disability of petitioner was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service and was a constitutional disease.
In so far as the facts are concerned, the same have been admitted in para 3 of the written statement.
5.
Petitioner has filed replication with a view to bring to the notice of this Court that the persons with similar disease, who were discharged from Army, were given disability pension.
Case of one Captain Harbhajan Singh has been cited to say that even though he had the same disease 'Sensory Neural Deafness (BIL) and (ii) 'Pulmonary Bosinphilla' from which the aforesaid officer was found suffering at the time of his release from service and in his case disability 'Sensory Neural Deafness' was regarded as attributable to his Military Service and degree of disablement was assessed at less than 20% for the period from October 31, 1982 to October 1, 1984.
In so far as disability No. 2 is concerned, the same was held neither attributable nor aggravated by his service.
Another case of Captain Pokh Raj has been cited, who, it is pleaded, had deafness of both ears.
He was found suffering from this disease at the time of his release and the same was regarded as attributable to Military service.
It is not that the examples of two persons have simply been cited but the same have been proved as well as on the basis of orders Annexures P4 and P5 respectively.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the points raised by Mr. Sehgal, have merit and therefore this writ must succeed.
It is proved from the records of the case that petitioner, when joined the Army, was not suffering from disability of any kind whatsoever.
Even though its is not admitted that petitioner became deaf to an extent on account of nature of his duties, that is, while dealing with high thunder and loud voice equipment, yet the very disease that he suffered points towards the fact that it ought to have been on account of his Military Service.
That apart, the respondents cannot discriminate with the petitioner and deny him the disability pension.
The persons with the same very disease have been granted disability pension by holding that such disease in their case was directly attributable to Army service.
This is, thus, a case of hostile discrimination which offends Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
As mentioned above, the respondents have far from referring to the rules departed even from making use of common sense and thus, denied the rightful claim of petition who had after all served the cause of the Nation.
7.
In view of what has been said above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to forthwith give disability pension to petitioner to the extent the deserves under the Rules.
Petitioner is also entitled in this case to interest which shall be @12% per annum from the date the disability pension became due till such time the same is paid.
He also deserves the costs of this case which are quantified at Rs. 5000/-.