JS Narang, J - The petitioner is a graduate and he was appointed as a Clerk in the Court of District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot, with effect from July 11, 1989.
He continued working as such upto February 29, 1992 when he was declared surplus on abolition of a Court.
Subsequently, he was reinstated in service on June 11, 1992 and continued working as such.
As averred, upon reinstatement he had been granted the benefit of earlier service rendered by him with effect from 1871989, vide order dated March 26, 1993.
2.
It has been further averred that the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Punjab (hereinafter referred to as "the Commission"), had sent a requisition to the District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot, that the Clerks already working in the Court of District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot, may apply for their selection and appointment as Clerks with the President, District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Moga (hereinafter referred to as the "District Consumer Forum").
Pursuant thereto, the petitioner along with others applied accordingly through proper channel.
He along with others were called for interview and that the petitioner was selected for appointment as a Clerk-cum-typist and that the order of appointment dated October 16, 1996, along with three others with District Consumer Forum, Moga, had been issued upon the terms and conditions spelt out therein.
Under term No. 1, it has been stated that the appointments are against temporary posts and incumbent would retain their lien against their substantive posts in their parent department.
It is contained in the second condition that the incumbent would be relieved of their present posts as per directions to be given by the District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot, would assume the charge of Bench clerk, LDCs.
and typists respectively in District Consumer Forum, Moga, as early as possible.
3.
Pursuant to the above, the petitioner joined his duty in the post of Clerk-cum-typist with District Forum, Moga on October 25, 1996.
He was transferred from District Forum Moga to District Forum, Kapurthala vide order dated May 9, 1997 and he joined the duty at the aforestated place on 1261997.
By virtue of the notification dated May 28, 1997, the rules called the Punjab Civil Services (First Amendment) Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, 1997, had been amended.
It had been provided that in the case of a temporary government employee who is appointed by direct recruitment or by transfer in another department or in a different cadre in the same department, he shall not be allowed to retain any lien on the post held prior to his new appointment, after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of his joining the new post.
Copy of the notification has been appended as Annexure P5.
4.
It is also the case of the petitioner that pursuant to Rule 4.6 of the Consumer Protection (Punjab) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules"), the State Government would appoint such staff as may be necessary to assist the District Forum in its day-to-day work and perform such other functions as are provided under the rules or assigned to the employee by the President.
It is also the case of the petitioner that all the posts with the said Commission as well as the District Consumer Forums have been sanctioned and created by the Government of Punjab, Department of Food and Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs by passing orders from time to time.
The Government of Punjab had notified the Punjab Food and Supplies (Class-III) Services Rules, 1990 and under Rule 10 of the said rules, the person appointed to the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if recruited by direct appointment and for one year if recruited otherwise.
Under the rules, the probation period including extension shall in no case exceed three years.
Thus, as per these rules the petitioner has rendered service more than the aforesaid period and would be deemed to have been confirmed with the said Commission.
5.
The State Commission i.e. respondent No. 2 issued an order dated March 31, 2001, relieving the petitioner from the post of LDC, District Forum, Kapurthala with immediate effect with a direction that the petitioner would join his substantive post in the office of Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Moga.
A copy of the aforestated order has been appended as Annexure P6.
Copy of the relieving order dated April 1, 2004, has been appended as Annexure P7.
The petitioner submitted his joining report with the District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot vide communication dated 242004, copy Annexure P8.
He had not been assigned any duty and that a communication dated May 7, 2004 was addressed to the learned District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot, copy Annexure P9.
In response thereto, the communication dated May 22, 2004, was received by the petitioner disclosing that the matter had been referred to the High Court, as soon as a reply is received, further action would be taken.
The petitioner addressed a communication to the learned District and Sessions Judge, Faridkot that despite having reported on duty since April 2, 2004, he has not been paid his salary.
The High Court vide communication dated August 23, 2004, addressed to the learned District and Sessions Judge, communicated that the claim of the petitioner has been considered and declined.
The petitioner reverted back to the State Commission respondent No. 2 as also to the District Consumer Forum, Kapurthala.
The representation dated September 6, 2004, submitted by the petitioner to the President of the District Consumer Forum had been forwarded to the State Commission respondent No. 2, no order thereon has been passed by the State Commission.
Since no relief having been granted to the petitioner, the present petition has been filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated March 31, 2004, as also the reliving order issued pursuant thereto and also a writ of mandamus for a direction to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 for allowing the petitioner to continue as Clerk-cum-typist with the District Consumer Forum, Kapurthala.
6.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated September 30, 2004 and that the petition has been contested by respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 5 by way of filing written statement through the President of respondent No. 5.
However, respondent No. 4 has also filed written statement accordingly.
7.
The stand of the respondents is that the letter of appointment dated October 16, 1996, categorically discloses that the appointment is being made against a temporary post and that the incumbent would retain his lien against his substantive post in his parent department and that on his request the petitioner had been transferred to Kapurthala.
It is also the stand that a person appointed on deputation or appointed against a temporary post can be repatriated at any time without giving any reasons.
It is further the stand that the post of clerk fell vacant upon the repatriation of the petitioner on 142004 and that the same has been filled up by the respondents on 1852004 and that the present petition has been filed on September 21, 2004.
Thus, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief and the petition deserves to be dismissed on this ground alone.
It has been further disclosed that the vacancy caused by the petitioner upon repatriation has been filled up by way of transfer of Ms. Kiran Devi Clerk, District Consumer Forum, Faridkot, and that she has challenged the transfer by way of CWP No. 8267 of 2004.
The contention of the petitioner vis-a-vis losing of the lien upon the post by virtue of a notification dated 2571997, issued by the Government of Punjab, has not been denied as is evident from the contents of para 5, where such plea has been taken by the petitioner, which has been admitted, being the matter of record.
8.
Additionally, the plea has been taken that it was the duty of the petitioner to have submitted an application to his parent department in regard to his lien at the relevant time.
The compliance having not been made, the petitioner cannot take the benefit under the garb of the aforestated notification.
It is the stand of the respondents that the Punjab Food and Supplies (Class-III) Service Rules, 1990, have no application vis-a-vis the staff working in the State Commission or the District Consumer Forum and that the service condition of the petitioner is governed by the drafts rules framed by respondent No. 2 on May 5, 1999 by virtue of the power under Section 24- B(iii) read with Section 24-B(2) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, which are known as "The Punjab State District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forums Class-III and Class-IV Services Regulations, 1999."
Thus, the petitioner is not entitled to consider himself as confirmed by virtue of any deeming fiction.
9.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have also perused the paper book as also the orders impugned before us.
10.
The petitioner has also placed on record the document termed as "Information regarding Staff of the District Consumer Forum", copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-15.
Likewise another such similar document has been appended as Annexure P-16, the perusal of the same shows that the President, District Consumer Forum, Kapurthala, has categorically mentioned against the name of the petitioner under the column "Position of lien in the parent Office" "No lien".
Similar is the status in the subsequent document.
Under the head, mode of recruitment, it has been mentioned "transfer", date of joining has been reflected as 1261997 and the date of retirement has been indicated as 30112003.
This status has been accepted by the District Consumer Forum respectively.
This fact has been specifically indicated in para 24 and that there is no denial on the part of the respondents and that the plea set up is that the mentioning of the word "No lien" has been mentioned inadvertently and that the petitioner cannot take advantage of the wrong information supplied by the replying respondent.
The factum of appointment of the petitioner by transfer has not been denied.
It has nowhere been intimated that the petitioner had joined the District Consumer Forum on deputation.
The Consumer Forum categorically admitted that the petitioner does not have any lien upon the post from where he has been transferred for the purpose of being recruited.
It has also been admitted that he shall be retiring from the post in 2023.
It does not lie in the mouth of the respondents now take the stand that the word "no lien" has been mentioned incorrectly.
Though such plea has been taken but the same has not been justified under any count or under any rule.
So far as the contention of the petitioner, having been regularized by virtue of the application of the rule, we refrain ourselves from opining in this regard as the stand of the respondents is that the service conditions of the petitioner are governed under the draft rules which have been defined as The Punjab State District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forums Class-III and Class-IV Service Regulations, 1999.
Thus, the status of having been regularized would be determinable as per the rules applicable.
By no power, the State Commission could have passed the impugned order repatriating the petitioner to the substantive post, as the lien of the petitioner, as per the stand of the Consumer Forum had ceased as is evident from the documents as appended as Annexure P15 and P16 respectively.
Thus, the petitioner could not have been directed to join at his alleged substantive post in the office of Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division) Moga, in the Sessions Division, Moga.
No doubt, it is contained in the term of appointment that the appointments are against temporary posts and that the incumbents would retain their lien upon the substantive post in their parent department.
It is not the stand of the respondents that the post still continues to be a temporary post and that so far as the retention of lien is concerned, the stand of the petitioner is completely justified and that the factum of "no lien" on the substantive post has been duly accepted by the respondents.
It is borne out from the notification dated 2851997, issued by the Government of Punjab, vide which Rule 312 has been substituted spelling out the claim of retention of lien by the employees accordingly.
It has been specifically substituted under Rule 312(2) that in case of a temporary government employee, who is appointed by direct recruitment or by transfer in another department or in a different cadre in the same department, he shall not be allowed to retain any lien on the post held prior to his new appointment after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of his joining the new post.
In the case at hand, admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed temporarily as a Clerk in the Court, which fact has been admitted by the respondents.
Thus, the petitioner having completed two years from the date of his joining against the new post, would be taken to have lost his lien on the temporary post against which he had been appointed.
For ready reference the provision applicable is reproduced as :  "312 (1) xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx (2) In the case of a temporary Government employee, who is appointed by direct recruitment or by transfer in another department or in a different cadre in the same department, he shall not be allowed to retain any lien on the post held prior to this (his new appointment) after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of his joining against the new post.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx".
11.
We are of the considered opinion that the petitioner had lost the lien on the post of Clerk in the office of Sessions Division, Moga, after completion of a period of two years upon the post from the date of joining service with the Consumer Commission i.e. respondent No. 2.
Thus, the impugned order of repatriation of the petitioner is not sustainable.
12.
In view of the above, the petition deserves to be allowed, resultantly, writ of certiorari is granted, the aforestated impugned orders vide which the petitioner has been repatriated and has been relieved of the charge, are quashed.
The petitioner is also granted a writ of mandamus with a direction to the respondents allowing the petitioner to join his post of Clerk-cum-typist at the place from where he had been ordered to be repatriated, as the post against which he was working cannot be said to have fallen vacant.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to join his duties within a period of 30 days from the date of production of certified copy of his judgment.
It is clarified that he shall be entitled to the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, claim of salary as well but without interest, which shall be paid to the petitioner within two months from the date of joining.
Petition allowed.