GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing order Annexure P4 dated 1411981 vide which the State Government promoted respondent No. 3-Shri B.S.
Datta on the post of Senior Staff Officer (Administration), Home Guards and Civil Defence Department, Haryana; order Annexure P7 dated 13101982 vide which Governor of Haryana retrospectively relaxed the qualifications prescribed for the post of Senior Staff Officer and combined seniority list (Annexure P8) of the officers of Home Guards and Civil Defence Services.
2.
Late Shri Raj Kumar Jindal, who is represented by his legal representatives, joined service as Clerk in the office of Commandant General, Home Guards and Director, Civil Defence, Punjab on 1241960.
He was promoted as Assistant on 27.1.1962.
On the re-organisation of the State of Punjab, his services were allocated to the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as Accountant on 18.11.1968, as Superintendent on 18.5.1971 and lastly as Junior Staff Officer w.e.f.
181974.
In January 1981, the State Government undertook the exercise for making promotion to the post of Senior Staff Officer from among Group-B officers of the Home Guards and Civil Defence Department and promoted respondent No. 3 vide order Annexure P4 apparently because he was shown an senior-most officer in list Annexure P8.
The representation made by late Shri Raj Kumar Jindal against the fixation of his seniority below respondent No. 3 was rejected by the State Government vide letter Annexure P9 dated 2161982.
Later on, the State Government issued order dated 13101982 under Rule 17 of the Haryana Home Guards and Civil Defence Services (State Service Group `A') Rules, 1979 (for short, `the Rules') for retrospective relaxation of qualification from graduation to matric for all Group-B officers as a class for promotion to the post of Senior Staff Officer.
3.
Shri Raj Kumar Jindal challenged the promotion of respondent No. 3 and the Government's decision to retrospectively relax the requirement of qualifications prescribed under Rule 7 of the Rules on the following grounds :-  (a) Respondent No. 3 was not eligible on 1411981 to be considered for promotion because he did not possess the qualifications prescribed under Rule 7 read with Appendix B of the Rules.
(b) Rule 17 does not empower the State Government to retrospectively relax the requirement of the qualifications prescribed for appointment to the posts specified in the Schedule.
(c) Order dated 13101982 is liable to be quashed being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because the sole purpose of relaxing the requirement of academic qualifications was to regularise the illegal promotion given to respondent No. 3.
(d) There is provision in the Rules for preparing a combined seniority list of the officers of different wings and, therefore, respondent No. 3 could not have been treated senior to him.
4.
Respondent No. 1 has filed written statement.
It has defended the promotion of respondent No. 3 on the post of Senior Staff Officer by asserting that decision in this regard was taken after examining the record of three senior-most officers.
It has also justified the relaxation granted vide order dated 13101982 by making the following averments :  "Para No. 9(i) of the writ petition is admitted to the extent that the statutory rules lay down graduation as minimum qualification for appointment to the post of Senior Staff Officer but according to rule 17 "where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so, it may, by order for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
In connection with the promotion of respondent No. 3 as Senior Staff Officer relaxation has been given vis-a-vis academic qualification not to this individual alone but to all incumbents eligible for promotion, since it was felt, that denial of promotion chances to a number of Home Guards personnel who are mostly ex-servicemen and non-graduates on the basis of mere academic qualifications, will lead to frustration among them and hammer the department's smooth working.
The Government has granted relaxation in question not to any individual but to a category and class of people.
The matter has been referred to Public Service Commission and on receipt of its approval, regular promotion orders will be duly notified.
Respondent No. 3 is eligible for promotion and his appointment is legal."
5.
Dr. Balram Gupta, learned senior Counsel appearing for the legal representatives of late Shri Raj Kumar Jindal argued that promotion of respondent No. 3 should be declared illegal and quashed because he did not possess the minimum academic qualifications prescribed under Rule 7.
He further argued that order dated 13101982 should be treated as non est because Rule 17 does not empower the State Government to retrospectively relax the minimum qualification prescribed under Rule 7.
He then argued that the decision of the government to retrospectively relax the qualification from graduate to matric may be held as vitiated by mala fides because the sole purpose of doing so was to regularise the illegal promotion of respondent No. 3.
Dr. Gupta laid emphasis on the fact that, the petitioner was the only eligible candidate available for promotion to the post of Senior Staff Officer and argued that the State Government could not have relaxed the requirement of qualification ignoring the availability of an eligible candidate.
Dr. Gupta further argued that respondent No. 3 could not have been selected because his ACRs were full of adverse remarks.
6.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General pointed out that relaxation granted vide order dated 13101982 was to benefit all Group-B officers and not respondent No. 3 alone and argued that general relaxation granted by the State Government in the requirement of academic qualification cannot be termed as arbitrary or violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution or an act of favouritism.
He further argued that even if the Court finds any irregularity in the promotion of respondent No. 3, the same may not be quashed at this belated stage because the petitioner has left for heavenly abode and respondent No. 3 has retired from service.
7.
I have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned counsel.
Rules 7, 17 and Entry-I of Appendix B of the Rules, which have bearing on the decision of the writ petition, read as under :-  "7.
Qualifications : No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix `B' to these Rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment by promotion.
17.
Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so, it may, by order for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these Rules with respect to any class or category of persons.
Entry No. 1 of Appendix B  S. No.
Designation of Post.
Academic qualifications and experience for appointment other that direct recruitment.
1.
Senior Staff Officer (including Commandant, Combined Training Institute.
(i) From amongst officers of the rank of District Commandant, Junior Staff Officer.
Accounts-cum-Administrative Officer, Public Relation Officer and Chief Instructor, Combined Training Institute, Haryana, Home Guards and Civil Defence (State Service Group `B') having at least 5 years experience and Deputy Controller, Civil Defence Group A having at least 3 years experience as Deputy Controller, Civil Defence, Class I Provided that only persons who are at least Graduate from a recognised University and who fulfil the above conditions shall be eligible for promotion.
Selection will be based on merit- cum-seniority.
(ii) Superintendent of Police, with at least three years service as such with minimum educational qualification upto Graduation standard or equivalent will be eligible for promotion."
A reading of the rules reproduced above showas that no person can be appointed as Senior Staff Officer by promotion unless he is holding one of the posts specified in column-3 of Entry 1 of Appendix B and possesses the requisite experience apart from being a graduate from a recognised University (Rule 7).
Rule 17 lays down that where the government is of the opinion that it is necessary and expedient to do so, it may relax any of the provisions of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons.
It is, thus, clear that the government can relax all or any of the provisions of the Rules for the benefit of any class or category of persons provided that it is satisfied that such relaxation is necessary in the interest of service.
8.
In the present case, the State Government relaxed the requirement of academic qualification for the entire class of officers in Group `B', who did not possess the qualification of graduation from a recognised University because it was felt that but for the relaxation of the qualification senior- most officers in the service would not get promotion and would feel frustrated by being made to work under junior officers.
Therefore, it is not possible to agree with Dr. Gupta that there was no valid ground to relax the requirement of minimum qualification.
9.
I am further of the view that the decision contained in order dated 13101982 cannot be held as vitiated by arbitrariness of mala fides.
It has not been disputed by the petitioner that the relaxation granted by the government was to benefit all Group-B officers including respondent No. 3.
It is also not his case that the government has relaxed the minimum qualification at the instance of respondent No. 3 or that some one in the government had tried to favour him.
Therefore, order dated 13101982 cannot be nullified on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution or mala fide exercise of power.
10.
In Sandeep Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(2) SCT 16 (SC) : 1997(2) RSJ 583, a two-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court upheld the decision taken by the Government of Punjab to grant relaxation in the requirement of minimum physical standard prescribed for selection of Deputy Superintendent of Jails under Punjab Police Service Rules, 1959.
The High Court had referred to the provisions of Rule 7 which stipulated the qualifications necessary for direct recruitment to the Service and Rule 14 under which the government could relax the rules and observed that the so- called policy was formulated after the result of the written test was announced with the sole object of securing selection and appointment of the respondent (appellant before the Supreme Court) because he could not have been interviewed by the Commission without clearing the standard of physical fitness and that this was an act of sheer favouritism.
While reversing the order of the High Court, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Appellant cannot be blamed for being the only candidate available at present seeking relaxation of physical standards.
The same benefit could also have ensured to anyone else situated in the same position as the appellant had there been any.
Policy-wise it is not possible to think that appellant would have been the only kith and kin of those who suffered on account of the activities of the terrorists in Punjab or those, who faced terrorism bravely.
Perhaps, in this particular selection appellant happened to be the only beneficiary of the policy.
Nor can we find any mala fides merely because government evolved the policy on the occasion when appellant approached for relaxation of the standard.
The occasion would have provided to the government an opportunity to recapitulate the events and thus to remind themselves of the plight of those families which suffered traumatic experience when their kith and kin were relentlessly involved in continued operations fighting the terrorists who were possessed with highly lethal weapons and using hideouts to strike blitz against innocent people as well as the police force intermittently.
A government may have to act on some occasion for chalking out a particular policy.
If any particular occasion has altered the government to the necessity for taking a policy decision it is hardly sufficient to attribute mala fide or favouritism to the government."
By applying the ratio of the aforementioned decision to the facts of this case, I hold that the general relaxation granted by the State Government in the requirement of academic qualification is not tainted by arbitrariness or mala fides.
11.
There is another reason for my disinclination to entertain the prayer of the legal representatives of the petitioner to quash the promotion of respondent No. 3 and to direct the consideration of the case of late Shri Raj Kumar Jindal for promotion to the post of Senior Staff Officer because respondent No. 3 had retired from service in April, 1984 and Shri Raj Kumar Jindal had expired in 1986.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.