RL Anand, J - Smt. Krishna Johar, petitioner, has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by her that the order Annexure P-3 be quashed and directions be issued to the respondents to treat her as continuing Head Accountant with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she was duly selected and appointed as Clerk under the respondents and joined her duties on 28.8.1968.
On account of her good performance she earned promotion as Junior Auditor w.e.f.
1621976 on seniority-cum-merit basis.
Her performance as Clerk as well as Junior Auditor was to the best of the satisfaction of her superiors.
Her services are being governed by Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board (Services) Regulations, 1976.
She was selected and promoted as Head Accountant vide order dated 1241993 on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
She took over as Head Accountant on 1541993.
Her entire record was unblemished and she was never found wanting in the performance of her duties.
She was placed on probation for a period of one year.
Nothing adverse was conveyed to her.
After the completion of prescribed probation period she could not be subjected to any further period of probation.
After the completion of probation period of one year on 14.4.1994 again she was put on probation period vide order dated 10.3.1995.
Since there was a tussle going on regarding seniority and promotion etc, she was harassed in various ways.
On 1721995 adverse remarks were conveyed to her for the year 1993-94.
She made a representation and refuted the observations.
On 1071996, she was issued show cause notice vide which it was decided to revert her to the post of Junior Auditor after her having worked in the capacity of Head Accountant for over three years.
She duly gave the reply to the show cause notice, but respondent No. 4 passed the order reverting her without going into the facts and circumstances of the case and brushing aside the settled law on the point.
The petitioner alleged that she has already completed one year of the probation on 14.4.1994 and her probation period could not be extended.
The ACR which was conveyed to her after a long period has no significance and the entire action of the respondents is illegal, unfair, mala fide, unjust and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The order of the reversion of the petitioner was passed by respondent No. 4 in order to accommodate a person of his convenience in place of the petitioner.
With these broad allegations, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed a joint written statement and denied the allegations.
According to them, the petitioner was promoted as Head Accountant on 12.4.19943.
She joined on 1541993.
She was put on probation and it was extended from time to time.
She was on probation for a total period of three years.
Adverse remarks were conveyed to her.
She did not improve her work and in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations she was reverted from the post of Head Accountant to the post of Junior Auditor.
According to the Regulations, if the probation period is not satisfactory, an official can be reverted to the post from which one was promoted.
The probation period of the petitioner was extended for one year ie from 1541994 to 1441995 vide order dated 10.3.1995 and it was further extended for six months from 1541995 to 15.10.1995.
Further it was extended for six months from 15.10.1995 to 1441996 vide order dated 26101995.
In the year 1993-94 the petitioner was given a warning.
She committed serious mistakes in income tax deduction at source.
She was graded below average for the year 1993-94.
Against these remarks, representation was received which was filed being time barred.
In the year 1994-95 the petitioner was given a warning and she was adjudged below average.
She did not make any representation against these remarks.
Again on 28111995, she was conveyed adverse remarks for the first six months of the year 1995-96.
The remarks were "below average - not fit for promotion - careless in work - does not try to improve - does not know the job of an Accountant even".
No representation was made.
She was asked to do the work of Ram Chander, Accountant, who went on leave.
The petitioner refused to do the work saying that it is a complicated job.
Later on, the work was given to one Mr. Sohan Lal, Clerk, who did the same.
In short, the stand taken up by the respondents is that the work and conduct of the petitioner was not satisfactory.
She was given various warnings etc. As the work of the petitioner was not found satisfactory against the post of Head Accountant, therefore, she was reverted to the post of Junior Auditor.
4.
I have heard Mr. Rameshwar Sharma, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. KL Arora, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is the common case of the parties that the services of the petitioner were governed by Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board (Services) Regulations, 1976.
Regulation 9 reads as under :-  "9.
Condition of service :- (1) Probation of Members of Service :- Persons appointed to any post shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if recruited by direct appointment and one year, if recruited, otherwise, provided that :- (a) any period, after such appointment, spent on deputation on a corresponding or a higher post shall count towards the period of probation.
(b) In the case of an appointment by transfer, any period of work in equivalent or higher rank, prior to appointment to the service may, in the discretion of the appointing authority, be allowed to count towards the period of probation; and (c) any probation of officiating appointment to a service shall be reckoned as period spent on probation, but no person who has so officiated, shall on the completion of prescribed period of probation, be entitled to be confirmed, unless he be appointed against a permanent vacancy.
(2) If in the opinion of the appointing authority, the work or conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory, it may :- (a) if such person is recruited by direct appointment, dispense with his services; and (b) if such person is recruited otherwise :- (i) revert him to his former post; or (ii) deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of the previous appointment permit; (3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may :- (a) if his work or conduct, in his opinion, has been satisfactory - (i) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily; (ii) if his work or conduct has not been in its opinion satisfactory :- (i) dispense with his service, if recruited by direct appointment or if recruited otherwise revert him to his former post, or deal with him in such other manner, as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment permit; or (ii) extend his period of probation, and thereafter, pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation :- Provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years."
6.
A reading of the above would show that a person appointed to any post shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if recruited by direct appointment and one year, if recruited, otherwise.
Clause (2) of regulation 9 (supra) lays down that if in the opinion of the appointing authority, the work and conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory and if such person is recruited by direct appointment, his services can be dispensed with and if the employee is promoted he can be reverted to his former post.
The proviso to clause (3) of Regulation 9 further lays down that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
It is also the case of the parties that the petitioner was promoted to the post of Head Accountant on 1241993.
Further, the case of the respondents is that since the work and conduct of the petitioner was not found satisfactory, therefore, her probation period was extended from time to time and last extension which could be granted to the petitioner ought to be 1241996.
So far as the position of law is concerned, it is very clear.
The authorities are supposed to take the decision either before the date of expiry of the last date of the probation period or within a reasonable time as to whether the employee who has been promoted should be allowed to continue with the post or he/she should be reverted to the former post.
If the decision is not taken within three years from the date of the promotion, the intention of the law is further that in the event of non-passing of any order by the authorities, such employee shall be deemed to have cleared the probation making a way for his confirmation.
In the present case the action was taken by the respondent authorities against the petitioner on 1071996 when it issued a show cause notice.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that the petitioner was informed that her period of probation is not going to be extended beyond 1241996.
The show cause notice which was issued on 1071996 has also not been issued within a reasonable time after 1241996.
7.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the respondents are an insignificant office and the establishment's people are not familiar with the intricacies of law.
The file was processed somewhere in the month of May 1996 and some delay could always occur in the issuance of show cause notice.
Therefore, if the respondent authorities had issued the notice on 1071996, it should not be considered fatal.
I am not convinced with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
We are dealing a case of statutory provisions.
According to the Regulations, the period of probation could not be extended beyond three years.
Meaning thereby, it was obligatory on the part of the Board to take a decision immediately before the expiry of the last date of probation or just after the expiry of the probation period.
In the present case the notice was issued somewhere in the month of July, 1996.
In such a situation some guidance has also been given to the law courts by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation and another v. S Manjunath, 2000(2) SCT 810, where it was observed that if there is an implicit term in the scheme of Regulation governing the service that on the expiry of the period of probation beyond the maximum term provided therein, an employee will be deemed to have been confirmed, inasmuch as the Corporation cannot terminate his service on the expiry of such period.
In this regard it will be useful for me to reproduce para 5 of the judgment as under :-  "5.
All the three writ petitions were initially heard by a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court and by a common order dated 3.11.95 those writ petitions were allowed on the view that there was an implicit term in the scheme of Regulation governing their services that on the expiry of the period of probation beyond the maximum term provided therein, an employee will be deemed to have been confirmed inasmuch as the Corporation cannot terminate their services on the expiry of such period.
In coming to such a conclusion, the learned Single Judge followed an earlier decision of Division Bench dated 5282 in writ Appeal No. 100/91 (M Balachandra Rao v. KSRTC and another).
The Corporation, aggrieved by such orders, pursued the matter in Appeal before a Division Bench in Writ Appeal No. 36-38/96.
The Division Bench adverted to the decisions of this Court reported in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210; Paramjit Singh v. Ram Rakha, 1979(3) SCC 478 and MK Agarwal v. Gurgaon Gramin Bank, AIR 1988 SC 286 and observed that the position in the appeals is no different from the one dealt with in those decisions of this Court and consequently confirmed the order of the learned Single Judge.
Hence, the above appeals."
8.
Further, this High Court in NK Dutta v. Punjab State Coop.
Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, 1994(4) SCT 625 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 777 held in the contest of the Staff Regulations that once the period of probation came to an end, the petitioner will have to be treated as confirmed by operation of rules.
It was observed by his Lordship that "Moreover in view of the judgments of the Supreme Court, once the period of probation came to an end, the petitioner will have to be treated as confirmed by operation of rules."
No law to the contrary has been cited by the learned counsel for the respondents.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed, the order Annexure P-3 is hereby quashed and a writ of mandamus is issued to the respondents to treat the petitioner as continuing Head Accountant with all the consequential benefits.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.