RL Anand, J - Shri Ranbir Singh son of Shri Zile Singh was a Clerk-cum- Cashier in Bank of India.
He has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents with a prayer that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the report dated 2061996 and the order dated 14.11.1996 passed by the respondents vide which he was dismissed from the service be quashed.
It has also been prayed by the petitioner that the order dated 3111997 vide which his appeal was dismissed be also quashed.
Further, a prayer was made by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing them to take back him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the service of the respondent-Bank on 27.9.1983 as temporary employee.
He was promoted to the clerical cadre on 441994.
The service conditions of the petitioner are governed by the Staff Regulations, besides Sastry Award and Bipartite Settlement.
On 26101995 he was issued with a charge sheet for alleged misconduct relating to the purported transaction of March, 1992 and 661993.
The charges were that he has collected Rs. 5,200/- from one Parkash Singh who was loanee and out of the same misappropriated certain amount and issued false counter-foil of pay-in-slip.
The petitioner gave the reply to the charge sheet.
Inquiry was conducted in an arbitrary manner.
The finding of the inquiry has gone against the petitioner.
Show cause notice was given to the petitioner to which he gave his explanation, but the same was not accepted and the impugned order of dismissal from service was passed.
The petitioner also filed an appeal which was illegally dismissed.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the charges with regard to the embezzlement are false.
It is not proved before the Inquiry officer that there was any entrustment of Rs. 5,200/-.
The alleged deposit of Rs. 4,000/- on 951995 and Rs. 400/- subsequently by the petitioner in the loan account of Parkash Singh is incorrect.
The inquiry as based on no evidence.
There was hardly any proof before the Inquiry officer with regard to the embezzlement of Rs. 4,400/- by the petitioner.
The preliminary inquiry conducted in this case is on the back of the petitioner.
The defence of the petitioner has not rightly been considered by the Inquiry Officer.
Therefore, the impugned orders are illegal and without jurisdiction and the petitioner is liable to be reinstated into service.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The respondents took preliminary objections that Parkash Singh was granted a loan of Rs. 5,000/- by the respondent-Bank on 1831992 and he used to remit the repayment of his loan through the petitioner, who was then posted at Model Town Branch, Ludhiana as Staff Subordinate.
According to Parkash Singh, he remitted a total amount of Rs. 5,200/- on various occasions through the petitioner.
The petitioner, however, deposited only Rs. 500/- on 19.6.1992 and Rs. 300/- on 13101992 in the loan account of Parkash Singh and misappropriated the amount of Rs. 4,400/-, which was entrusted to him for depositing in the loan account of Parkash Singh.
The petitioner issued false counter-foils of pay-in-slips for Rs. 100/- dated nil, Rs. 200/- dated 7/92 and Rs. 500/- dated 661993 to Parkash Singh for his satisfaction though no such amount was deposited by the petitioner in the loan account of said Parkash Singh.
Subsequently, on knowing that the bank came to know the fact of the aforesaid misappropriation, the petitioner arranged to deposit Rs. 4,000/- in cash on 951995 and Rs. 400/- in cash in the loan account subsequently.
A departmental inquiry was instituted after issuing a charge sheet vide order dated 26101995 and subsequently Inquiry Officer was appointed.
He held a fair and impartial inquiry.
The petitioner was given reasonable opportunity to fully participate in the inquiry.
He led his defence and on receipt of the finding of the Inquiry Officer the disciplinary authority concurred with the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer.
It furnished a copy of the inquiry report to the petitioner, who made representation to the show cause notice vide which penalty of dismissal was proposed.
Personal hearing was also given to the petitioner.
During the course of inquiry the petitioner made his oral/written submissions.
The punishing authority after going through the entire record passed the final order by confirming the proposed punishment of dismissal.
The petitioner filed an appeal which was also dismissed on 3111997.
Before the Appellate Authority also personal hearing was given to the petitioner.
There is no legal infirmity in the impugned order and the written petition is without any merit.
With this defence the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
The petitioner filed a re-joinder to the written statement of the respondents in which he reiterated the averments of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that it is a case of no evidence and there is cogent proof led by the bank before the Inquiry Officer that the petitioner deposited Rs. 4,400/- or that the said amount was entrusted to the petitioner in the year 1993.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner even referred to the order dated 12.11.1997 passed by the Bench at the time of the admission of the writ petition.
On the contrary, it is submitted on behalf of the respondents that it is proved on the record that the petitioner is responsible for misappropriation.
It is a case of evidence.
The petitioner himself has confessed his crime which has been relied upon rightly by the Inquiry Officer.
The petitioner has no explanation to the letters Exhibits P-10 and P-11 which were produced before the Inquiry Officer Mr. AK Aggarwal, who considered the entire matter and gave the finding against the petitioner.
Every principle of natural justice was complied with.
7.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that this writ petition is totally devoid of merit.
Annexure P-5 is the copy of the charge sheet was which framed against the petitioner.
It runs as follows :-  "During the period while you were posted and working as staff Subordinate at bank's Model Town Branch, Ludhiana, the acts of gross misconduct as hereinafter mentioned are alleged to have been committed by you :- That Mr. Parkash Singh S/o Shri Sher Singh who was granted a loan of Rs. 5000/- by our Bank's Model Town Branch on 18.3.92 used to remit the repayments of his loan account through you.
Accordingly, he remitted a total amount of Rs. 5200/- on various occasions through you.
You have, however, deposited only Rs. 500/- on 19.6.92 and Rs. 300/- on 13.10.92 in the loan account of Shri Parkash Singh and misappropriated the rest of the amount i.e. Rs. 4400/-.
That is this process of misappropriation of the amount entrusted to you for depositing in the loan account of Shri Parkash Singh, you have issued false counter-foils of payment in slips for Rs. 100/- dated nil, Rs. 200/- dated 7/92 and Rs. 500/- dated 6693 to Mr. Parkash Singh for his satisfaction though no such amount was deposited by you in his loan account.
Your aforesaid acts of misappropriation of Rs. 4400/- received from the borrower for depositing in his loan account and issuance of false counterfoils of paying in slips being acts prejudicial to the interest of the bank, amount to acts of gross misconduct within the meaning of clause 105(j) of the First Bipartite Settlement dated 191066."
8.
Thus the reading of the above would show that Parkash Singh was granted a loan of Rs. 5,000/- by the bank, who used to remit the repayment of his loan through the petitioner.
He remitted a total amount of Rs. 5,200/- on various occasions through the petitioner but the petitioner deposited only Rs. 800/- out of the said amount in the loan account of Parkash Singh and the rest of the amount was misappropriated by the petitioner.
It is further alleged by the bank that the petitioner issued false counter-foils of pay-in-slips for Rs. 100/-, Rs. 200/- and Rs. 500/- to Parkash Singh on different dates for his satisfaction but in fact no amount was deposited by the petitioner.
We are dealing a case of a dismissed employee.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show that there is any legal infirmity or material irregularity of procedure in the conduct of the inquiry.
This Court is not sitting as a court of appeal.
Its jurisdiction is limited under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to see whether there is any legal infirmity or material irregularity in the procedure vide which the case of the petitioner has been prejudiced.
Every departmental allegation is not supposed to be proved like a criminal charge, but if there is some evidence justifying a conclusion on the part of the Inquiry Officer that the delinquent official is guilty of the charge, in this type of finding the High Court will be slow in interfering the same under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The bank before the Inquiry Officer was relying upon the two vital documents Exhibits P-10 and P-11 which have been proved through the statement of PW-11 Tarlochan Singh, who appeared before the Inquiry Officer and his statement runs as follows :-  "I am Tarlochan Singh, working at Regional office, Ludhiana.
I know Mr. Ranbir Singh.
I met him at Panipat Branch on 09.08.95 for taking his statement in connection with investigation related to alleged complaint against him, assigned to me.
I got his statement in writing on that day.
I identify the statement given by Sh. Ranbir Singh (marked Exhibit P-11) (Annexure III to investigation report submitted by me).
Ranbir Singh himself has written this letter and he has put his signatures in my presence.
He has given this letter voluntarily.
I visited the residence of Mr. Parkash Singh the borrower at Jabadi, Ludhiana.
I was taking along a copy of loan application on which photograph of Parkash Singh was affixed, so I could identify Parkash Singh.
I was to enquire about the payments made in the account to which he advised that he had been sending money amounting to Rs. 5200/- through Ranbir Singh.
I clarify that I had told Mr. Parkash Singh that no such amount (Rs. 5200/-) had been deposited in the a/c except Rs. 300/- on 13.10.92; Rs. 500/- on 19.06.92.
Further to this he told me that the matter has been finally resolved with Ranbir Singh for total Rs. 4000/- in lumpsum.
This entry of Rs. 4000/- is found reflected in the ledger.
Though there was a balance of Rs. 400/- which was left un-accounted and he was prepared to forego that.
To the question by the Presiding Officer that if any amount had been given by Ranbir Singh to me (Tarlochan Singh) at Panipat Branch when I had gone to investigate, to this, I state that he gave me Rs. 400/- for onward deposit in Borrowers Loan Account.
The Paying-in-slip for Rs. 400/- was duly filled in and signed by Ranbir Singh and was handed over to me alongwith the money (marked Exhibit P- 12), which was deposited in the Branch later on.
L.T.I.
of Mr. Parkash Singh on the letter he gave to me was affixed in my presence (Letter marked Exhibit P-10).
This letter was handed over to me during my visit on 20.07.95 to his residence.
To conclude I confirm that the letter dated 20.07.95 given by Sh. Parkash Singh (marked Exhibit P-10), Letter dated 09.08.95 given by Sh. Ranbir Singh alongwith Rs. 400/- in cash and loan paying-in-slip for Rs. 400/- duly filled in and signed by Sh. Ranbir Singh were handed over to me during my visit to their respective places on the respective dates."
9.
This statement has been shown to me by the learned counsel for the petitioner during the course of submissions.
It will further show that this witness was duly cross-examined by the delinquent official.
The reading of the same would show that it stands established that the petitioner is the author of the document P-11 and a reading of Ex. P-11 would further show that the petitioner had admitted his guilt.
So much so, he even deposited an amount of Rs. 4,400/- in the bank which implies that he misappropriated the amount which was given to him from time to time by Parkash Singh.
This point was duly discussed by the Inquiry Officer in the report dated 2061996 Annexure P-6.
This aspect of the case was also considered by the Appellate Authority in the order dated 3111997 and the relevant operative portion of the order runs as under :-  "The Appellant's contention of not being given fair and reasonable opportunity for being heard in the enquiry is not found correct.
On the contrary it is observed that the principles on natural justice has been duly observed during the course of enquiry proceedings.
In fact, the appellant/defence representative had inspite of being given sufficient opportunity let the enquiry proceed without their presence.
From the proceedings it is observed that after cross examination of the management witnesses, the Appellant himself along with his defence representative abstained from the enquiry instead of producing defence witnesses despite the fact that he was given reasonable & adequate opportunity to do so.
He also failed to submit his written briefs after the completion of the enquiry.
On the basis of documentary and order oral evidence led during the course of departmental enquiry it was rightly found proved that an amount of Rs. 4400/- paid to him by the borrower, Shri Parkash Singh, for depositing in latter's loan account had been misappropriated by the Appellant and also that he had issued false counterfoils to the borrowers.
Moreover the appellant has clearly confessed in his statement marked Exhibit P-11, the fact of receiving the said amount from the loanee Shri Parkash Singh for depositing the same in the latter's loan account but not depositing the same as charged in the charge sheet dated 26.10.95.
Even during the course of personal hearing the appellant has inter alia admitted before the undersigned his acts of misappropriation and issuance of false receipts in respect of the amount not deposited in the account of the borrower."
Having regard to the aforesaid fact the punishment order dated 14.11.1996 passed by the Disciplinary Authority is just and proper and the submissions/contentions to the contrary made in the present appeal are not tenable and hence merit no consideration.
In view of the aforesaid, the undersigned does not find any merit in the appeal preferred by the Appellant and also finds no mitigating circumstances in his favour which may justify my interference in the Punishment awarded to Shri Ranbir Singh, the appellant by the Disciplinary Authority."
10.
Thus, this Court is of the opinion that there was no infirmity in the impugned orders passed by the Punishing Authority as well as the Appellate Authority.
Since the petitioner was working in a bank and he was responsible for the embezzlement of Rs. 4,400/-, therefore, in the matter of punishment also he did not deserve any sympathy.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.