Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner, in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, prays for quashing of Annexure P/1, the order dated 2772000 passed by the Assistant Inspector General, Government Railway Police, Punjab, Patiala.
2.
The petitioner joined the said force as a constable on 1731961.
Brother of the petitioner, namely, A.S.I.
Govinder Singh, was killed by the terrorists on 2431991.
In furtherance to the instructions issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, (Annexure P/2 to the writ petition), under Section 12 of the Punjab Police Act, the department had decided to give some adhoc promotions to the police officers whose family members had been killed by the terrorists.
On 351994 the name of the petitioner was placed in C-II list on priority quota meant for this category and according to the petitioner he was given the pay scale of Had Constable nearly for a period of six years.
However, vide order dated 2772000 the petitioner was reverted to the rank of constable.
According to the petitioner the order dated 2772000 is without any authority of law and the vested rights of the petitioner to the post of Head Constable could not be taken away.
Thus, he challenges this order in the present writ petition.
The petitioner has also retired on 31122000.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply.
It was stated that there is no statutory provision under the Punjab Police Rules where a person falling in the category of the petitioner could be granted promotion to the higher rank out of turn.
The Director General of Police had circulated the directions being Memo No. 8694-8793 E.6 dated 2842000.
In these instructions it was stated that the police personnel who had been granted adhoc/fortuitous next higher rank promotion for several reasons and placed in higher ranks such promotions etc. should be withdrawn and they should be asked to draw their salary in their substantive posts, but such persons would be entitled to regular promotion on their own turn as per rules.
It is stated in the reply that family of the deceased brother of the petitioner is availing all the pensionary and other benefits meant for such category.
The petitioner cannot claim adhoc promotion as a matter of right.
In fact he has no right to the post.
As per the order of the Court in CWP No. 1755 of 1999, these ranks were converted as ORP ranks.
Promotion on ORP ranks has been held to be bad by this High Court and as such the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
4.
We had heard learned counsel for the parties at great length.
5.
The first and the fore-most question that arises for consideration is whether the petitioner has any indefeasible vested right to the post of Head Constable.
Petitioner was promoted vide order dated 351994.
The said order reads as under :  "As approved by Director General of Police, Punjab, Chandigarh vide his office memo No. 2789/E.6, dated 27194 the following constables are hereby promoted purely on adhoc and fortuitous basis to the rank of Head Constable.
they will not claim any seniority over their seniors on the basis of their fortuitous promotions.
They will get their regular promotion on their turn on the basis of promotion lists held by them, if any.
They are liable to be reverted to their substantive rank of Constable without the formality of show Cause Notice and their work and conduct is found unsatisfactory.
1.
C Sukhwinder Singh No. 1250/GRP.
2.
C Avtar Singh No. 636/GRP (On list C-I) 3.
C Jagjit Singh No. 347/GRP.
On list C-II) Sd/.
Assistant Inspector General  Govt. Railway Police, Punjab,  Patiala.
6.
The intent and purpose of the said order was obviously and at best to grant to the petitioner temporary benefit without vesting any right in the petitioner.
The promotion was not on the basis of any rule of regulation, but was merely on the basis of instructions intended to provide some benefits to the terrorists affected persons/police officers.
It is not disputed before us that several benefits under the said scheme have been availed of by the family of the deceased brother of the petitioner who was an Assistant Sub-Inspector.
It was specifically provided in the said order that the petitioner would get regular promotion on his turn and he cannot claim any seniority.
It is specifically provided that the petitioner will be reverted to his substantive rank without any notice.
If the petitioner desires to take benefit of the said order in regard to his promotion, he has to accept the order in its entirety.
The petitioner would be liable to abide by all its terms and conditions.
7.
The respondents after passing the above orders had converted the ranks into ORP ranks and had taken such stand in the previous writ petitions.
However, a learned Single Bench of this Court while deprecating the practice of sanctioning/granting ORP ranks in the case of Bachan Singh Randhawa and others v. The State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 1386 of 1996, decided on 2082001, held as under :-  "It shall be appropriate that the concerned authorities in the first instance should withdrawn the ORP ranks from SP to the level of Inspectors and the vacant posts should be filled up in accordance with procedure provided under provisions of law."
8.
Some of the affected persons had preferred Letters Patent Appeal against the said judgment which was also dismissed by the Letter Patent Bench comprised of Hon'ble the Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Arun B Saharya and Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali, vide order dated 31.8.2001 in L.P.A. No. 1957 of 2001, titled as Rajinder Singh DSP and others v. Bachan Singh Randhawa and others.
9.
In other words, the promotions on ORP ranks which defeat the purpose and intent of regular promotion are not sustainable in law.
As a result of such judicial pronouncements the respondents have reverted the petitioner, who in fact has already retired, and the question is more academic in its nature.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) SCT 556 (SC) : JT 1994(2) SC 157. the petitioner can hardly take any advantage or help from the said judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court inasmuch as it is neither pleaded in the writ petition nor was argued before us that the petitioner was promoted within 19% quota provided under Rule 138(2) of Punjab Police Rules and in any case it was for no achievement of the petitioner himself that he was given the said benefit.
The family of the deceased has been given the benefits permissible under the rules and as such the petitioner cannot challenge the validity of the said order on this score.
The impugned order of reverting the petitioner does not suffer from lack of jurisdiction and has been passed by the competent authority.
The order is general in its nature and has been passed covering the case of all persons who were given ORP ranks.
The said order is in consonance with the view taken by the Letters Patent Bench and we have no reason to differ with the reasoning given by the learned Single Judge in the case of Bachan Singh Randhawa (supra) and as confirmed by the Letters Patent Bench.
10.
The other contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that he has actually rendered six years of service as head constable and has drawn that salary immediately preceding the passing of the impugned order and as such he is entitled to the pensionary benefits.
There is some merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner inasmuch as the petitioner has actually functioned as Head Constable and had drawn the salary of the said post for the period in question.
While computing the pension payable to the petitioner, the respondents are obviously obliged to count the said service as per service record of the petitioner and in accordance with the relevant pension rules.
For the period when he stands reverted his salary will be counted on the basis of actual scale sanctioned by the competent authority and paid to him.
11.
For the reasons afore-stated, this writ petition is allowed limited to the extent that the respondent shall compute the pension payable to the petitioner in the light of the above observations and other reliefs prayed for the petitioner are declined.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.