GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to change his cadre from Conductor to that of Clerk.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner was initially engaged in the employment of Haryana Roadways as Ticket Verifier on daily wages.
By an order dated 111986, he was appointed as Conductor in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 on purely temporary basis or till the arrival of a candidate from the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana.
Simultaneously, he was adjusted against the vacant post of Clerk till further orders.
After having worked as Clerk for sufficiently long time, the petitioner has filed this petition for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to absorb him in the cadre of Clerks.
He has relied on the following orders passed by this Court :-  (i) Order dated 22.8.1992 passed in CWP.
No. 776 of 1992, Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and others : 1993(4) SCT 797 (P&H); and (ii) Order dated 10.2.1994 passed in CWP No. 15059 of 1993, Randhir Singh v. State of Haryana and others : 1994(3) SCT 468 (P&H).
3.
The respondents have opposed the prayer of the petitioner on the ground that appointment on the post of Clerk by transfer from the cadre of Conductor is not permissible under the Haryana Transport Department (Group C) Haryana Roadways Service Rules, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the 1995 Rules).
4.
Shri GS Dhankar argued that the petitioner is entitled to be appointed as Clerk by transfer in accordance with Rule 9(i)(h)(iii) of the 1995 Rules and there is no rhyme or reason to deny this benefit to him because in the cases of Dharam Pal and Randhir Singh, the respondents have passed orders appointing them as Clerks by transfer from the cadre of Conductors in compliance of the directions given by the High Court.
Shri Jaswant Singh controverted the argument of Shri Dhankar and pleaded for dismissal for the writ petition by contending that appointment by transfer can be made in the same cadre and not from one cadre to another cadre.
He submitted that the post of Clerk forms part of the Ministerial Cadre whereas the post of Conductor forms part of Operational Cadre and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be appointed on the post of Clerk by transfer.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and have perused the 1995 Rules.
In our opinion, the claim made by the petitioner for his appointment as Clerk by transfer merits rejection.
6.
Admittedly, recruitment to the posts of Conductor and Clerk and the conditions of service of persons appointed on these posts are governed by the provisions of the 1995 Rules.
Rule 7 read with Appendix `B' of the 1995 Rules enumerates the qualifications which a candidate must possess for recruitment to the various posts specified in Appendix `B'.
Rule 9 lays down the method of recruitment.
This rule categories the service as under :-  (1) Ministerial Staff;  (2) Operational Staff; and  (3) Technical Staff.
The posts of Section Officer, Statistical Assistant, Assistant, Accountant, Junior Auditor, Manager-cum-Accountant, Chief Store Keeper, Store Purchase Assistant, Junior Scale Stenographer, Steno-Typist, Cashier, Clerk, Assistant Cashier, Computer, Store Keeper, Restorer, Ticket Verifier and Assistant Store Keeper fall in the category of Ministerial Staff.
The post of Conductor falls in the category of Operational Staff which includes Station Supervisor, Welfare Officer, Chief Inspector, Welfare Inspector, Yard Master, Inspector, Sub-Inspector, Light Car Driver, Heavy Vehicle Driver, Booking Clerk.
Since we are not concerned with the Technical Staff, a detailed reference to the posts falling in that category is being avoided.
Rule 9(1)(h) under the heading `Ministerial Staff' and Rule 9(1)(i) under the heading `Operational Staff', which have bearing on the issue raised in the writ petition reads as under :-  9(1)(h) in the case of Clerk (including Workshop Clerk, Diesel Pump Clerk, Preventive Maintenance Clerk, Ledger Keeper, Counter Clerk, Assistant Accountant and Store-cum-Stock Clerk.
(i) 20% by promotion from amongst Peon, Restorer, Sweeper, Gunman, Chowkidar, Mali-cum-Water Carrier, Ticket Verifier; or (ii) 80% by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of any official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
9(1)(i) in case of Conductor - (i) by direct recruitment; or (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
7.
The entry 12 appearing below the heading `Ministerial Staff' and the entry 11 appearing below the heading `Operational Staff' in Appendix `B' attached to the Rules are also extracted below :-  Sr. No.
Designation of Posts Academic Qualification and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic Qualification and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment Remarks, if any 1 2 3 4 5 Ministerial Staff + + + + 12 Clerk (including Workshop Clerk, Diesel Pump Clerk, Preventive Maintenance Clerk/Ledger Keeper, Counter Clerk, Store-cum-Stock Clerk and Assistant Accountant) (i) Matriculation(ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard (i) Matriculation with Hindi (ii) Five years experience on the post of Peon, Restorer, Sweeper, Gunman, Chowkidar, Mali-cum-Water Carrier in Haryana Roadways or Ticket Verifier with at least two years experience Operational Staff + + + + 11.
Conductor  (i) Matriculation with Hindi(ii) Should hold Conductor's licence (i) Matriculation with Hindi(ii) Should hold Conductor's licence 8.
A conjoint reading of the Rules and the relevant entries of Appendix `B' extracted above shows that the minimum qualification prescribed for recruitment to the post of Conductor is Matriculation with Hindi and Conductor's licence.
As against this, a person possessing the qualification of Matriculation with Hindi and 5 years experience on any of the posts enumerated in column (4) of the Appendix `B' is eligible to be appointed as Clerk etc. Rule 9(1)(h)(iii) speaks of appointment on the post of Clerk by transfer or deputation of any official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
Likewise, Rule 9(1)(i)(ii) speaks of appointment on the post of Conductor by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
Neither of these rules speaks of any particular posts, the holder of which may be appointed as Clerk or as Conductor by transfer or deputation and this must have prompted Shri Gulab Singh to argue that in the absence of any prohibition in the recruitment rules, a person holding the post of Conductor is eligible to be appointed as Clerk by transfer.
However, we are unable to agree with him.
It is a settled principle of interpretation of statutes that language of a particular provision appearing in the statute must not be interpreted ignoring the context in which the provision has been incorporated in the statute and an attempt must be made to interpret the statute as a whole.
If we examine the scope of Rules 9(1)(h)(iii) and 9(1)(i)(ii) of the 1995 Rules in the light of this principle, it is not possible to accept the claim of the petitioner to be appointed on the post of Clerk by transfer from the post of Conductor.
In our opinion, the recruitment by transfer or deputation is permissible within the same cadre and not from one cadre to another cadre.
We are also of the opinion that the rules referred to hereinabove provide appointment by transfer or deputation of any official already in the service of any State Government or the Central Government and not of an official within the service.
9.
If the argument of Shri Dhankar that the plain language of Rule 9(1)(h)(iii) permits the transfer of a person from the post of Conductor to that of Clerk is to be accepted, the same principle will have to be adopted while interpreting similar provision contained in the entry relating to the post of Conductor and then a Clerk who does not even possess the Conductor's licence will become eligible to be appointed as Conductor by transfer.
That, in our opinion, will be totally destructive of the intention of the rule making authority and, therefore, we are unable to agree with Shri Dhankar that the petitioner, who is holding the post of Conductor, is eligible to be appointed as Clerk by transfer.
10.
The two orders of the High Court on which reliance has been placed by Shri Dhankar do not in any manner help the cause of the petitioner.
A bare reading of the order dated 22.8.1992 passed in Dharam Pal's case (supra) shows that the Court had accepted the petitioner's claim in the peculiar facts and circumstances of that case and had made it clear that it shall not be quoted as a precedent in other cases.
The order dated 10.2.1994 passed in Randhir Singh's case (supra) was passed solely on the basis of some concession which appears to have been made by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
However, neither in Dharam Pal's case (supra) nor in Randhir Singh's case (supra), the Court has laid down any proposition of law after examining the scheme of the statute.
Therefore, these orders cannot be treated as judicial precedents having binding force on other coordinate Benches.
The very fact that in the first case the Hon'ble Division Bench had categorically mentioned that this shall not be treated as a precedent lends credibility to the argument of Shri Jaswant Singh that the said order does not have any precedence value and is not to be followed in each and every case.
We are also of the considered opinion that the dismissal of the Petition for Special Leave to Appeal against the order passed in Randhir Singh's does not in any manner help the petitioner because such dismissal only leads to the inference that the Hon'ble Supreme Court did not find it to be fit case for exercise of their appellate jurisdiction.
Under no circumstances, dismissal of the Petition for Special Leave to Appeal without assigning any reason can be treated as declaration of law for the purpose of Article 141 of the Constitution of India.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.