SB Sinha, J - This writ application depicts a sordid state of affairs.
The petitioner is the wife of late Ananda Majumdar, who was an employee in Jitpur High School.
The said Ananda Majumdar died on 2nd April, 1985 in harness.
The case of the petitioner is that after her marriage, she was not allowed to stay in her in-laws' place and ultimately her husband committed suicide.
She thus became eligible for appointment in terms of Recruitment Rules framed by the Director of School Education, West Bengal in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under Clauses (i) and (ii) of Sub-Rule (1) and by clause (1) of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non- Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969, in the died-in-harness category.
It further appears that the respondent No. 6 who was the elder brother of the petitioner's husband without impleading the petitioner as a party filed a writ application for direction upon the respondents therein to appoint him in the died-in-harness category, whereupon an order dated 11.2.1994 was passed by a learned Judge of this Court.
It also appears that one Madan Mohan Mondal also filed a writ application for consideration of his case on the ground that unless he is posted in the vacancy caused by the death of the petitioner's husband, he would be overaged.
That application was marked as CO 11857(W) of 1993.
The petitioner having come to learn about the order passed in the said writ applications has filed this writ application claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "(A) A writ in the nature of Mandamus not to give effect or further effect to the panel as prepared on 25.2.1994 and further declaring that the respondent No. 6 is not competent to be considered in the vacant post of Clerk on compassionate ground instead and in place of deceased Ananda Majmudar; (B) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to consider the representation dt. 731994 filed by the petitioner and further commanding the Respondents to absorb and/or the petitioner on compassionate ground according to her qualification in the vacant post of Daftari of the Respondent No. 3 school by using notification such vacancy in accordance with law as only eligible deponent widow of the deceased Daftari Ananda Mazumdar in permanent post as die in harness and/or above and/or appoint her in any other school within district Nadia in terms of Government Policy to appoint as defendant of the die in harness, with immediate effect."
2.
Samaresh Banerjea, J by an order dated 1341994 after considering the matter in great details passed an interim order restraining the respondents from giving any effect or further effect to the panel dated 25th February, 1994 and from issuing any appointment letter pursuant to the said impugned panel.
However, from the records, it appears that the said interim order is now not in force.
3.
A question arises as to whether despite an order passed by the learned Judge of this Court, the same can be reviewed by another judge at the instance of third party.
It is now a well-settled principle of law that if an order has been obtained by playing fraud upon Court, the same will be a nullity and even principle of natural justice is not required to be complied with.
Even in such a case, it is open to this Court to review its earlier order either suo motu or on an application filed by a third party who is affected thereby.
Reference in this connection may be made to AIR 1963 SC 1909.
The Apex Court has clearly held that when a fraud has been committed on Court even by suppression of a relevant fact or a document, compliance of principle of natural justice is not necessary nor principle of estoppel shall apply therein.
Reference in this connection may be made to 1994(5) SLR 206; Judgment Today 1997(3) SCC 346 and 1996(5) SCC 550.
4.
In view of the fact that Banerjea, J, in his order dated 1341994, has taken note of the fact that even the petitioner was not impleaded as party in the aforementioned writ application filed by the respondent No. 6, evidently the said order is binding on her.
5.
Despite appearance on 1341994 neither State nor the respondent No. 6 had filed any affidavit-in-opposition.
The State despite the order dated 28.7.1994 has also not produced the records of this case.
Thus, the allegations made in the writ application must be taken to be admitted and adverse inference must also be drawn as against the State for non-production of the records to the effect that he had such records been produced, the same would have gone against the respondent No. 6.
6.
Ms. Chowdhury, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, submits that to the best of her knowledge the panel wherein name of the aforementioned Sadananda Majumdar was appearing, had not been approved.
7.
In view of the fact that the vacancy had arisen and the same is existing, this application is disposed of with a direction upon the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Nadia to consider the case of the petitioner for grant of appointment on compassionate ground in died-in-harness category in terms of the Recruitment Rules which was prevailing at the relevant time and when the vacancy was declared.
If the aforementioned Sadananda Majumdar has been appointed in the meantime, his appointment shall be cancelled.
An appointment order should be passed and appropriate action may be taken by the District Inspector of Schools, the respondent No. 2 at an early date and preferably within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
8.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.