HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - C.W.P.
Nos. 18906 of 1995, 3989 of 1996, 5835 of 1998 and 10095 of 1998 are being disposed off by this judgment.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 18906 of 1995.
2.
The respondent-State of Punjab, through the Director, Animal Husbandry, Punjab, published an advertisement in the Newspaper Daily Chardi Kalan in its issue dated 10.1.1994 Annexure P-2 to the petition, inviting applications for 125 seats for admission to the two years Veterinary Pharmacist Training Course.
The last date for the receipt of the applciations was fixed as 1711994.
334 applications including those of the petitioners were received in respose to the notice.
Vide Annexure P-1 dated 1781995, the State Govenmment consituted a Committee for the purpose of making the selection to the said course and also notified that 250 seats in all were now to be filled in.
The Selection Committee met on 25/2681995 to settle the criteria for making the selection and took a decision that no marks were to be kept for the interview as this invariably led to criticism and that the selection would be made only on the basis of the marks obtained in the qualifying examination and for higher educational attainments.
The petitioners were accordingly selected for the course in question and were required to report at Patiala on 1291995, for the start of the course.
The State Government, however, issued an order dated 2991995 Annexure P-4/A to the petition intimating that the course was being discontinued for the time being and that the trainees should vacate the hostel immediately.
The present writ petition has been filed impugning this order.
3.
On notice of motion, the respondent-State of Punjab has filed two replies in this Court.
In the first reply filed by Mrs. Gayatri Jain, Joint Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Animal Husbandry, it had been pointed out that the order Annexure P-4/A had been made as News items reporting serious irregularities in the calling of applications and the selection process with Rs. 60,000/- to Rs. 70,000/- per seat having been paid to the members of the Selection Committee, had been published.
It has also been pointed out that the two Newspapers i.e. Chardi Kalan and Right Action in which the advertisement inviting applications had been issued, did not have a wide circulation in the State, with the result that the public at large did not have the information with regard to the calling of applications for the course.
It had also been pleaded that though 125 vacancies had initially been advertised, 250 candidates in all had been granted admission and even in the actual admission process, various irregularities, such as entertainment of late and incomplete applications had been suspected.
It has also been stated that the largest number of selected candidates were from District Bhatinda leading to an inference that the Committee had been acting under pressure from some senior functionary from that District.
The State Government was, however, directed to file an additional written statement detailing the full material before it that had weighed in the issuance of the order Annexure P- 4/A, and another written statement has been filed by Mr. P Ram, Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Animal Husbandry.
In this written statement, it has been pointed out that after the filing of the first written statement, the matter had been entrusted to the Vigilance Department for a detailed investigation and the Vigilance Bureau had submitted a preliminary enquiry report on 1281996 intimating that the allegations that had been levelled had not been proved.
A copy of the report has been appended as Annexure R-2 to the reply.
It has also been pleaded that this report had been examined in the Vigilance Department by the Legal Cell which had opined that the enquiry was still incomplete and further clarification be sought from the Vigilance Bureau, but as the matter had, in the meanwhile, become sub judice in the present writ petition, the Government had apparently expedited its decision and the Chief Minister had, on 2211997, ordered that in view of the findings recorded in the preliminary enquiry, no further action was called for and the matter be dropped as per the recommendations of the Vigilance Bureau.
The file was then produced in this Court and after its return to the Department, the Join Secretary, Vigilance, vide his note dated 2521997 referred the matter to the Principal Secretary, Vigilance, who further submitted the file to the Chief Minister with the following recommendations :-  "(i) A Regular Enquiry be registered in this case and the Vigilance Bureau asked to conduct a thorough probe in a time-bound manner; or (ii) The proceedings in this case be closed as recommended by the Vigilance Bureau and ordered by the former Chief Minister."
The Chief Minister approved the first note.
The Vigilance Department, thereafter, referred the matter to the Vigilance Bureau for a Regular Enquiry but it is not the admitted position that the enquiry has since been closed.
4.
A separate reply has also been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and it has been highlighted that Dr. Harbhajan Singh, who was the Director of Animal Husbandry and the Chairman of the Selection Committee at the time when the advertisement inviting applications had been issued, had retired in October, 1994.
The fact that the Selection Committee had chosen to determine the merit of candidates exclusively on the basis of academic performance in the qualifying and other examinations has been reiterated.
5.
The petitioners have also filed a rejoinder to the written statement in which they have given the District-wise break up of the selected candidates and special emphasis has been placed on the fact that only 48 candidates had been selected from District Bhatinda, which was not an inordinately large number.
6.
Mr. HS Mattewal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has argued that the Veterinary Pharmacists course to which the petitioners stood selected was an essential step to appointment as a Veterinary Pharmacist as in addition to the minimum prescribed qualifications laid down in the statutory Rules a candidate seeking appointment to the post was also required to undergo the Veterinary Pharmacist Course of two years' duration from a recognised Institute or from the Department of Animal Husbandry, Punjab, and in this eventuality, the order Annexure P-4/A was bad in law as it had been made without notice to the petitioners.
In this connection, he has argued that the reason that had led to the making of the aforesaid order (which had been spelt out by the respondents in the written statements) could well have been dispelled by the petitioners, had they been given an opportunity of doing so.
He has also urged that the assertion of the respondents that adequate publicity had not been given to the advertisement inviting applications for the course in question advertised was also without any basis as the call had been published in the Daily Chardi Kalan, which stood approved by this High Court as also by the Government as one of the well known publications and also in the Daily Right Action.
Mr. Mattewal has finally pointed out that the third allegation that District Bhatinda had been given an unnecessary large representation was also ill-founded as out of the 250 selected candidates, only 48 belonged to Bhatinda.
7.
Mr. HL Sibal, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondents Nos. 2 and 3 has largely supported the stand taken by Mr. Mettewal.
8.
Mr. Hemant Gupta, the learned Additional AG Punjab has, however, controverted the arguments raised by Mr. Mattewal and has argued that an opportunity of a hearing was not an absolute right and this could be dispensed with in special circumstances as the rules of natural justice had to be applied to the facts of the case.
He has urged that `Chardi Kalan' and `Right Action' were little known publications and as the appointments had been made in a cloistered manner, they could not be sustained.
In this connection, he has relied on The Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and Others, 1996(3) S.L.R.
649.
He has finally pointed out (on the instructions from the Special Secretary of the Department who is present in Court) that though the enquiry into the irregularities in the admission process had since been closed, the government had nevertheless decided to cancel the admission and this had been notified by order dated 2581997, but the enquiry pertaining to the fixation of the responsibility for the irregularities committed was still going on.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the file, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
10.
It is the admitted position that the order Annexure P-4/A had been made without notice to the petitioners.
In the light of the fact that the admission granted to the petitioners has since been finally cancelled by the State Government, the argument raised earlier that Annexure P-4/A was an order made only for the time being pending further investigation no longer remains valid.
It is to be noted that as per the written statement filed by Mrs. Gayatri Jain, the State Government was influenced by the newspaper reports that had been received in the department and that too within a few days of the start of the course.
The order was, therefore, made without enquiries into the correctness of the allegations and was based on first impression and apprehensions.
To my mind, certain rights had accrued to the petitioners on their admission and these rights could not be taken away without notice to them, more particularly, as the order Annexure P-4/A had been made on the basis of yet unsubstantiated complaints.
11.
It is true that allegations of misconduct had been levelled against the members of the Selection Committee but they seem to be without foundation on the facts that have been put on record.
The allegation that large sums of money had been paid by the successful candidates to the members of the Selection Committee cannot find acceptance as no investigation leading to this conclusion has been made and as no discretion had been left with them as the selection was to be made purely on academic performance in the qualifying and other examinations as would be evident from Annexure R-2/2, the criteria utilised at the time of making the selection on 25/2681995.
The allegations that a large number of candidates from District Bathinda had got admission, again seem to be without basis.
In the rejoinder filed by the petitioners, the District-wise break-up of the selected candidates has been given.
The same is reproduced below :-  Sr. No. Name of the District Selected Nos. of candidates 1.
Gurdaspur 24 2.
Amritsar 19 3.
Jalandhar 11 4.
Kapurthala 8 5.
Hoshiarpur 4 6.
Ludhiana 22 7.
Ropar 13 8.
Fatehgarh Sahib 8 9.
Patiala 10 10.
Mansa 13 11.
Sangrur 22 12.
Bhatinda 48 13.
Faridkot 29 14.
Ferozepur 18 15.
UT Chandigarh 1 Total :  250 It is true that the largest number of candidates who stand selected do belong to Bathinda, but this by itself cannot be a factor in determining any irregularity in the selection process or in the matter relating to the receipt of applications in response to the advertisement.
The arguments dealing with inadequate publicity with regard to the course in question must now be dealt with.
It has been pointed out by the respondents that `Chardi Kalan' was a Newspaper recognised by the State Government as also the Punjab and Haryana High Court and in this view of the matter, the mere fact that yet more publicity in other newspapers could have been given, does not, in any way, dislodge the petitioners' case.
It is true (as has been argued by Mr. Gupta) that the widest publicity must be given while making public appointments as held in KBN Visweshwara Rao's case (supra) but each case must depend on its own facts.
It will be seen that 334 candidates in all had applied in response to the 125 posts initially advertised.
It bears reiteration that the first vigilance enquiry had found no fault with the selection process, and the second one initiated as a consequence of the Chief Minister's order on the note dated 2521997 has been dropped and a final decision taken to cancel the selection as per order dated 2581997.
It is, therefore, evident that as of now, no adverse finding with regard to the selection process has been recorded and on the contrary, a preliminary enquiry had cleared the exercise, and this report had been duly accepted by the incumbent Chief Minister on 2211997.
There is, therefore, to my mind no material on record to support the Government's decision.
Mr. Gupta has finally urged that the selection should be confined only to 125 seats as originally advertised and only to such candidates who had attained eligibility and had applied within the last date fixed for the receipt of applications.
The first part of Mr. Gupta's argument it untenable as it was as a consequence of a decision taken at the State Government level, that the number of seats was increased to 250 from 125, and as a State Counsel, he cannot make a challenge to this decision.
Although there does not appear to be any material on record for any suspicion for the second limb of the argument but if there be any such case, it should be scrutinihed.
It is, accordingly, directed that the Deputy Secretary of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Punjab, shall himself within a period of one month of the supply of a certified copy of this judgment go into the details with regard to the eligibility of each of the successful candidates and if he finds that any candidate is ineligible or his application had been received after the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications, or is otherwise incomplete, the same shall be rejected.
It is further directed that the course will be restarted within a month after the completion of this process.
It is also clarified that this arrangement is being made by way of abundant caution and not because of any suspicion about the credibility of the admissions already made which have been held to be good on all counts.
A report on this process shall also be submitted to this Court with copies to the counsel for the parties within 15 days of the finalisation of the admission.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed; the order annexure P-4/A and the order dated 2581997 insofar as it cancels the selection are quashed.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.