TS Doabia, J - This petition has come to be filed under the following circumstances :  On 29th January, 1998, an order No. FC(A)/315 of 1998 dated 2911998 came to be issued.
The preamble of the order recites the fact "in the interest of administration following transfers and postings are ordered with immediate effect".
The names of the Officers are given.
In the end, it is mentiond that the above order has been passed under the orders of the Revenue Minister.
For facility of reference, this order is being noticed.
This reads as under :-  "In the interest of administration the following transfers and postings are ordered with immediate effect.
1.
Shri Krishan Lal Sharma, KAS awaiting posting is transferred and posted on deputation as Director, Land Management in Jammu Development Authority against available vacancy.
2.
Sh Sat Paul KAS Assistant Commissioner, Relief Migrant Organisation, Jamm is transferred and posted as Deputy Commissioner, Relief Migrant Jammu against available vacancy.
3.
Shri Roop Krishan Handoo, Assistant Commissioner awaiting adjustment is transferred and posted as Assistant Commissioner, Migrant vice Shri Sat Paul.
4.
Shri Sohan Lal Raina, KAS awaiting adjustment is transferred and posted against available vacancy of Collector Bank Recoveries, Jammu.
5.
Shri Abdul Gani, Assistant Commissioner awaiting adjustment is transferred and posted against available vacancy of Collector PWD, Jammu.
Shri Mohd.
Ayub Sheikh and Shamsher Bhadur members of Revenue Gazetted Service awaiting adjustment on their repatriation from Excise and Taxation Department shall report to Divisional Commissioner Kashmir and Jammu respectively.
Advance TA as admissible under rules is also sanctioned in favour of the officer in whose case change of station is involved.
By order of the Revenue Minister."
The further fact is that order dated 29th January, 1998 came to be rescinded on 13th February 1998.
In the order, there is a recital that the necessity to rescind arose as the earlier order reproduced above was passed in violation of Jammu and Kashmir Government Business Rules.
This order dated 1321998 is also being noticed.
It reads as under :-  "Order No. FC(A) 315 of 1998 dated 2911998 issued, by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, J&K Government, under endorsement No. FC(A) 804/Misc.
dated 2911998 in violation of J&K Government Business Rules, is hereby rescinded.
The officers shall revert to their original position with immediate effect.
Further adjustment of these officers, wherever necessary, shall be ordered separately."
The issuance of order dated 1321998 has led the petitioner to file this writ petition in this court.
It is stated that the reasoning given in the order dt. 1321998 that the earlier order was not passed in terms of Rules of Business, is not correct.
It is used that as a reason has been mentioned in the order dt. 13th February, 1998 and as the above reasoning is not supportable by the relevant Rules of Business, therefore, a writ of certiorari should be issued with a view to quash the same.
The respondent No. 3 has filed objections.
The stand taken is that under the Rules of Business, the order issued on 29th January, 1998 could be issued only when brought before the Cabinet in accordance with the provisions of the Rules contained in Part II.
It is stated that this matter is covered by Item No. 20 of Schedule II.
Thus, the main thrust of the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 is that the order which was rescinded later on was an order which fell under Item 20 of Second Schedule.
It having not been issued in consonance with Rule 8 of the Rules of Business, was rightly rescinded.
The further argument raised is that the Revenue Minister was not competent to issue the order as the subject matter which has been dealt with in order No. FC(A) 315 of 1998, does not fall within the business which has been allocated to the Revenue Minister.
The further stand taken in the objection is that the later order was brought to the notice of the Chief Minister and he had approved of the action.
It is in these circumstances, it is pointed out that the later order was validly issued.
The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that this is a matter which is covered by item 32 of Schedule Third.
This as per the counsel is so because the transfers/adjustments have been made in the same department.
It is accordingly stated that the Revenue Minister was competent to deal with the matter and he had rightly passed the order dt. 2911998.
It is also urged that while passing order, Annexure `B', there is no application of mind.
What is being rescinded, is order passed by the Financial Commissioner.
The order passed by the Revenue Minister has not been touched.
According to the counsel, as the order passed by the Revenue Minister remains untouched, therefore, that order continues to have force of law.
It is also urged that in the objections, it has not been stated that the Chief Minister has approved of the order.
Mere bringing to the notice of the Chief Minister some fact, would not amount to the approval.
It has also been urged that whatever was done by the Revenue Minister, was done as per the practice prevailing in the department.
Therefore, no exception can be taken to the same.
The question as to whether the Revenue Minister could pass the order the Rules of Business is being dealt with at the first instance.
Before dealing with the argument, relevant Rules of Business and the items mentioned in the Schedule are being noticed.
These read as under :  "8.
Subject to the orders of the Chief Minister under Rule 14 all cases referred to in the Second Schedule shall be brought before the cabinet in accordance with the provisions of the rules contained in Part II."
"12.
Every order or instrument of the Government of the State shall be signed either by the Chief Secretary, the Additional Chief Secretary a Secretary, an Additional Secretary, a joint Secretary, an Additional Joint Secretary, Deputy Secretary or an Under Secretary to the Government or such other officer as may be specially empowered by the Government in that behalf and such signature shall be deemed to be the proper authentication of such order of instrument."
"20(1) Proposals for the appointment/promotion of the following officers namely :-  (a) Chief Secretary, Additional Chief Secretary and other promotions of All India Service Cadre Officers to various scales of pay within the respective services.
(b) Heads of Departments and such other officers as are treated equivalent to a Head of Department like Advisers, Consultants and  (c) KAS Officers."
"32 Proposals for the transfer of Deputy Secretaries, Senior Scale KAS Officers from one Department to another Department and Junior Scale IAS Officers: Provided that KAS Offices shall be transferred within the Department under the charge of a Minister in terms of any orders that the Minister concerned may deem fit to pass.
Immediate intimation of such intra-departmental transfers shall be given to the General Administration Department for information of the Chief Minister."
The argument raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that in terms of item 32, the Revenue Minister could deal with the transfer and posting of Officers who were working under him, be examined at the first instance.
It be seen that so far as S/Shri Krishan Lal Sharma, Roop Krishan Handoo, Sohan Lal Raina and Abdul Gani, are concerned, they were not working anywhere and they were awaiting adjustment.
Therefore, these officers could not be said to be working in the Revenue Department.
In any case, the above mentioned officers have not approached this court and it is not necessary to deal with the aspect of the matter.
So far as the petitioner, Sat Paul is concerned, order dated 29th of January, 1993, states that this petitioner who was working as Assistant Commissioner, Relief Migrant Organisation, Jammu is being transferred and posted as Dy.
Commissioner, Relief Migrant, Jammu.
The case of the petitioner would not fall within the perview of item 32.
The above mentioned item deals with the proposal for the transfer of Deputy Secretaries, Senior Scale KAS Officers from one department to another department and Junior Scale IAS Officers.
There is a proviso that KAS Officers shall be transferred within the department under the charge of a Minister in terms of any orders that the Minister concerned may deem fit to pass.
The order which is impugned in the present writ petition indicates that Sh.
Sat Paul, KAS Assistant Commissioner, Relief Migrant Organisation, Jammu is transferred and posted as Dy.
Commissioner, Relief Migrant, Jammu against available vacancy.
This is not a mere transfer.
This is a promotion.
This is a matter which would not fall within the purview of term `transfer'.
In the objections preferred by the respondent No. 3 it is categorically stated that the post of Assistant Commissioner carries a pay scale of Rs. 2350/4050 and that of Deputy Commissioner carries the pay scale of Rs. 3150/4560.
This is mentioned in the Annexure which gives the revised structure of the Relief Organisation Jammu in the Head Office.
This annexure mentions that there is one post of Relief Commissioner and one post of Deputy Relief Commissioner.
Both the posts carry different pay scales.
Even if it be presumed that the inter-departmental transfer could be done by the Revenue Minister, even then order dated 29.1.1993 does not fall within the purview of `transfer'.
The petitioner has in fact been promoted from the post of Assistant Commissioner to the post of Deputy Commissioner.
Therefore, the argument raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the order passed by the Revenue Minister was covered by item 32 cannot be accepted.
The argument raised by the learned Counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 that the order in question was not passed in consonance with Rules 3 and in terms of Schedule Second, item 20 be now examined.
It be seen that several officers came to be inducted in the Kashmir Administrative Service.
An order to this effect was passed on 26th of November 1997.
In this, it was further mentioned that the orders of posting of officers mentioned in Annexure `A' of the order would be issued separately.
The name of Sh.
Sat Paul, petitioner herein appears at Sr. No. 15.
The petitioner, as such, came to be inducted in the KAS cadre in pursuance of the order dated 26111997 and further orders were to follow regarding posting in terms of the directions contained in order Annexure R1.
Thus, this first posting to the KAS could be done only in terms of Rule 3.
A definite proposal emanated from the General Administration Department.
Further action was also required to be taken by the same department which issued order annexure R-1.
This matter would fall within the purview of item 20.
As the requisite approval of the Cabinet was not obtained, therefore, the stand taken by the respondent No. 3 that the earlier order was not passed in terms of Rule of Business cannot be faulted.
The technical objection that order dated 13.2.1993 does not rescind the order said to have been passed by Revenue Minister may also be examined.
It be seen that Revenue Minister could not deal with the matter in question.
As such no interference is called for.
The issuance of any writ which may resuscitate a situation which is not in accordance with law would not be apt.
See Gadde Venkateswara Rao v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and others, AIR 1966 Supreme Court 323 (V 53 C 154) where in para 17 it was observed.
"In those circumstances, was it a case for the High Court to interfere in its discretion and quash the order of the Government dated April 13, 1963?
If the High Court had quashed the said order, it would have restored an illegal order."
See also M/s. Faridabad C.T.
Scan Centre v. Director General of Health Service, JT 1991(8) SC 171 where it was observed that :  "A wrong order cannot be permitted to be perpetuated."
This petition is accordingly found to be without merit and is dismissed with no order, as to costs.
Petition dismissed.