RS Mongia, J - A firm named and styled as M/s Sikri Brothers Coal Merchants, Ferozepur, was an establishment covered by Clause (b) of sub- section (3) of Section 1 of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (for short, `the Act') as this was an establishment employing twenty or more persons.
It was constituted by six partners which included Sohan Lal Sikri and Satya Pal Sikri.
This firm was complying with the provisions of the Act and the Scheme framed thereunder and was depositing the requisite contribution to the Employees Provident Fund and Family Pension Fund till August, 1967, when it was dissolved.
After the dissolution of the firm two new firms came into existence.
One firm which was newly constituted was named and styled as M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons Coal Merchants, which consisted of two old partners - Sohan Lal Sikri - and Satya Pal Sikri and a new partner was inducted in the same.
The other firm was constituted by rest of the partners and was named and styled as M/s Sikri Brothers and Co, Ferozpur City.
A partnership deed was executed on September 1, 1967, by the three partners of M/s Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons, which has been placed on record as Annexure P.1.
2.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Chandigarh, issued a notice dated December 31, 1974 (Annexure P.4) to M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons mentioning therein that M/s Sikri Brothers Ferozepur City was an establishment covered under the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act and Employees Family Pension Funds Scheme and it had been reported that M/s Sikri Brothers stopped functioning w.e.f.
August 31, 1967, and in the same premises M/s Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons were new carrying on the same business in the name and style of M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons, Ferozepur City, w.e.f.
September 1, 1967.
Accordingly it was mentioned that the establishment would continue to be covered under the aforesaid Act w.e.f.
September 1, 1967, and M/s Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons were asked to pay upto date provident fund and submit their returns.
A detailed reply was given by M/s Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons that M/s Sikri Brothers, Ferozepur City, had stopped functioning and an entirely new partnership firm in the name and style of M/s Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons had come into being and it had nothing to do with the earlier firm i.e. M/s Sikri Brothers.
The firm, i.e., M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons was a totally different entity.
It was further mentioned that M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons had not employed more than 12 employees who were all new and, therefore, the new firm was not covered under the provisions of the Act.
During the course of personal hearing, Shri Sohan Lal Sikri, partner of M/s, Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons had contended before the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner that their firm was neither the successor nor the split up unit of M/s Sikri Brothers.
However, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner vide order dated May 31, 1976, (Annexure P.6) held that the firm M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons was the successor Firm of M/s Sikri Brothers.
It had employed some of the employees who were the employees of M/s Sikri Brothers at the time of its closure and the business were being carried on in the same premises.
All the furniture, table, chairs, Godrej Almirah etc. along with motor car had been taken over by M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons and, therefore, the firm M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons was a successor of M/s Sikri Brothers, an establishment already covered under the Act and therefore, the new firm would continue to be covered by the provisions of the Act.
He found that from the period September, 1967, to January, 1976, the employers' and employees' share to the tune of Rs. 701950 was due from the firm apart from Rs. 21210 as administrative charges.
The firm was asked to deposit the aforesaid amount within 15 days.
3.
A representation under Section 19-A of the Act was filed by the Firm before the Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment, New Delhi.
The aforesaid factual position was reiterated.
It was also mentioned in the representation that after the closure of the firm, M/s Sikri Brothers, a new firm had been constituted by a regular deed of partnership and the firm had also been got registered with the Registrar of Firms and further it had got itself registered under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishments Act.
The firm had also been assessed to income tax as a separate firm.
Another fact which was mentioned was that the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Chandigarh, had been duly informed by M/s Sikri Brothers vide their letter No. 110 dated September 28, 1967, sent under registered post acknowledgement due that the firm had ceased functioning since September 1, 1967, and the previous employees were no longer its employees.
Copy of the same had also been attached with the representation.
No assets or liabilities of the old firm were taken by M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons.
Still further it was mentioned that M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons had started independent business w.e.f.
September 1, 1967, while the car and furniture were purchased in August, 1972.
The business premises were taken on monthly rent of Rs. 50/- from the landlords.
In fact the property did not belong to M/s Sikri Brothers but was owned by different persons.
Only two employees of M/s Sikri Brothers, the old firm, had been appointed in the new firm on fresh assignment and they too left the service of their own accord after three or four years.
One of the old employees had been appointed by the other firm styled as M/s Sikri Brothers and Co Case law was also cited in the representation to show that on these facts it could not be said that the new firm was a successor firm of M/s Sikri Brothers.
The representation was rejected vide order dated February 14, 1978 (Annexure P.8), which led M/s. Lachhman Dass Sikri and Sons to file a writ petition in this Court (C.W.P.
No. 1206 of 1979) challenging the orders of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner as also of the Central Government.
The said writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge on March 6, 1987, holding that on the facts as pleaded before the authorities, the conclusion was wrongly drawn that the petitioner-firm was a succcessor- firm of the original firm M/s Sikri Brothers and since it was a new firm, the provisions of the Act would not be applicable.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner and the Union of India have come up in this Letters Patent Appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
4.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants, certain provisions of the Act may be noticed.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 1 of the Act, the provisions of the Act are applicable to establishments employing 20 or more persons.
Section 16(1)(d) of the Act provides exemption from the applicability of the provisions of the Act to newly set up establishments until the expiry of period of three years from the date a new establishment is set up.
The Act provides that once the provisions of the Act are made applicable to an establishment, which is employing more than 20 persons and the infancy period of three years has already lapsed, then irrespective of the fact that the number of persons employed falls below 20, the provisions of the Act shall continue to apply.
Sub-section (5) of Section 1 is in the following terms :  ``1(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be governed by this Act notwithstanding that the number of persons employed therein at any time falls below twenty.''
It may be observed here that the aforesaid sub-section (5) of Section 1 had a proviso, which was deleted by Act No. 16 of 1971.
The proviso reads as under :  ``Provided that where, for a continuous period of not less than one year the number of persons employed therein has been less than fifteen, the employer in relation to such establishment may cease to give effect to the provisions of this Act and any scheme framed thereunder, with effect from the beginning of the month following the expiry of the said period of one year, but he shall within one month of the date of such cessation, intimate, by registered post, the fact thereof to such authority as may be specified by appropriate Government in this behalf.''
It has throughout been the case of the petitioner-firm (now respondent) that right from September 1, 1967, it had never employed more than 12 employees.
To an averment made in the writ petition to the above effect, the following reply was given on behalf of the respondents (now appellants) :  ``May be that the strength of the employees of the petitioner is less than 12, that in law makes no difference insofar as it has been found in the impugned orders that the petitioner is a continuation of the old covered establishment........'' Even the learned Single Judge observed in his judgment that ``no doubt, the old firm had a number of employees and was covered by the aforesaid provisions but it has not seriously been disputed that the petitioner has at no time more than 12 employees right from its inception till now.''
Accordingly for the purpose of this case, it would be assumed that for the relevant period, the firm had only employed twelve persons.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellants argued that the following circumstances would go to show that the petitioner-firm (now respondent) was a successor firm of M/s Sikri Brothers :  (i) Out of the six partners of the earlier firm, two partners are the same, only one is an outsider.
(ii) The rest of the partners formed a new firm.
(iii) The same business was being carried out by the new firm as was being carried out by the earlier firm and the premises were also the same.
(iv) Furniture, electric fans, Godrej almirahs, motor car belonging to the old firm was taken by the new firm.
(v) No time gap in the closure of the old firm and the starting of the business by the new firm.
(vi) The old firm did not inform about its closure.
(vii) Some of the old employees were also employed by the new firm.
6.
According to the learned counsel, the cumulative effect of all the above factors would go to show that the new firm was the successor of the old firm and, therefore, in view of the provisions of Section 1(5) of the Act the new firm will continue to be covered by the provisions of the Act irrespective of the fact whether the number of the employees has been reduced to less than 20.
Strong reliance was placed on the judgment of a learned Single Judge of Delhi High Court in the case reported as M/s. Radhakishan Bal Kishan Muchhal and Co. v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, New Delhi, 1977(2) LLJ 1041, in which quite a number of authorities of other Courts as well as of Supreme Court have been considered.
7.
Learned Counsel for the appellants also referred to some other authorities but it is not necessary to refer to the same.
In all the authorities referred to by him, the whole discussion is as to whether the new firm or establishment is not the successor of the old firm or establishment and therefore, entitled to the exemption of the applicability of the provisions of the Act for the infancy period of three years as provided under Section 16(1)(d) of the Act.
As observed above, even if the new establishment has 20 or more employees, under the provisions of Section 16(1)(d) of the Act it has got exemption from the applicability of the provisions of the Act for a period of three years.
If the number of employees is reduced to less than 20, Section 1(5) of the Act (supra) provides that the provisions of the Act shall continue to apply irrespective of the fact that the number of persons employed has been reduced to less than 20.
However, the proviso to the aforesaid sub- section, as it existed upto the year 1971, which has already been quoted above, stipulated that if for a continuous period of not less than one year, the number of persons employed therein has been less than 15, the employer in relation to such establishment may cease to give effect to the provisions of the Act, and shall within one month of the date of such cessation indicate by registered post the fact thereof to such authority as may be specified.
As noticed above, we are assuming that the new firm which came into existence from September 1, 1967, had at no time more than 12 employees.
Even if it is taken that it was a successor firm, the number of employees having been reduced to less than 15 for a continuous period of one year, the provisions of the Act would have ceased to apply to the establishment under the aforesaid provision to Section 1(d) of the Act.
The only requirement was that the firm or the establishment should have informed the authority by registered post.
In 1967, the proviso was very much in existence and the firm could not anticipate in 1967 that the proviso would be deleted in the year 1971.
It could have easily taken the benefit of the proviso since the employees were less than 15 after a period of one year from 1967 by informing the authority concerned that the employees were less than 15.
According to us, one of the important tests to see whether the new establishment is a successor of the old establishment is as to whether there is reason to hold that the dissolution of the old partnership was a mere artifice or a camouflage for the circumvention of the provisions of the Act.
It was so observed also in Palani Malai v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 1969(2) Mysore Law Journal 392.
In a Division Bench judgment of the Madras High Court in the case reported as Regional Provident Fund Commissioner v. Vittaldass Jagannathadas, 1969(II) LLJ 145, it was also observed that one of the factors to be taken into account is whether the establishment in question is genuinely such or is only an old one formally resuscitated in order to avoid the legal obligation ?
We are of the view that if the dissolution of the partnership or the winding up of the Company is a result of subterfuge, the law would refuse to recognize that a new establishment has come into existence.
In The Provident Fund Inspector, Trivandrum v. The Secretary, NSS Co-operative Society Changannachery, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 82, it was noticed in a case where the old establishment was purchased by another owner; that at the time of the purchase, a new owner came in place of the previous owner, the work of the press was stopped on sale and was restarted after a break up of about three months.
The machinery in the press was altered.
The persons employed previously were not continued in service.
A fresh recruitment of the employees took place amongst whom only six happened to be previous employees and compensation was paid to the workmen at the time of sale by the previous owner.
It was held that a new establishment had come into being.
8.
From the facts of the present case, we find that the dissolution of the earlier firm and establishment of the new firm was not a subterfuge or camouflage to avoid the provisions of the Act.
The amount as demanded by the impugned order from the firm for the period September, 1967, to January, 1976, was only Rs. 723160.
If the number of the employees had been reduced to less than 15, then by paying the contribution only for one year and informing the authorities, the firm could have taken advantage of the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 1 as it existed then.
Why should they have resorted to the dissolution of the firm and establishing a new firm under these circumstances ?
On facts also, we find as has been noticed by the Central Government in its order (Annexure P.8) that according to the firm, it had re-employed two employees of the old firm who had been paid their dues by the old firm and their accounts also closed and they were also paid their fund by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner itself.
Those two employees were employed by the firm along with new entrants treating them as new employees on enhanced pay.
On behalf of the Department, it was argued before the Central Government that the mere fact that the employees were paid their dues by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner's office could not lead to a conclusion that they were new employees for the purpose of the Act.
The previous employees never raised any objection.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner should be deemed to know that why the employees are being paid the provident fund by his office and their accounts were being closed.
In the representation filed before the Central Government, it was clearly-mentioned that vide their letter No. 110 dated September 28, 1967, sent under registered post acknowledgement due, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner had been informed that the firm had ceased functioning since September 1, 1967, and the previous employees were no longer its employees.
Copy of the letter was also attached.
The Central Government has not held that no such letter was received by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner.
Consequently, it can be presumed that the same had been received.
For the view we have taken in the matter, it becomes wholly immaterial on the facts of this case if the new firm was carrying on the same business in the same premises.
The liabilities of the old firm had not been taken by the new firm.
It has also been stated by the firm before the Central Government that the insurance etc. was purchased by the new firm from the partners of the old firm who owned the furniture after five years of its establishment.
All these facts cumulatively go to show that the new firm was not a successor of the old firm and its employees being only 12 at the relevant time, was not covered by the provisions of the Act.
We find no infirmity in the finding of the learned Single Judge that the new firm was not a successor of the old firm.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this appeal, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.