VK Bali, J (Oral) - I propose to decide this set of four writs by common order as identical questions of law and fact arise in all the writs.
The facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 3405 of 1985.
In the petitions, that have been filed later, there are some additional facts which need notice and, therefore, whenever need might arise, reference shall be made to the said facts having been extracted from the later petitions.
2.
Petitioners herein, who are Shastri with OT qualifications and quite a few of them have done MA whereas petitioner No. 1 has also done PhD, seek writ in the nature of the mandamus directing the respondents to treat them at par with their colleagues of Master grade and not to discriminate them in any manner including appointments/promotion to higher posts in the education department.
They stake their claim for promotion to the posts of Lecturer, Head Master and Block Education Officer.
3.
The facts, on which the relief indicated above is sought to rest, reveal that all the petitioners possess academic qualifications of Shastri and OT which is said to be now recognised by the State of Haryana and Director of Public Instructions, respondent 1 and 2 herein, as equivalent to BA/B.Sc., B.T./B.Ed.
In addition, petitioners 1 to 25 has passed MA examination in Sanskrit in first or second division, petitioners 1 to 8 have also passed second examination of MA (Hindi) in Second division, petitioner No. 2 is M Phil and petitioner No. 1 is PhD also in Sanskrit.
Petitioners 4, 6, 9, 12, 16, 17, 22 and 23 have also passed BA examination in full subjects.
At the time petition came to be filed way back in 1985, they were employed as Sanskrit teachers in various High /Higher Secondary Schools in Haryana under the Control and management of respondents 1 and 2.
There have always been two cadre of the entire teaching staff in schools in the State of Punjab and when Haryana was formed in 1966 as a separate State, the same pattern of cadres was adopted.
First cadre consists of posts, minimum qualification for which is BA/B.Sc.
plus B.T./B.Ed.
and is commonly called `the Masters' Cadre'.
The second cadre consists of all other teaching posts in the school.
It is stated that these posts have nothing in common to justify their being lumped together in any single cadre.
For instance, these posts vary as regards their respective emoluments, duties, responsibilities, requisite minimum academic qualifications and skills.
All new types of posts for which minimum qualifications was not BA/B.Sc., B.T./B.Ed, had been consigned to this cadre.
Neither the posts nor their incumbents are inter-changeable or inter -transferable.
This cadre is called the Classical and Vernacular Teachers Cadre (for short C & V cadre).
It does not only contain the post of Sanskrit teachers, as the petitioners are Hindi teachers and Punjabi teachers who teach classicial and vernacular languages but also such posts as Drawing teachers, Arts and Craft teachers, Manual Training Instructors, Spinning and Weaving teachers, Tailoring mistresses and Physical Training Instructor Masters' cadre was thought by the Government to be superior to C & V cadre.
It always carried a higher status and pay scale except in the case of Shastri and OT but at the time when petition was filed they drew the same pay scale in the Masters Cadre.
It is the case of the petitioners that once a person joins that Classical and Vernacular cadre, as a rule, he is debarred for life from getting out of it or from getting admission to the Masters cadre even after he acquires the qualifications of BA/B.Sc., B.T./B.Ed.
or still higher qualifications such as MA, B.Ed., M Phil or PhD It is further the case of petitioners that by a series of steps taken by the respondents, all avenues of promotion of the members of C & V cadre have been closed.
The possible avenues for promotion for teachers of this cadre are the posts of Head Masters of High Schools, Lecturers in Schools, Block Education Officer and Principal of the Higher Secondary Schools.
Some steps indicating as if the petitioners have been excluded for promotion to the posts mentioned above have been enumerated in para 6 of the petition.
It is pleaded that as a result of these steps, there is complete stagnation in the service career of members of C & V cadre.
It is this denial of appointment by promotion and direct recruitment to the higher posts and giving higher status to the persons of Masters cadre that has been complained of in the present petition.
That the petitioners are entitled to promotional posts from the facts as enumerated above, is sought to be buttressed by pleadings, which are in tune with the contentions raised at the time of arguments, that when Shastri examinations can be taken by a person, who has passed MA examination in Sanskrit, there shall be absolutely no justification for putting any hurdles in the way of such person to the promotional post of Lecturer in Sanskrit.
That for admission into Shastri a person has to have passed MA examination is sought to be supported from Annexure P-3, an extract from the syllabi and the Regulations for Oriental Titles Examination, 1979 issued by the Panjab University.
Clause 17 in Annexure P-3 states that the Shastri examination shall be held in two parts, Part I at the end of the first year and part II at the end of the second year.
Clause 21 in the same document says that a person who has passed one of the following examinations shall be eligible to join the Shastri Part-I class:-  ``(a) the Visharda Examination of this University.
(b) MA examination in Sanskrit of this University.
(c) An examination of another university recognised as equivalent to (a) or (b).''
Reliance to also placed upon Annexure P-6, a judgment delivered by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 2019 of 1972 (Rampalit Vyakran Acharya and others v. Panjab University, Chandigarh and others) decided on September 22, 1975.
This was a case where certain Sanskrit teachers educated in the traditional way and obtaining degree of Acharya were complaining about that they were treated worse even in their own field of operation by the yardstick of the prevalent standard in the modern universities.
They were claiming the pay scale that was being given to Acharya, who had passed BA/B.Ed.
While dealing with the grievance, the Apex Court observed as follows:-  ``That being the position, the appellants should have a real grievance if being Acharyas they are now shown the cold shoulder by the University in not giving them their due recognition.
From the letter of the Registrar, Panjab University dated November 6, 1969, quoted above, it is clear that Shastri plus BA or Shastri plus Prabhakar is one category and is inferior to Acharya which is at par with Shastri plus MA Sanskrit.
It is, therefore, clear even from the above letter of the University that Acharyas need not have in addition an MA degree in the Sanskrit in order to be entitled to the grade of Rs. 300-600 quoted above.
It is, therefore, clear that after their service have been taken over by the University, the appellants will be entitled to scales of pay appertaining to Acharyas and as available to them during the relevant period.
Their claim to such scales cannot be defeated by fact that they are not also in addition holders of MA degrees in Sanskrit.''
Petitioners also reply upon written statement that came to be filed by the Director Public Instructions, Haryana, in Civil Suit No. 2115 of 1972 which suit, it appears, was filed by teachers of C & V cadre asking for pay parity between them and Sanskrit teachers.
While opposing the cause of the plaintiffs in the said suit, it was categorically stated by the respondents that Classical and Vernacular teachers of each cadre i.e. provincialised and State cadre do not form one unit of service and are borne on District cadres.
However Classical and Vernacular teachers of each category of two cadres, as mentioned in para 3 above, includes persons teaching various subjects like Sanskrit, Hindi and Punjabi, Drawing, Art and Craft teachers etc.
The teachers belonging to both these cadres have a seniority list of each cadre separately.
Even before the revision of grades i.e. 1.121967 there used to be some distinction between the Shastri and other Classical and Vernacular teachers.
Prior to the revision of scales of the Classical and Vernacular teachers i.e. Rs. 60-120, Shastris were getting starting salary of Rs. 80/- because of their having been better qualified as compared to other Classical and Vernacular teachers.
Similarly, Language Teachers, Honours in Hindi and Punjabi, in addition to one year OT training, used to get a starting salary of Rs. 72/- in the grade of 60-120 amongst Classical and Vernacular teachers.
Now the grade of Rs. 220-400 (for 85% posts) and Rs. 400-500 (for 15% posts) has been given to Sanskrit teachers by Haryana Government equating them with trained graduates simply because of the fact that the degree of Shastri has been treated equivalent to BA The degree of Panjab University by Government of India, so far as professional qualifications (OT for Shastri and B.T./B.Ed.
for trained Master) are concerned those are according to the subject they teach.
(Emphasis supplied)  4.
From the facts, stated above, as also various documents that have been detailed, the contention raised by Mr. Harbhagwan Singh, learned counsel on behalf of the petitioners in support of the writ is that once the petitioners' qualifications have been equated with the employees of Masters cadre for the purposes of pay scale, there cannot be any justifiable reason whatsoever for the respondents to deny them promotional avenues that are open to the employees of the Masters' cadre.
It is, thus, a case of discrimination, contends the learned counsel.
5.
Insofar as the petitioners' claim with regard to promotional post of Lecturer is concerned, in the context of the written statement that has been filed in subsequent writ petitions and some decisions that have been taken during the pendency of the writ, nothing much is required to be said as, virtually this part of the writ petition has been conceded, thus, rendering the petition on that count to be infructuous.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 2505 of 1992 it has been pleaded in the written statement that qualifications of MA in Sanskrit with minimum of 50% or more is prescribed for direct recruitment to the post of Lecturers (Schools Cadre) Sanskrit and vide Haryana Government Memo dated 2210.1992 Government has ordered that hence- forth Sanskrit teachers possessing the qualifications of MA in Sanskrit with 50% or more marks may be considered for promotion to the post of Lecturer in Sanskrit (School Cadre).
The cases of all such teachers are being called from all the District Education Officers in the State and their promotion cases would be processed on seniority-cum-merit basis.
It is further pleaded in paragraph 7 of the written statement that promotional avenues of Classical and Vernacular teachers have not been closed.
If such teachers acquire qualifications of BA/B.Ed./B.T.
and fall in 50% subject-wise quota, they will be promoted to the post of Masters/Mistresses and they are merged in the Master's cadre and they are considered for promotion to the post of Headmaster and Lecturer on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Many teachers, who were initially recruited as C & V teachers have been promoted to the posts of Headmaster/Lecturer by way of promotion in their quota.
The teachers possessing qualification of MA in Sanskrit with 50% or more marks are considered for promotion to the post of Lecturer Sanskrit (School Cadre).
Once it has been accepted that all those who have qualified MA Sanskrit, can be and are being promoted to the post of Lecturer, nothing survives for adjudication insofar as quite a few petitioners of this writ are concerned as they have passed MA Sanskrit.
It may be mentioned at this stage that by way of instructions that come to be issued on May 4, 1985, Masters/Mistresses, who posses qualifications with regard to their subject can be promoted to the post of Lecturer and under the heading `Sr. No. Subject' at item No. 4.
Sanskrit is also mentioned.
So, it is clear that all those, who have passed MA in Sanskrit with 50% marks can be promoted to the post of Lecturer.
There is, however, surviving claim of those who have not passed MA in Sanskrit but have passed such qualification which has been recognised either by the Government or by virtue of judicial precedents to be equivalent to MA Government of India, Ministry of Education, vide its letter dated January 23, 1964, addressed to all the Education Secretaries of the States and Union Territories in the country, mentioned that the Central Sanskrit Board had advised the Govt. on all matters relating to development of Sanskrit and had recommended that the one who had done Honours in Sanskrit (Acharya) from the Panjab University, his said qualifications are equivalent to MA In fact, at item No. 21, Honours in Sanskrit (Acharya) has been said to be equivalent to examination in the general education set up as equivalent to MA in Sanskrit.
The Supreme Court, while dealing with the case of Rampalit Vyakran Acharya (supra) also observed that Acharyas are equivalent to MA as is clear from letter dated January 23, 1964 from the Government of India, Ministry of Education, Annexure P-5, herein.
It appears that by the time the matter came to the decided by the Supreme Court, letter like Annexure P-1 (in CWP No. 1476 of 1987) was not there but a similar letter recommending the same thing, as has been done in Annexure P-3 was in existence.
The same was relied upon by the Apex Court to grant relief to the petitioners in the said case.
If, therefore, a particular educational qualification has been treated to be equivalent to such a qualification that entitles an incumbent to be promoted to the next higher post, the said qualification cannot be ignored.
What follows is, therefore, that those who have actually passed MA in Sanskrit and those who hold the degree equivalent to MA in Sanskrit, are entitled to be promoted to the post of Lecturer in Sanskrit.
Acharya from Panjab University is, thus, a qualification equivalent to MA in Sanskrit and, therefore, those who hold this qualification, cannot be excluded for consideration to the post of Lecturer in Sanskrit.
6.
The stake of the petitioners with regard to promotional posts of Head Master and Block Education Officer, in considered view of this Court, it not that well merited as their case is for promotion to the post of Lecturer in Sanskrit.
The statutory Rules relied upon for the claim referred to above, are called the Punjab Educational Service Class III School Cadre Rules, 1955.
The Counsel places reliance upon Rule 7 dealing with method of recruitment.
The same reads thus:-  ``7.
Method of recruitment.
- (i) Posts in the service shall be filled; (a) by direct appointment, or  (b) by transfer of an official from other services or posts of Government in the Education department of any Government in India, or (c) by promotion from lower grades in the service.
(ii) when a vacancy occurs or is likely to occurs in the service the appointing authority specified in rule 3, shall determine in what manner such vacancy will be filled.
(iii) Appointment to any post by promotion of officials already in the service or by transfer from other service within the Education Department or other departments of any State or Central Govt. shall be made strictly by selection based on consideration such as qualification and/or consistent good record for a number of years and no official shall have any claim to such appointment as of right.''
Clause (c) of Rule 7 of the 1955 Rules is pressed into service and it is argued that once the grade of the petitioners has been equated with the employees of the Masters' grade, who in turn are admittedly entitled for consideration to the post of Head Master and Block Education Officer, the petitioners holding the same grades cannot be denied such benefits.
There is however a basic fallacy in the argument.
When the Rules of 1955 came into being, there were no posts of lecturer or Block Education Officer in existence.
The post of Head Master was, however, covered under the said Rules.
The petitioners, who are teaching Sanskrit or Hindi, came to be considered for promotion to the post of Lecturer for the first time in 1985, concededly at a stage far after when the Rules of 1955 had come into existence.
Earlier, they were not even entitled to be promoted to the post of Lecturer.
The framers of the Rules while providing promotion from lower grades in the service had obviously in mind the posts that were in existence and not that came into existence later on.
If, by later development, the petitioners can be promoted to the post of Lecturer, it does not automatically follow that they can be promoted to other posts i.e. of Head Master and Block Education Officer also.
However, after the avenue of promotion to the post of Lecturer became available, the administration ought to have applied its mind as to whether the employees in the said cadre i.e. the cadre of petitioners were capable to man the posts of Head Master and Block Education Officer.
There can be arguments available on both sides.
It can well be thought over by the Administration that those who have studied variety of subjects while doing their BA/B.Ed./MA would be better suited to man the posts which are admittedly administrative in nature than those who have studied and taught only one language.
It can also be thought over that even though a person has studied and taught only one language, he shall be in no manner at a dis-advantageous position to man the administrative posts.
As mentioned above, there may be merit in either of the views.
Even though, therefore, the cause of petitioners at this stage does not seem to be justified for directing the respondents to consider them for promotion to the post of Head Master/Block Education Officer, a direction, however, deserves to be issued to them to consider if the petitioners are good enough to man the posts of Head Master and Block Education Officer as competently as the others are.
7.
While, therefore, the writ petition insofar as cause of petitioners, who have done or whose qualification is equivalent to MA in Sanskrit are concerned, the same is allowed directing the respondents to consider their case for promotional post of Lecturer in Sanskrit w.e.f.
the date they fulfil the qualifications.
If found fit, they should be promoted to the post of Lecturer against the vacant posts without disturbing those who have already been promoted.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case as also in view of the fact that petitioners, who have actually not worked on the promotional posts, would not be entitled to arrears of salary if a decision to promote them is taken from the dates, as mentioned above.
A further direction is issued to the respondents to deliberate over the issue and take a conscious decision and preferably after hearing the petitioners and other equally situate persons and finally opine as to whether they are entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of Head Master and Block Education Officer.
Let this exercise be done within a period of three months from the date of copy of this order is handed over to the Secretary, Education Department, Haryana.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.