NK Sodhi, J - Whether the benefit of higher scale of pay granted to the petitioner could be withdrawn merely because she had acquired the higher qualification before joining service is the short question which arises for our determination in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
Facts giving rise to this petition may first be noticed.
Petitioner joined as a JBT Teacher on ad hoc basis on 2111983 and her services were regularised with effect from 1111986.
She is presently working as JBT Teacher in Government High School, Kambohpura (Karnal).
She acquired the qualification of BA on 23.7.1980 before joining service.
The composite State of Punjab had issued a circular letter dated 2371957 revising the pay scales of various categories subordinate services including teachers.
While fixing revised pay scales in respect of different categories of teachers in the Education Department, two broad categories, namely, Category A and Category B of teachers were created laying down inter alia the requirements of their academic qualifications.
It is important to note that the scale of pay was linked to the qualifications.
This circular letter remained operative in the State of Punjab and Haryana even after the reorganisation of the State in the year 1966.
In March, 1990, the State of Haryana revised the pay scales of teaching personnel of the Education Department and decided to give a go-bye to the earlier principle of linking the pay scales with the acquisition of higher qualifications.
It was stipulated that teachers acquiring higher qualifications would not be entitled to the higher grade with effect from the respective dates of their acquiring those qualifications.
It was decided that the Masters/Teachers in the Education Department would be placed in the scales of pay of their respective categories to which they are appointed against the sanctioned posts and mere possession/acquiring of higher qualifications will not automatically entitle them to claim higher pay scales.
A circular letter dated 931990 was issued in this regard.
3.
The matter regarding grant of higher pay scales to JBT Teachers in terms of composite Punjab Government letter dated 2371957 who had acquired BA qualification up to 831990 was again considered by the State Government in 1995.
It was decided to grant higher pay scales in terms of the letter dated 2371957 to the JBT Teachers of Government Schools from the dates of acquiring BA qualification by them and the benefit was confined to those JBT Teachers who had acquired the qualification of BA up to 831990 subject to the condition that the arrears shall be restricted to 38 months preceding the date of issue of the letter.
The decision was circulated by letter dated 26101995 (Annexure P-2 with the writ petition).
The petitioner, as observed earlier, had acquired the qualification of BA on 23.7.1980, that is, before the cut of date 831990 fixed in the letter Annexure P-2 and was, therefore, entitled to the higher scale in terms of this letter.
Her case for the grant of higher pay scale was taken up by the Headmistress, Government High School, Kambohpura and the same was sanctioned to her on 4.12.1995 with effect from 1111986.
The order of the Headmistress was verified by the Section Officer, Office of the District Primary Education Officer, Karnal.
This order is Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
The benefit of higher scale granted to the petitioner is now sought to be withdrawn on the ground that the petitioner was not entitled to the same as she had acquired the higher qualification of BA before joining service.
It is against this action of the respondents that the present petition has been filed.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents, it being pleaded that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of the higher scale as she had acquired the higher qualification of BA before entering service.
It is submitted that the letter dated 2371957 provides that only those teachers would be entitled to higher grade who acquired the higher qualification subsequently after joining service and that those who had acquired the higher qualification before entering into service are not entitled to the higher grade because the benefit of higher qualification had already been given to them at the time of selection to the post of JBT Teachers in the form of bonus marks.
In other words, the benefit, according to the respondents, is intended only for those who improved their qualification during service by obtaining BA degree.
The learned Additional Advocate General placed reliance in this regard on a recent judgment of the Apex Court in Wazir Singh and others v. The State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 431 (P&H) : JT 1995(7) SC 404.
5.
We have heard counsel for the parties and find no merit in the submissions made by the Additional Advocate General.
There is no dispute that on the basis of the letter dated 2371957 issued by the composite State of Punjab, the scales of pay of teaches had been linked with the higher qualifications acquired by them.
This principle continued to be followed by the State of Haryana till the policy was changed as per circular letter dated 931990.
On 26101995, the State Government issued the circular letter (Annexure P-2) giving the benefit of higher pay scale to those JBT Teachers who had acquired the qualification of BA upto 831990 i.e. before the policy was changed by the State Government.
Petitioner had actually acquired the higher qualification prior to the cut off date and was rightly given the higher scale by the Headmistress.
This benefit, in our opinion, cannot be withdrawn from her merely because she possessed this qualification before entering service.
Firstly, the plain language of the letter dated 26101995 (Annexure P-2 with the writ petition) does not in terms restrict the benefit to those teachers who had acquired the qualification while in service.
Secondly, if the benefit was to be given only to the teachers acquiring the higher qualification while in service, then we are of the view that it would result in discrimination amongst the JBT Teachers.
The teachers who possessed the qualification prior to joining service and those possessing thereafter would be classified in different categories which classification would be most arbitrary treating the equals as unequals and having no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
The object of encouraging a teacher to have higher qualification is to impart better education to the students and how does it matter whether the teacher had obtained that qualification prior to joining service or acquires it thereafter.
The question whether a teacher who possessed higher qualification before joining service is entitled to the benefit of higher pay scale is not res integra.
In Subhash Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1986(2) S.L.R.
706 the posts of Masters could be filled up by appointment as well as by promotion and the competent authority fixed the quota of promotees at 33 per cent and while doing so it also imposed a condition that only those teachers would be promoted as Masters who had passed their BA, BEd/BT Examination during service.
This condition was challenged in the writ petition filed in this Court and the Division Bench held the same to be illegal and arbitrary violating Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was observed as under :-  "However, while presenting this quota for promotion, respondent No. 2 had added a condition that only those teachers who acquired higher qualifications prescribed for the post of Master while in service were eligible for promotion to the Master's cadre.
This has resulted in the creation of two classes within the category of teachers.
Teachers who possessed the BA and BEd/BT degree at the time of joining the service as teachers were grouped in one category and the teachers who did not possess these qualifications at the time of joining service as teachers and who had acquired the qualification of BA, BEd/BT during the course of their service have been put in a separate category.
Admittedly both the these categories belong to the same grade of teachers.
Such a sub-classification within a class smacks of arbitrariness and is discriminatory.
It has not been shown that this sub-classification is based on any intelligible diferentia.
It has no nexus with the object to be achieved, viz., excellence of education.
The teachers who possess the higher qualifications at the time of joining service are not in any way intellectually or professionally inferior to those teachers who attained these qualifications while in service of the Government.
Rather former because of their experience and maturity may be able to teach better."
Again, in Rattan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 711 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 533, a Division Bench of this Court in a similar context observed as under :-  "Distinction sought to be made out between the persons appointed as Masters with higher qualifications and those acquiring higher qualification while in service is illusory and unwarranted."
The issue now before us was not before their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Wazir Singh's case (supra).
In that case, appellants were appointed JBT Teachers and they did not possess B.T./B.Ed.
qualification at the time of their appointment.
They acquired those qualifications later but they were denied the benefit of higher grades by the State of Haryana on the basis of circular letter dated 931990.
They claimed the benefit on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in Chandan Lal and others v. State of Haryana, 1987(3) SCC 313.
The effect of the circular letter dated 931990 was considered and their Lordships observed that the policy of the erstwhile State of Punjab as depicted in its circular letter dated 2371957 had been changed by the State of Haryana with effect from 931990.
They also observed that but for the policy instructions issued on 931990 the judgment of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal's case (supra) would have applied.
The decision in Wazir Singh's case (supra) is, therefore, of no help to the respondents.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the order dated 22.1.1996 passed by the District Education Officer, Karnal whereby the benefit of higher grade is restricted only to the JBT Teachers acquiring higher qualifications during service is quashed.
The respondents are directed not to withdraw the higher scale granted to the petitioner.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.