Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners were recruited as Constables in the Haryana Armed Police in the year 1991.
On September 15, 1992, a case under Sections 363/376/34 IPC was registered against them.
It was alleged that they, along with six other persons had raped Renu on the night of September 14, 1992.
The petitioners were arrested.
On September 17, 1992, the petitioners were called upon to submit their respective explanations with regard to certain complaints received against them including the allegation that they had gang-raped a girl on September 14, 1992.
Vide letter dated September 28, 1992, the petitioners submitted that they be given time to submit their reply after their release from the Jail.
On September 30, 1992, the petitioners were discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
The petitioners alleged that they have in fact been dismissed from service and that the action is violative of the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution as well as the rules.
2.
The respondents contest the claim of the petitioners.
In the written statement filed by Mr. RC Jowel, IPC, Commandant, 4th Battalion, Haryana Armed Police, it has been mentioned that the petitioners have been discharged from service as they were ``found unlikely to prove'' efficient police officers.
3.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that a specific accusation of misconduct having been made against the petitioners, it was incumbent on the respondents to hold an enquiry and that the impugned orders are violative of Article 311 (2) of the Constitution of India.
On the other hand, Mr. Arun Nehra, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana, has submitted that the petitioners were discharged from service in conformity with the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules and that the impugned orders were not penal in any way.
He has rested his submission on the pronouncement of a Full Bench of this Court in Sher Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 1 (P&H)(FB) : 1994(1) Punjab Law Reporter 456.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we find that a similar question had arisen for consideration before the Full Bench.
On a review of the various decisions rendered by their Lordships of the Supreme Court, the following propositions of law were laid down :-  ``(i) If a person has been employed on purely temporary basis and his services are terminated on account of his unsuitability or some alleged misconduct by a simple and innocuous order which carries no stigma/or penal consequences provisions of Art. 311 (2) are not attracted unless it is shown by some evidence that the authority actually intended to punish the employee.
(ii) The employer is entitled to conduct a preliminary enquiry to determine the truth of falsehood of the complaint as also the suitability of the employee.
Such an enquiry cannot by itself imply that the employer intended to punish the employee.
(iii) In a case where allegations amounting to misconduct are made against a temporary employee, the employer has a two-fold choice.
It can either choose to terminate the services of the employee in accordance with the terms of appointment and the rules governing the service or it can proceed to take punitive action.
If it chooses to invoke the right under the contract of service and passes a simple order of termination/discharge, the provisions of Article 311 or the rules prescribing the procedure for imposition of a penalty are not attracted.
However, if the employer feels that the employee deserves to be punished and proceeds to take punitive action, the prescribed procedure and the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India have to be followed.''
5.
Furthermore, on a consideration of the rules including Rule 1221, it was held that ``for a period of three years, a constable is under surveillance.
He is being watched.
He is kept under close supervision.
He has no right to the post.
His services are terminable at any time during this period of three years.
He can secure his position in the service only if he convinces the Superintendent of Police that he is likely to prove an efficient police officer..............''  6.
What is the position in the present case ?
7.
The petitioners had been admittedly enrolled as Constables in the year 1991.
They were discharged from service vide orders dated September 30, 1992.
Prima facie, these orders are innocuous.
However, Mr. Surya Kant submits that these had in fact been passed on account of the allegations made in the notices issued to the petitioners.
One a perusal of the documents produced with the writ petition, we find that different memos had been issued to the petitioners in which various acts of omission and commission including the case under Sections 363/376 IPC had been mentioned.
In response to these notices, the petitioners submitted an application dated September 28, 1992.
They merely stated that they had been implicated in a false case and were locked-up in Kaithal Jail.
They had not controverted any of the adverse suggestions regarding their performance of duties as made in the notices.
In this situation, if the respondents had really intended to punish them, they could have initiated disciplinary proceedings.
They did not do so.
In our view, the mere issue of a notice calling upon the employees to explain their position, does not mean that the employer intended to punish them.
The employer has the right to satisfy itself about the suitability of the employees and before arriving at a firm decision, it can seek their explanation.
This is only an evidence of fairness.
The petitioners were afforded such an opportunity.
They had a chance to explain their position with regard to various acts of omission and commission.
By way of illustration, Constable Badri Parsad, petitioner No. 4 was informed that there was a written complaint against him that he did not obey the orders of his superior officers.
He was also alleged to have been found absent on November 16, 1991 for 13 hours and 13 minutes.
He did not deny any of these allegations in his reply.
In this situation, the competent authority could have either proceeded to initiate disciplinary action or taken recourse to the provisions of Rule 1221.
It adopted the latter course.
It passed the orders of discharge in strict conformity with the provisions of Rule 1221.
We are not persuaded to hold that these were orders of dismissal.
Apparently, the orders cast no stigma.
No penal consequences ensue.
Consequently, the respondents were not required to follow the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution or Chapter 16 of the Rules whereunder an enquiry etc. have to be held.
8.
Mr. Surya Kant referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Babu Lal v. State of Haryana, 1991(1) SCT 474(SC) : 1991(1) SLR 756.
Therein a criminal case under Section 420, IPC had been registered against the petitioner.
He was under suspension.
While he was under suspension, an order of termination was passed.
Ultimately, he was acquitted of the criminal charge.
Their Lordships observed that ``the order of termination had been made illegally during the pendency of the order of suspension and also during the pendency of the criminal proceedings which ultimately ended with the acquittal of the appellant.
It is the settled position in law that the appellant who was suspended on the ground of pendency of criminal proceeding against him, on being acquitted of the criminal charge is entitled to be reinstated in service.''
Furthermore, it was also found that Babu Lal had a right to be considered for regularisation in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
His claim had not so far been considered.
It was in this situation that the view taken by the High Court was reversed by their Lordships.
In the present case, however, the petitioners were never placed under suspension.
In our view, there is an essential distinction between the two cases.
While under suspension, an employee is paid merely the subsistence allowance.
The termination of his services results in the penal consequence of loss of wages for the period for which he has remained under suspension.
This is certainly a penal consequence.
However, in a case where no order of suspension is passed and the authority merely exercises its right under the statutory rules to determine the employment, it cannot be said that the action is penal or that any civil consequences ensue from the order.
9.
We also find that in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : 1991(1) SLR 606, it has been clearly held that if the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant are not satisfactory ``or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary government servant''.
The choice is, thus, of the employer.
This appears to have been exercised in the present case.
The respondents decided to terminate the services of the petitioners and not punish them.
10.
Mr. Surya Kant was also at pains to point out that the petitioners had been acquitted by the Additional Sessions Judge vide his order dated January 4, 1993.
We have perused the judgment.
The two witnesses produced by the prosecution had turned hostile.
Accordingly, there was no evidence against the petitioners.
This, however, does not mean that there was no material before the authority on which it could have come to the conclusion that the petitioners were not likely to make efficient police officers.
Various acts of omission and commission had been pointed out in the notices issued to the petitioners.
If on consideration of those matters, the authority drew an inference against the petitioners and took the view that they were not likely to make efficient police officers, its action cannot be said to be vitiated on account of lack of any evidence.
Of course, this court in the exercise of writ jurisdiction does not normally go into the sufficiency of the evidence.
11.
Accordingly, we hold that the impugned orders are not punitive.
The provisions of Article 311(2) or Chapter 16 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 cannot be invoked by the petitioners.
The petition is, accordingly, liable to be dismissed.
We dismiss it in limine.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.