VK Bali, J - Tarlok Singh Batra and another, who are Superintendent Grade-II and Senior Assistant, respectively in the office of Advocate General, Punjab, through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek a direction to be issued to the respondents to promote them to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I and Superintendent Grade II, respectively as also to set aside the order, Annexure P-3, dated December 20, 1989 vide which respondent No. 3, Mohan Singh, an Assistant, was promoted as Superintendent Grade-I  2.
The brief facts, on which the relief aforesaid tests, reveal that petitioner No. 1 was appointed in the office of the Advocate General, Punjab in the year 1964 as Clerk on ad hoc basis and was regularised in November, 1965 on the said post.
Petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Clerk straightaway on regular basis on November 16, 1965, Respondent No. 3 who belongs to Scheduled Caste, was appointed as Clerk on December 15, 1967 on the reserved vacancy of Scheduled Caste.
Petitioners were promoted as Assistants with effect from August 23, 1969 and were confirmed on the said post with the effect from December 19, 1974.
They were granted selection grade in the office of the respondent No. 2 whereas respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant on October 20, 1973 on a reserve vacancy of Scheduled Caste by superseding three clerks of the general category, namely, Karam Singh, Jagbir Singh and Ram Parkash.
Respondent No. 3 was, however, confirmed as Clerk w.e.f.
December 20, 1974 and thereafter as Assistant on October 30, 1980.
In the manner aforesaid, it is pleaded that petitioners are senior to respondent No. 3 and the fact aforesaid is also reflected in the seniority list, Annexure P-1.
Prior to February 23, 1977, the office of Advocate-General, Punjab was 'B' class office and there were posts of Head Clerk, Assistants, Stenographer, Clerks and Restorers as sanctioned by the Government and provided the Rules called 'The Punjab Advocate General's Office Class III Service Rules, 1965.
Thereafter, post of Personal Assistant was kept in abeyance and in its place.
A post of Superintendent was sanctioned by the Government vide letter dated June 2, 1970.
This post was abolished on August 17, 1970 while reviving the post of Personal Assistant.
Again on November 20, 1970, the post of Superintendent was revived while keeping the post of Personal Assistant in abeyance and was made permanent subsequently in April, 1974.
In the manner aforesaid, it is pleaded that in the year 1970, there was one post of Superintendent, Head Assistant, Personal Assistant and 12 posts of Assistants and Clerks.
The promotion of the post of Superintendent was to be made from Head Clerk/Head Assistant and the Head Clerk/Head Assistant was to be promoted from the Assistants.
The post of Head Assistant was upgrade to that of Superintendent w.e.f.
July 15, 1975.
However, on February 23, 1977, the office of the Advocate General, Punjab was upgraded from 'B' class to 'A' class office having the post of Superintendent which was later on categorised as Superintendent Grade-I in the pay scale of Rs. 825-1580/- which was revised and the present pay scale of the Superintendent Grade I is Rs. 2,000-3,500.
The unrevised pay scale of the Superintendent Grade-II was Rs. 800-2,400/-.
Prior to the promotion of respondent No. 3 that has been challenged in the present petition, he was given promotion to the post of Incharge, Copying Branch against the reserved quota which post was having a special pay of Rs. 15/- per month over and above the pay of Clerk by superseding a number of persons of the general category.
Aker the upgradation of the office of respondent No. 2, a post of Superintendent Grade-II was created by the Government vide its order dated July 16, 1987 and petitioner No. 1, being the seniormost Assistant in the selection grade, was promoted to the said post of Superintendent Grade II on July 31, 1987.
Prior to 1975, there was one post of Superintendent, which is now known as Superintendent Grade-I, which was a non-reserved post being a solitary post.
Thereafter, in 1975 another post of Superintendent was created by upgrading the post of Head Assistant/Head Clerk.
In the manner aforesaid, it is pleaded that the incumbent who was already working as Head Assistant/Head Clerk became the Superintendent now known as Superintendent Grade-I The first vacancy of Superintendent Grade-I occurred in July, 1980 on the retirement of Shiv Kumar Sharma which was filled up by promotion of the seniormost Assistant, Harnam Singh, as no suitable candidate of Scheduled Caste was available.
It is also pleaded that the first vacancy could not got to reserved category being a cadre of only two posts of Superintendent Grade-I Further, the next vacancy became available in 1982 and once again Lachhman Dass was promoted against that post which was in fact a second point roster and as per recording scheduled caste candidate was available.
The third vacancy which could at the most be taken as carry- forward rule occurred in July, 1983 and it was given to a general category candidate by promoting Mohinder Singh, seniormost Assistant as on suitable Scheduled Caste candidate was available.
The forth vacancy occurred in 1986 which too was filled up by promoting as Assistant of general category, namely, Gurdev Singh Dhaliwal.
Again on November 7, 1989, a vacancy of Superintendent Grade I became available for promotion on account of promotion of Shri Gurdev Singh Dhaliwal Superintendent Grade I on previsional basis and the petitioners alongwith other eligible persons were called to represent their claim for promotion.
Petitioner No. 1 claimed promotion on the post under contention being seniormost, that is of Superintendent Grade-I The cadre of Superintendent Grade-I is only of two posts.
Petitioner No. 1 pleaded in support of his claim for promotion that the cadre being only of two posts, it could not be allocated to a candidate of reserved category as that would tantamount to 50% reservation which is contrary to the instructions of the Government as also against the ratio of decision in Joginder Singh Sethi v. State of Punjab and ors., 1982(2) SLR 307.
He further stated that the reservation in Class III for promotion is fixed by the Government upto 20% for the Scheduled Caste and 2% for the Backward Classes and, therefore, as well there could be no reservation in a cadre of two posts.
Petitioner No. 2, who was senior-most Assistant in selection grade, also staked his claim on parity of same reasoning, and further stated that in case petitioner No. 1 was promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade I, he was entitled to promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade II being solitary post on which a person of Scheduled Caste category could not be accommodated.
He further pleaded that even otherwise the reserved vacancy could be carried forward upto two subsequent years in case no suitable person was available and inasmuch as the vacancy of Superintendent Grade I occurred for the first time for Promotion in the year 1980 it could not be carried forward in the recruitment year 1982 and 1983 when in those years also no suitable candidate of scheduled caste was available.
3.
Inasmuch as petitioner No. 1 was apprehensive of his claim being ignored by the Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, as it was likely that respondent No. 3 would be promoted, he submitted representation on December 13, 1989.
The said representation was rejected.
Considering the vacancy at reserved roster point, respondent No. 3-Mohan Singh was promoted on provisional basis vide order dated December 20, 1989.
Ignoring the claim of petitioners and favouring respondent No. 3 to the promoted post is challenged in the present petition and Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioners vehemently contends that Advocate-General, Punjab, has given double promotion to respondent No. 3 from the post of Assistant to the post of Superintendent Grade-I by ignoring the claim of his senior Assistants and Superintendent Grade-II, who were eligible and suitable for the post of Superintendent Grade-I It is also contended that the action of respondent No. 2 in considering the vacancy of Superintendent Grade-I as reserved for Scheduled Caste category is illegal and contrary to the instructions issued from time to time making the reservation of posts for Scheduled Caste to the extent of 20%.
The cadre of Superintendent Grade-I is of only two posts and the next vacancy is likely to occur after more than eight years.
That being so, reserving one post out of the two will tantamount to 50% reservation.
4.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed in two identical written statements, one filed by respondents 1 and 2 and the other filed by respondent No. 3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objections that since respondent No. 3 has been given promotion only on provisional basis against reserved vacancy, there was no question of supersession of the seniors.
While giving the facts, it is stated that one post of Superintendent (Non-Gazetted) was created in the office of Advocate General, Punjab, on June 3, 1970 and one Ramji Dass Khanna was promoted against that post.
It was a solitary post.
On July 17, 1975 another post of Superintendent (Non-Gazetted) was created in the office of the Advocate General, Punjab by upgrading the post of Head Assistant, already existing.
Consequently, Shiv Kumar Sharma, incumbent of the post of Head Assistant assumed the charge of Superintendent (Non-Gazetted) against the said post.
There was, thus, no element of promotion.
On July 25, 1980, on the retirement of Shri Shiv Kumar Sharma, one post, of Superintendent fell vacant and consequently Shri Harnam Singh, seniormost Assistant, was promoted as such.
No suitable reserved category employee was available at that time.
This was the second point of promotion as per the roster.
Shri Ramji Dass retired on November 2, 1982 and against the said vacancy, Shri Lachhman Dass, seniormost Assistant; was promoted out of general category because no suitable scheduled caste candidate was again available.
This was the third point of roster.
On July 28, 1983, Shri Mohinder Singh seniormost Assistant, was promoted as Superintendent against the vacancy failing vacant on account of retirement of Shri Harnam Singh because again no suitable reserved category employee was available.
This was the fourth point.
On September 1, 1986, Shri Gurdev Singh Dhaliwal was promoted as Superintendent against the vacancy created on account of retirement of Shri Lachhman Dass.
This was the fifth point of roster.
The vacancy for the scheduled caste employee had occurred in 1980 at point No. 2 of the roster but the same could not be filled from amongst the scheduled/backward class employees as no one was found suitable.
This vacancy was carried forward as per the rules/instructions but no scheduled caste candidate was found suitable.
The post of Superintendent in the office of Advocate General, Punjab, was designated as Superintendent Grade-I w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
The vacancy of Superintendent Grade-I became available in AG, Punjab's office on November 27, 1989 consequent upon the promotion of Shri Gurdev Singh Dhaliwal on provisional basis.
This vacancy was at No. 6 of the roster maintained in that office.
Even though, petitioner No. 1 staked his claim for the said post on the ground that he was working as Superintendent Grade-II and hence was the seniormost employee and that this was not reserved point as per roster and further that there being only two posts of Superintendent Grade-I in the said office, the reservation for Scheduled Caste would be 50% in case the said post was given to scheduled caste employee but all these contentions raised were duly considered by the office and his representation was rejected.
Respondent No. 3-Mohan Singh, it is further pleaded, was promoted as Superintendent Grade-I vide orders dated December 20, 1989 after carefully considering the instructions and other relevant factors including roster point.
As per roster maintained since November 1, 1966, the said vacancy being at point No. 6, was to be reserved for Scheduled Caste, and since respondent No. 3 was seniormost Assistant, he was rightly promoted.
5.
The plea of petitioners that respondent No. 3 has been given double jump by promoting him to the post of Superintendent Grade-I from that of Assistant has been replied by pleading that there are no service rules for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-I Before the creation of the post of Supdt.
Grade-II on July 16, 1987, the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I used to be filled up from amongst the Assistants on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
If the contention of petitioners is accepted, then the very purpose of reservation would stand frustrated as there is only one post of Supdt.
Gr.II which is occupied by petitioner No. 1.
This being a solitary post could not be reserved as per Government instructions in force.
It is further stated that if contention of petitioner No. 1 is to be accepted that post of Supdt.
Gr.
I should be filled up from amongst the Supdt.
Gr.
II on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, then neither the post of Supdt.
Gr.
II nor that of Supdt.
Grade I would ever be filled up from the reserved categories as per the roster point and in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government for reservation of posts.
The contents of written statement noticed above in detail would, thus, reveal that the stand of the Advocate General is that since there is only one post of Supdt.
Grade II, presently occupied by petitioner No. 1, there cannot be any promotion on the said post from amongst the Assistants belonging to reserved category and as per roster maintained for their promotion as that would tantamount to 100% reservation and, therefore, with a view to give full effect to the reservation policy which is applicable to the promotional posts as well, it has been thought necessary an expedient to promote respondent No. 3-Mohan Singh to the post of Superintendent Grade-I from that of Assistant without first giving him a post in between Assistant and Supdt.
Gr.
I i.e. Supdt.
Grade II.
6.
Respondent No. 3-Mohan Singh in the written statement filed by him seeks dismissal of the writ on preliminary objections that instructions issued by the Government of Punjab on reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes are applicable in the office of Advocate General, Punjab, Class I, II and III posts in the said office are regulated for the purpose of appointment by instructions issued by the Government.
For the purpose of present controversy which relates to the cadre of Superintendent Grade I, the instructions dated October 11, 1974 are stated to be relevant.
Copy of said instructions has been placed on records as Annexure R/3-1.
It is pleaded that the aforesaid instructions relate to reservation in cadres which are less than five posts and stipulate that the first vacancy which occurs in a cadre of less than five, shall not be filled up by reservation but the vacancy arising thereafter might be filled up by reservation.
It is, thus, in accordance with the instructions aforesaid that the case of respondent No. 3 was considered for promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I and on his being found suitable, he was allowed promotion as such w.e.f.
December 20, 1989.
The post occupied by him was not the first vacancy created in the cadre of Supdt.
Gr.
I but was a subsequent vacancy.
He was, however, first incumbent to be promoted by reservation to the said cadre.
Dealing with the plea of petitioners with regard to his double promotion, which it may be stated is the main contention and rather the solitary contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner, it is averred by respondent No. 3 in his written statement that he has never availed of double promotion, as has been mentioned, and that his promotion was in consonance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab.
7.
Petitioners have filed replication to the written statements filed on behalf of respondents.
8.
The facts, as have been given above, reveal that petitioner No. 1 was appointed as Clerk in the office of Advocate General, Punjab, in the year 1964 on ad hoc basis and was so regularised in November, 1965.
Petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Clerk on regular basis on November 16, 1965.
Respondent No. 3, who belongs to Scheduled Caste, was appointed as Clerk on December 15, 1967 on reserved vacancy of scheduled caste.
Petitioners were later on promoted as Assistants w.e.f.
August 23, 1969 and were confirmed on the said post w.e.f.
December 19, 1974.
They were granted selection grade in the office of respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 3 was promoted as an Assistant on October 20, 1973 on a reserved vacancy of Scheduled Caste by superseding three clerks of general category, namely, Karam Singh, Jagbir Singh and Ram Parkash.
Respondent No. 3 was, however, confirmed as Clerk w.e.f.
December 20, 1974 and thereafter as Assistant on October 30, 1980.
These service particulars of petitioners vis-a-vis respondent No. 3 have been given in paras 2 and 3 of the writ petition.
Whereas, respondents No. 1 and 2 have admitted the contents of para 2, in paragraph 3 of the written statement it has been mentioned that respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant against the reserved vacancy and, thus, question of supersession of seniors does not arise.
It would, thus, be clear from the pleadings of the parties that the aforesaid facts have been admitted.
That being so, it has to be held that both petitioners were far senior to respondent No. 3 both, on the post of Clerk as also on the post of Assistant.
The only contentions issue is as to whether respondent No. 3 could be promoted to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I straightway from the post of Assistant without his having ever come to occupy the post of Superintendent Gr.
II on the basis of instructions so pleaded by respondents and roster point meant for the scheduled caste category employees.
9.
Before this matter is proceeded any further, it would be relevant to mention that during the course of arguments it was not deputed that as on the relevant date i.e. when respondent No. 3 was promoted to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I from that of Assistant, there was in between another post which was that of Supdt.
Gr.
II.
The said post of Supdt.
Gr.
II was created on July 16, 1987 in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1,400/- which was revised to Rs. 1,800-3,200/- and then to Rs. 2,000-3,500/-.
We are really not concerned with the various posts that might be three prior to the date when respondent No. 3 was promoted and the controversy raked up on that point in the pleadings i.e. creation of various posts of Superintendent (Non-Gazetted) are of no consequence at this stage.
No precedent has been cited by either side but for the one cited on behalf of respondent No. 3 which shall be referred to and discussed in the later part of the judgment on the point as to whether a person belonging to scheduled caste while giving him a jump on the basis of reservation for promotion as per roster point, can score over a person in general category by jumping over a post in between but in clear view of this Court, such a course is not permissible either under any instructions that have been placed before this Court nor on any precedent nor on principles of natural justice, equity and fair-play.
The instructions relied upon, undoubtedly, talk of promotion to the next higher rank.
Since nothing culled out from the instructions which in terms might indicate that a person of scheduled caste category can be considered not for next higher post but next to next higher post, it has to be held that the said instructions talk of only next higher rank.
10.
During the course of arguments, respondent No. 3 filed an application CM No. 458 of 1994 under Rule 4-F(b) of the High Court Rules and Orders read with Section 151 of CPC for placing on record additional affidavit.
It requires to be mentioned that before the application aforesaid was filed, arguments were heard on January 7, 1994 as also on January 10, 1994 and, it appears, since the Court was of the prima facie view that respondent No. 3 could not get double jump on the dint of instructions favouring promotion of scheduled caste candidate out of turn on the roster point, that the said application was filed.
In reply to the argument of learned counsel for the petitioners that in Punjab Civil Secretariat and other offices of the State of Punjab only Supdt.
Grade II are eligible for promotion to the post of Sup Gr.
1, it is pleaded that insofar as other departments are concerned, petitioners could not raise the contention aforesaid without examining the relevant statutory rules.
However, from the perusal of the extract of notification dated October 14, 1963 issued by the Punjab Government making the 'Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class II) Rules, 1963, it was clear that for promotion to the post of Superintendent, Deputy Superintendents, Assistants-in-charge and Assistants were eligible.
Rule 8 runs thus :-  "The posts in the service shall be filled in the following manner -  (b) in the case of Superintendent (or Section Officer) (i) by promotion from amongst Assistants, Section Officers of the Punjab Civil Secretariat having an experience of working on that post for a minimum period of one year or from amongst such Deputy Superintendents, Assistants-in-charge and Assistants as are members of the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class III) and have an experience of working as Deputy Superintendent for a minimum period of one year, or an experience of working as an Assistant for a period of ten years, as the case may be."
It is, thus, pleaded that as per provisions contained in Rule 8 for promotion to the post of Superintendent, Deputy Superintendents, Assistant-in-charge and Assistants are eligible.
The posts mentioned in 1963 Rules have since been re-designated as under :-  "(1) Superintendent Superintendent Gr.
I (2) Dy.
Superintendent Superintendent Gr.
II (3) Assistant-in-charge Assistant/Desk Asstt.
(4) Assistant Assistant.
It is stated that this provision continues to be applicable for appointment by promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I till date in the Punjab Civil Secretariat wherein both Assistants and Superintendent Grade II are eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent Gr.
I.
It is further stated that draft service rules have been prepared in the office of the Advocate General, Punjab, wherein also persons holding posts of Assistants and Supdt.
Gr.
II have been made eligible for appointment by promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I.
On the aforesaid promises, it is further pleaded that the case of respondent No. 3 was considered in view of provisions contained in Rule 8 as also in view of draft service rules prepared by the Advocate General, Punjab's office, which are pari materia to 1963 rules and since an Assistant could be promoted to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I, case of respondent No. 3 was considered from amongst the reserved category of scheduled caste for promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I.
It is further stated that respondent No. 3 was eligible for consideration for appointment by promotion and petitioner No. 2 was not eligible for appointment by promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I from that of Assistant.
11.
Reply by way of affidavit has been filed to the civil misc. aforesaid by petitioner No. 1.
It is pleaded that while making reference to the promotion as Supdt.
Gr.
I in the Secretariat and other offices of 'A' class, in para 8 of the writ petition he in fact wanted to emphasise that as per the normal practice in the Secretariat and other Class 'A' offices of the Punjab Government, the promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I is made from amongst the Supdt.
Gr.
II and to his knowledge there was not even a single instance where an Assistant was straightway promoted to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I where there was an intervening post of Supdt.
Gr.
I Further, in the present case, the posts of Supdt.
Gr.
II and Supdt.
Gr.
I were promotional posts and under no scheme or policy of the Government on reservation, a person on the ground of reservation alone was entitled to be promoted to the next higher post without first promoting him to the immediate next higher post.
Insofar as eligibility of respondent No. 3 is concerned, it is further stated that even if Rule 8 was to apply, respondent No. 3 could at best claim consideration but such consideration could not possibly be denied to him i.e. petitioner No. 1.
The clear stand of petitioner is that he was not considered.
It is also pleaded that during the pendency of the writ petition, another post of Supdt.
Gr.
II has come into existence and as such the contention of respondents that the reservation could not be made effective because of single post of Supdt.
Gr.
II, is not correct as atleast now the second post of Supdt.
Gr.
II is available.
12.
I have already held that it is not possible for respondent No. 3 to secure promotion based upon instructions dealing with the promotion of scheduled caste candidates as per reserved roster point for them.
Insofar are reliance on Rule 8 and pari materia draft rules of AG Punjab's office, is concerned, the same also cannot possibly come to the rescue of respondent No. 3.
Assuming that all Assistants and others, as mentioned in Rule 8 are eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I and assuming also that the post of Supdt.
referred to in Rule 8 is of Supdt.
Gr.
I, in no case those who are on higher post than that of Assistant can be ignored for consideration.
Petitioner No. 1, who was holding higher post of Supdt.
Gr.
II, was admittedly not considered and respondent No. 3 secured promotion on the dint of his being scheduled caste only.
Reliance on Rule 8 in the context of the facts of this case is, thus, wholly irrelevant.
13.
Mr. Khehar, learned counsel representing respondent No. 3 has relied upon a decision of Division Bench in L.P.A. No. 449 of 1991, Prabhash Chand Jain v. State of Haryana and Ors, decided on September 15, 1993.
The short question posed by learned Judges for decision was as to whether the policy for reservation of posts for members of Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes was applicable to the cadre consisting of only two posts.
The answer given is that if only are vacancy arises in a year, it cannot be given to a member of Scheduled Caste.
In a cadre consisting of only two posts, only one can be held by a member of the Scheduled Caste and it would not be permissible for the Government to fill up both the posts from amongst the members of Scheduled Caste for that would amount to 100% reservation.
This judgment has been cited, perhaps, with a view to show that there being only one post of Superintendent Gr.
II, which is presently manned by petitioner No. 1, it could not possibly be given to respondent No. 3 till such time petitioner No. 1 was promoted to a higher post.
This, it is argued, would render the policy of the Government giving reservation to the Scheduled Caste negatory and, therefore, it was permissible for respondent No. 2 to promote respondent No. 3 as that would keep alive the object of instructions providing promotion for Scheduled Caste candidates.
I am afraid this argument has no legs to stand and has, thus, to be repelled.
The policy of reservation has an object of uplifting the persons, who have been socially backward for generations.
This object, no doubt, needs to be achieved but reservation for such persons which is specifically protected in the Constitution failing which it would have been impossible to favour a junior over and above his senior, has to be limited to an extent the same is provided for, if in a given case, on the next higher post being only one, Scheduled Caste candidate cannot be promoted, then by no means it can be suggested that the policy has been rendered negatory.
The policy would work and shall be adhered to and implemented but it has to be in a situation where it is possible to do so.
If, however, the next higher promotional post consists of only one post and a person belonging to Scheduled Caste cannot be promoted on the said post as it shall amount to 100% reservation, then as a matter of necessary corollary it cannot follow that such scheduled caste candidate should be promoted to still a higher rank.
The policy of giving reservation in promotion to scheduled candidates would, thus, work where it is possible to work it.
14.
Mr. Khehar also relied upon judgment of Single Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1826 of 1973, Amar Singh Birdi v. State of Punjab and Ors Petitioner of that case sought mandamus directing respondents to consider his case for promotion to the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer from due date.
He had joined as Clerk on August 17, 1951.
He came to be promoted as Taxation Sub-Inspector in 1963.
On April 1, 1966 the posts of Taxation Sub Inspector and Taxation Inspector were amalgamated and thereafter and thereafter they were called as Taxation Inspector.
Petitioner claimed to be the seniormost confirmed clerk amongst the graduate scheduled caste clerks on the establishment of the Divisional ministerial strength.
There was reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Caste in promotional cases.
Petitioner claimed consideration for promotion to the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer against the reserved quote that fell vacant after September 12, 1963.
His reliance was on Rule 5 of the Punjab Excise and Taxation Department (State Service, Class III A) Rules, 1956.
Inasmuch as petitioner was qualified for being considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer out of the quota reserved for members of the Scheduled Caste under Rule 5(b), he staked such a claim.
However, in the written statement that was filed opposing his claim it was pleaded the Clerks were not considered for promotion as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer and that the selection to these posts was confined to the categories of Superintendents, Head Assistants, Assistants, Senior Scale Stenographers, Head Clerks and Accountants only of the ministerial staff of the Excise and Taxation Department as per Government decision contained in memorandum dated November 7, 1967.
It was held in the aforesaid decision that as per statutory rules, petitioner was eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer and that executive instructions and decisions could not override such statutory rules.
It was also held that petitioner was working as Taxation Sub Inspector since November 13, 1963 and then as Taxation Inspector from April 1, 1966 when both the posts were amalgamated into one cadre.
It is in these circumstances that it was held that it was not a very high jump in case he was appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
In considered view of this Court the reliance of the learned counsel on the aforesaid decision is totally misplaced.
In the present case it is admitted position that petitioners were not even considered for the post under contention and it is only respondent No. 3 who was considered and promoted on the sole basis that he belonged to Scheduled Caste category and the instructions of the Government provided promotion on reserved roster point to him.
Assuming, thus, that an Assistant can be promoted to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I, it cannot follow on any logic, precedent or instructions that those who are seniors and holding higher posts, can be ignored for such consideration.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow this petition and quash promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Superintendent Gr.
I with a direction to respondent-Advocate General, Punjab, to consider the case of petitioner No. 1 for promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
I and also that of petitioner No. 2 and respondent No. 3 if Rule 8, referred to above, is applicable to the office of Advocate General, Punjab or it the draft rules containing rule pari materia to 1963 Rules have since been approved and made operative.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.