DK Jain, J - Since the issue involved is very short and we have heard learned counsel for the parties at length, we propose to dispose of both the writ petitions at this stage itself by this common judgment.
2.
The petitioners in these petitions challenge the appointment of the third respondent viz., Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra as Director, Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan (for short 'the Sansthan'), an autonomous organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, fully financed by the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education), set up to propagate, develop and encourage Sanskrit learning and research by establishing/taking over Kendriya Sanskrit Vidapathas in various parts of the country and by associating with the institutions with similar objectives.
As per the Rules of the Sansthan, the Director (Nideshak) is its Chief Executive Officer and is to be appointed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India.
He is responsible for the day to day management of the administrative, academic and financial activities of the Sansthan.
The petitioners claim that they were eligible to the post of Director but their candidature was ignored and the third respondent was selected despite the fact that he did not possess the essential teaching experience as prescribed in the advertisement inviting applications for the said post.
In CWP No. 2198 of 1993 filed by Dr. Gaya Charan Tripathi, there are six respondents viz., the Union of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) as respondent No. 1, the Sansthan as respondent No. 2, Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra as respondent No. 3, Dr. KN Rao and Dr. S Janaki as respondents 4 and 5 respectively and Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla as respondent No. 6, whereas in CWP No. 2889/93, filed by Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla, only Union of India, the Sansthan and Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra are the three respondents.
3.
Respondent No. 1, the Ministry of Human Resource Development issued an advertisement in March, 1992 (with which we are presently concerned) inviting application for the post of Director.
The eligibility conditions, prescribed for the post, under the Head "Qualifications and Experience" are material and it is convenient to set them out at this stage :  (3) Qualifications and Experience :  Essential :  (a) A Master's Degree in Sanskrit or Acharya or equivalent degree.
(b) Research Degree of Doctorate level or published work of equivalent standard.
(c) Ten years of teaching experience as Professor/Reader at a University or in a Post-Graduate College.
(d) Five years' experience of Educational Administration.
Note : The eligibility conditions at (c) and (d) above are relaxable at the discretion of the Selection Committee in the case of otherwise deserving/well qualified candidates.
Desirable :  (a) (i) Degree or Title in traditional system equivalent to Acharya for those possessing Master's Degree in Sanskrit or equivalent Degree; and  (ii) Degree equivalent to MA (Sanskrit) for those holding an Acharya Degree or equivalent.
(b) Post-Doctoral Research.
(c) Original publication of high academic standard.
(d) Experience of guiding research scholars.
(e) Experience in editing and manuscriptology.
(f) Knowledge of English/Foreign Language (s).
(g) Administrative experience of running either a traditional school or college or an institution of higher learning."
4.
The appointment was to be on a contractual basis for a period of five years or will the incumbent attained the age of 60 years whichever was earlier.
5.
On receipt of the applications, respondent No. 1 constituted a Selection Committee consisting of Chairman, one ordinary Member from the said ministry, three expert Members and one Member Secretary.
Selection Committee after considering relevant merits of 16 candidates, who appeared before it for interview recommended the following candidates, in order of preference, for the post of Director :  (1) Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra, respondent No. 1 (in both the writ petitions).
(2) Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla (respondent No. 6 in CWP No. 2198/93 and petitioner in CWP No. 2898/93).
6.
It appears, the Government accepted the recommendations of the Selection Committee and appointed Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra to the post of Director.
7.
In CWP No. 2198/93, the petitioner has challenged the aforesaid recommendations of the Selection Committee, inter alia, on the grounds that : (1) the Selection Committee was not properly constituted inasmuch as Dr. KN Rao, who had acted as Chairman of the Selection Committee had neither any Degree in Sanskrit language nor had any association with the propagation, teaching, training or research in the field of Sanskrit learning and Dr. S Janaki having reached the Reader Scale at the fag end of her career was not competent enough to judge the suitability of the candidates of the Professor Scale, (2) respondent No. 3 did not have the requisite 10 years' teaching experience as Professor/Reader at a university or in a Post-Graduate College as also 5 years' experience of educational administration.
In support of his stand that respondent No. 3 did not have 5 years experience of educational administration, the petitioner points out that the said respondent was discharged from the post of Dy.
Education Officer in the Ministry of Human Resource Development before completing his probation term of two years and reverted back to his parent institution, National Council of Educational Research and Training (in short the NCERT).
The petitioner also challenges the selection of respondent No. 6, Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla on the ground that : (1) he has hardly any publication to his credit and (2) he has no knowledge of English language, one of the desirable qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.
On these grounds the petitioner has prayed that selection of respondent No. 3 to the post of Director be set aside with a direction to respondents 1 and 2 to hold a fresh selection for the said post.
8.
In CWP No. 2889 of 1993, Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla, who has been placed at Sl.
No. 2 in the penal prepared by the Selection Committee, challenges the selection of respondent No. 3 on the ground that he does not possess the essential qualifications of 10 years' teaching experience as Professor or Reader at a university or in a Post-Graduate College and five years, experience of educational administration.
It is also averred that respondent No. 3 was denied promotion to the next higher post of Professor in his parent institution, the NCERT, thrice because he was not considered fit for the said post.
Besides, his discharge from the Post of Dy.
Education Officer and his challenging the same in the Central Administrative Tribunal, but without success, is also highlighted.
The petitioner prays that the empanelment of respondent No. 3 at Sl.
No. 1 be declared illegal with a direction to respondents 1 and 2 to appoint him to the post of Director.
9.
The petitions are resisted by respondents 1 and 3 who have filled their answers to the show cause notices.
An affidavit has also been filed by respondent No. 4, Mr. KN Rao, Chairman of the Selection Committee, wherein he states that respondent No. 3 did possess essential qualifications, including 10 years' teaching experience as a Professor or Reader as required by Clause 3(c) of the advertisement.
Mr. Rao further goes on to say that the Selection Committee may be deemed to have relaxed the said eligibility condition in view of eminence and outstanding merit of respondent No. 3 in terms of the note appended to sub-clauses (c) and (d) of clause 3 of the advertisement.
10.
In the answer filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, while denying that the Selection Committee was not properly constituted, it is pointed out that Mr. KN Rao who retired as Chief Controller of Accounts in the Indian Audit, was nominated as Chairman of the Selection Committee keeping in view his administrative and academic background.
Similarly it is stated that Dr. S Janaki was nominated as expert member keeping her academic background in view.
It is stated that both the petitioners and respondent No. 3 fulfilled the essential qualifications prescribed in the advertisement but a departmental inquiry as per the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission was pending against Dr. Gaya Charan Tripathi, petitioner in CWP 2198/93.
As regards the teaching experience as Professor/Reader at a University or in a Post-Graduate College of Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra, the stand of respondent No. 1 is that he has been working as a Reader of Sanskrit for the last about 15 years in NCERT, which is a national level institute for educational research and development and in-service training of teachers and it also runs colleges leading to Graduate and Post-Graduate degrees and following the University Grants Commission (UGC)'s recruitment norms for the post of Professor, which make a scholar with 10 years' experience in research at University/National level institute eligible for a Post of Professor's scale, he duly fulfils the requirements of teaching experience.
It is also stated that since Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra fulfilled all the necessary qualifications, there was no question of granting any relaxation to him by the Selection Committee in terms of the note appended to sub-clauses (c) and (d) of Clause 3 of the advertisement.
11.
The stand of respondent No. 3, Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra, in his answer is not similar lines as that of respondent No. 1.
He also asserts that he possesses all the essential qualifications.
12.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties, who have more or less reiterated their respective stands taken in their petitions and answers to the show cause notice.
The petitioners allege that since Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra did not possess essential qualifications, recommendation of the Selection Committee for his selection to the aforesaid post is illegal.
Seeking to support the recommendations of the Selection Committee, it has been contended by Mr. Keshav Dayal and Mr. DD Thakur, learned Senior Counsel for respondents 1 and 3 respectively that Dr. Mishra was fully qualified for the post.
While making a reference to the resolution dated 24 July, 1961 of the Government of India, Ministry of Education on the formation of NCERT and the Notification dated 1991991, issued by the UGC, prescribing minimum qualifications for the posts of Professor, Reader etc., Mr. Thakur has canvassed that NCERT is a national level institute, undertaking training programmes for Trained Graduate Teachers, Post-Graduate Teachers etc. and it can, therefore, be treated as a Post-Graduate College.
His stand is that since Dr. Mishra has been working as a Reader in the NCERT for more than 10 years and otherwise qualified for the post of Professor as per the norms prescribed by the UGC in the aforesaid notification, Dr. Mishra fulfils the requisite essential qualifications of 10 years' teaching experience in a Post-Graduate College.
But the main thrust of Mr. Thakur's arguments is that in the absence of any allegation of mala fide or bias and the Selection Committee having taken a reasonable and liberal view in the matter of a comparative assessment of all the candidates who appeared before it, this Court, in judicial review, should not interfere with its recommendations.
In support he has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the University of Mysore and another v. CD Govinda Rao and another, 1964(4) SCR 575 : AIR 1965 SC 491.
13.
We are quite conscious of the fact that we are not sitting in an appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee to scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates.
It was for the Selection Committee to decide as an expert body as to which candidate fulfilled the eligibility qualifications and was fit for the post of Director.
What we have to examine is whether there has been any illegality or patent material irregularity either in the constitution of the Selection Committee or in the procedure adopted by the Committee vitiating the selection of respondent No. 3 for the post of Director or proved mala fides affecting his selection (See : Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. v. BS Mahajan etc., JT 1989(4) SC 487 : (1990) 1 SCC 305).
14.
It is common ground that there are no recruitment rules for the post of Director nor are there any rules, statutory or otherwise governing the constitution of the Selection Committee, in the absence whereof it cannot be said that the constitution of the Selection Committee was illegal or improper.
Though we are not satisfied with the allegation that Dr. KN Rao has no knowledge of the Sanskrit language but keeping in view the fact that duties of a Director are basically of administrative nature, the inclusion of Dr. Rao, with vast administrative experience, in the Selection Committee could not be said to be otherwise illegal in any way.
Keeping in view the academic background of Dr. S Janaki, no fault can be found with her inclusion in the Selection Committee.
Similar is the position regarding the allegation of violation of the procedure vitiating the selection process as none has been shown to exist.
15.
During the course of hearing we had called for the record of the proceedings of the Selection Committee.
The file has been produced before us, which contains the minutes recorded by the Committee on 16 October, 1992 after interview with the candidates and its recommendations, alongwith a tabulated statement giving particulars of experience and special remarks in respect of each of the candidates, with the following note :  "Note :- Candidates at S. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17 and 18 have been called for personal talk despite not fulfilling the experience of 10 years as Reader/Professor because :  (a) More than 10 years P.G.
Teaching experience;  (b) The fact that the experience, qualification is relaxable at the discretion of the Selection Committee; and  (c) The ambiguous statement by candidates in the bio-data sent earlier in the application in response to the advertisement.
16.
The said note, prepared by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Education for placement before the Selection Committee and appended by the Committee with the minutes indicates that 12 out of 21 candidates called for the interview, including respondent No. 3, whose name appeared at Serial No. 7 of the statement, did not, strictly speaking, possess the requisite teaching experience of 10 years in a University or a Post- Graduate College and further that this essential qualification was relaxable at the discretion of the Selection Committee.
The minutes of the interviews recorded by the Selection Committee state that 16 candidates, whose names were given in the aforesaid tabulated statements, were interviewed and after holding personal talk with the said candidates, the Committee made the impugned selection placing Dr. Kamla Kant Mishra, respondent No. 3, at Sl.
No. 1 and Dr. Ram Kishore Shukla, petitioner in CWP No. 2889/93, at Sl.
No. 2.
This it did with the knowledge, as it had been made aware in the tabulated statement that respondent No. 3 did not have the requisite teaching experience but had been called for interview alongwith some others similarly situated, keeping in view that the said essential qualification was relaxable at the discretion of the Selection Committee.
17.
The stand of respondent No. 1 and Dr. KN Rao, Chairman of the Selection Committee, taken in their respective answers to the show cause notice is that respondent No. 3 did possess all the requisite qualifications (which included 10 years of teaching experience as Professor/Reader at a University or in a Post-Graduate College).
In support it is stated in the additional affidavit filed on behalf' of Respondent No. 1 that as per the UGC norms, research experience in a national level institution like NCERT is equivalent to the post-graduate teaching and in terms of notification dated 19 September, 1991, issued by the UGC, Respondent No. 3 is fully qualified for the post of a Professor and that while considering the cases of all the candidates, the Selection Committee kept these norms in view and found that the said respondent fulfilled the necessary qualification of teaching experience.
This seriously contested by the petitioners herein, who contend that it was beyond the jurisdiction of the Selection Committee to go into the question whether NCERT could be deemed to be a Post-Graduate College, particularly when the petitioners did possess the requisite teaching experience.
The contention raised appears to be plausible.
However, the Selection Committee in its wisdom, in the totality of circumstances, found that Respondent No. 3 was fit to be appointed to the post of Director.
It is not possible for us to decipher from the minutes of the Selection Committee as to what transpired at their meeting; whether there were deliberations on the point of teaching experience and/or on relaxation of the said condition.
Though a mention about it by the Selection Committee was desirable to negate the possible impression of acting on dotted lines, the minutes are silent on it.
As noted above, in the present case, the Committee was apprised that the aforesaid qualification was relaxable at their discretion.
The fact that the Committee did select Respondent No. 3 in the above circumstances is suggestive of the fact that either they considered Respondent No. 3 is working as a Reader in Sanskrit in the NCERT as fulfilling the requisite qualification of 10 years' teaching experience in a Post-Graduate College or relaxation of this condition was granted to him in exercise of their discretion.
Be that as it may, a further probe in it is not called for in view of the observations of the Supreme Cow in The Chancellor and another etc. v. Dr Bijayananda Kar and others, JT 1993(6) SC 473 : 1994(1) 524 (SC), holding that the question whether a candidate fulfils the requisite qualifications or not is a matter which should be entirely left to the decided by the concerned Selection Committee, which invariably consists of experts on the subjects relevant to the selection.
The fact remains that the Selection Committee did make the selection.
There are no allegations of mala fide or bias by the Committee, in the absence were of the selection by them cannot be said to be illegal or patently irregular.
18.
For the view we have taken, it is not necessary for us to go into the question whether the NCERT could be considered as a Post-Graduate college.
19.
For the foregoing reasons, we are of the considered view that it is not a fit case where we should exercise our writ jurisdiction to upset the appointment of Respondent No. 3 to the post of Director of the Sansthan, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee and approved by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet.
20.
In the result both the writ petitions fail and are hereby dismissed.
Rule is discharged.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.