NK Kapoor, J - The petitioner has prayed for a writ of certiorari, mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction seeking quashing of order Annexures P-13, P-15 and P-19 with a further direction to the respondents to consider and promote the petitioner to the post of District Treasury Officer from the date persons junior to him were promoted along with all other attendant benefits.
2.
As per averments made in the petition, the petitioner was selected as Assistant Treasury Officer (now designated as Treasury Officer) by the Punjab Public Service Commission and was at serial No. 1 in the merit list.
He joined the service on 24.11.1972 and was posted at Sub Treasury at Dasuya, District Hoshiarpur.
He successfully completed the probationary period of two years and was allowed to cross first efficiency bar from 111980 vide order dated 9.5.1980 Annexure P-1.
He was confirmed as Assistant Treasury Officer (now Treasury Officer) on 3101980.
It is during the year 1982-83 that some adverse remarks in his annual confidential report were conveyed to which the petitioner filed representation on 7101983 which was rejected on 21121982 by a cryptic order "considered and rejected".
and that too after a gap of nine years.
The petitioners further contends that he was allowed to cross the second efficiency bar from 1.4.1984 and was given a selection grade vide order dated 3181988 - Annexures P-6.
But despite this, the respondents choose to promote persons junior to him on 19111991.
Feeling dissatisfied, the petitioner submitted two representations to the government on 6121991 and 2221992 to consider his case as well since the petitioner had good record of service and was entitled to be promoted.
Though these representations were pending, the government vide another order dated 28/30.5.1992, Annexure P-11, promoted some more juniors which action the petitioner termed as arbitrary.
Still another registered notice through counsel and representation was sent to the concerned authorities but with no effect.
It is with a view to get rid of wholly unjust and illegal orders Annexures P-13, P-15 and P-19 the petitioner has filed this petition seeking quashing and the consequential relief.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued, respondents have put in appearance and filed written statement.
The respondents besides controverting the various averments made in the petition have taken some preliminary objections which are (i) that the relief sought by the petitioner i.e. promotion when persons junior to him were promoted required consultation by the Public Service Commission; (ii) that the assertion of the petitioner that the government rejected his case for promotion at its own level without referring the same to the Public Service Commission is wrong.
The Government while passing order on 19111991 to promote Sarv Sh. Yuv Raj Jaitly and Shian Singh as District Treasury Officer, the Government requested the Public Service Commission to accord approval to the promotion of these persons and ignoring the case of the petitioner as well as of one Mr. ML Mehta.
This way Sarv Sh. Yug Raj Jaitly and Shian Singh were promoted on ad hoc basis.
The approval of the Public Service Commission is still awaited.
This way the petitioner's contention that his case was not referred to the Public Service Commission is wrong; and (iii) The government can validly take into consideration the record of the petitioner's service for the year 1973-74 and 1983 as well while considering his case of promotion.
On merit, it was stated that the petitioner's case was duly considered on both the occasions when the persons junior to him were promoted i.e. on 19111991 and 28/30.5.1992 but was not found fit for promotion to the post of District Treasury Officer by the committee.
With a view to seek concurrence from the Public Service Commission the respondents have already submitted the annual confidential reports of the petitioner for its perusal which is still under consideration.
4.
With a view to controvert the assertion of the respondents to the effect that the case of the petitioner was sent to the Public Service Commission while seeking promotion of juniors, namely, Sarv Sh. Yuv Raj Jaitly and Shian Singh petitioners filed civil miscellaneous No. 11307 of 1993 seeking permission to place on record an affidavit alongwith Annexures P-20 and P-21 which documents having bearing on the point in controversy.
Notice of this application was given to the respondents who too filed reply and placed on record documents Annexures R-6 and R-7 in support of Jaitly.
5.
The precise submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that he had been discriminated unjustly.
Old and stale entries in the annual confidential reports have been made basis to ignore the consideration of the case of the petitioner for promotion which is not according to law.
Long after the adverse report in the year 1973-74, the petitioner had been given proficiency step up twice which is granted only in lieu of good record of service.
Subsequent to the granting of proficiency step up, there is no adverse report against the petitioner or any reference has been made by the respondents either in the written statement or in reply to the Civil Miscellaneous No. 11307 of 1993, that itself would signify that for almost 8 to 9 years from the date when for the first time persons junior to the petitioners were promoted on 19111991 the petitioner had good record of service.
Thus either the adverse report of the year 1973-74 nor remarks of censure in the annual confidential report of 1982-83 could be made basis to ignore him his right of consideration to the high post.
Even the assertion of the respondents that the petitioner's case was sent to the Public Service Commission while seeking ad hoc promotion of persons junior to him is factually wrong.
The case of the juniors was sent to the Public Service Commission on 24.4.1992 for approval whereas the case of the petitioner was sent on 11111992.
Perhaps this was intended that the Public Service Commission should examine the case of the persons whose names had been recommended by the government alone.
Relying upon the Full Bench Judgment of this court in case reported as Punjab State and others v. Kulwantbir Singh, 1993(2) SCT 567, the counsel urged that grant of proficiency step up stands on an equal footing as promotion to a higher post and any remarks prior to such a promotion looses its significance i.e. it takes away the sitting of the adverse remarks and thus impugned orders are liable to be quashed.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents in support of the orders impugned referred to the annual confidential report of the petitioner especially for the year 1973-74 wherein his honesty was doubted and the year 1982-83 it was termed that reputation of honesty, average, complaints received but not proved and punishment of censure.
In additional thereto, it was urged that the proficiency step up cannot be equated with the promotion awarded to a person on account of his good track record.
Proficiency step up is merely intended to grant some financial benefits to persons who though does not deserve promotion are yet entitled to some compensation on account of their long service.
The counsel too relied upon the judgment in Kulwantbir Singh's case 1993 SCT 567 (supra).
7.
Before referring to the Full Bench judgment of this court, it would be appropriate to keep in mind the annual confidential reports of the petitioner.
A bare perusal of para 16(vii) of the written statement reveals that the petitioner earned adverse reports for the following years :  "Year, Remarks  1973-74, Honesty is doubtful.
Reputation for honestly is not good  1982-83, Reputation for honestly average; complaint received but could not be proved : Defects, if any.
Careless in working.
13983, Awarded the punishment of censure for making less payment on gold bond as a result of which RBI New Delhi charged irregularity.
15693, Awarded the punishment of censure, guilty of negligence in entertaining the unauthorised communication of Distt.
Treasury Office, Bathinda, instead of through Distt.
Treasury Officer, Sangrur and delaying payments of pension at enhanced rate to Smt. Harjit Kaur, a family pensioner, copy of charge-sheet is Annexure R/5."
8.
For other years ie 1974-75, 75-76, 80-81 and 81-82 the petitioners' annual confidential reports were recorded as 'average'.
From 1984-92 no reference has been made to the annual confidential reports.
Thus, it would be fair to infer that the petitioners earned either 'average' or 'good' reports during this period.
Thus the sole basis to ignore the petitioner appears to be the annual confidential reports for the year 1973-74 and 1982-83.
9.
Admittedly, promotions have been made in November, 1991 and May, 1992 and thus adverse reports for the year 1973-74 can safety be ignored on account of this long lapse of time during which except for the year 1982-83 the petitioner has earned either 'average' or 'good' reports.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the petitioners has been granted twice proficiency step up.
As regards the report for the year 1982-83, all that it records is that the petitioner's honesty is 'average' and he is somewhat are careless in working.
Strange expression appears to have been used i.e. recording as average against the reputation for honesty.
The fact that some complaint was received but the same could not be proved, cannot be so construed as amounting to maligning the reputation of honesty of a person.
Ordinarily, it is recording that reputation of such a person for honesty is either doubtful or not good.
In the annual confidential report for the year 1982-83 no such facts have been recorded and perhaps for this reason the authorities chose to record the annual confidential report for the period 1982-83 as 'average'.
With regard to awarding of punishment of censure of account of some irregularity, the same cannot be so construed as to deprive a person of consideration from a time the respondents thought of granting ad hoc promotion to the persons junior to the petitioners name was recommended to the Public Service Commission.
Thus, we scan the annual confidential reports almost for the 10 years proceeding recommendation of the names in the year 1991-92; except for punishment of censure on September 13, 1983, there is such adverse report.
Perhaps for this reason annual confidential report from the year 1984 to 1991-92 have to been brought not record by the respondents.
It appears that the respondents, if fact, made up their mind to recommend the names of the petitioner's juniors, namely, Sarv Sh. Yuv Raj Jaitly and Shian Singh, even without sending the name of the petitioner to the Public Service Commission.
This clearly smacks of the predetermined mind.
It was incumbent upon the respondents to set the name of the petitioner along with his service record when cases for promotion of persons junior to him were being sent to the Public Service Commission.
We thus find merit in the plea of the petitioner that his name was designedly not sent to the Public Service Commission when promotions were being made to a higher post.
10.
Interestingly, reliance has been placed by both the counsel upon the Full Bench judgment of this Court in case of Kulwantbir Singh (supra).
The court after considering the matter has put the same in the following terms :  "The principles that thus emerge are :  (i) As different consequences flow from crossing of the efficiency bar, retention in service of premature, retirement after the requisite qualifying period and promotion, considerations applicable for their decision have inevitably to be relevant in their context, thus separate and distinct;  (ii) The previous history of a government servant, or to put it in different words, his past adverse remarks are not to be completely ignored once he is allowed to cross the efficiency bar or to continue in service after the requisite qualifying service;  (iii) If, there are some unfavourable remarks pertaining to such government servant after the crossing of the efficiency bar, his continuance in service after the qualifying period of promotion, as the case may be, past events may be looked into to assess his present conduct;  (iv) On the other hand, the adverse remarks prior to promotion to a higher post particularly where it is based upon merit and not seniority alone would lose their significance and such promotion would taken away the sting of the adverse remarks against the Government servant concerned;  (v) The entire record of service of the Government servant concerned, with greater emphasis and importance being given to his record during the later years, must be taken into consideration while deciding the matter pertaining to his retention in service or premature retirement after the requisite qualifying service;  (vi) The adverse entries against the Government servants prior to the crossing of the efficiency bar and indeed the crossing of the efficiency bar itself would form part of the record of service which must be considered in dealing with retention in service or premature retirement as the case may be."
11.
Counsel for the petitioner in support of his contention has placed reliance upon (iv) of the paragraph reproduced above that any adverse remarks prior to promotion to a higher post takes away sting of the adverse remarks against the government servant concerned.
Since the petitioner has already been granted proficiency step up, referred to the adverse remarks in the annual confidential reports for the year 1973-74 or remarks of censure in the annual confidential report for the year 1983 pales into insignificance.
12.
Counsel for the respondents, however, took support from the principle as envisaged in para (ii) of the above mentioned paragraph for the view that adverse remarks are not to be ignored even when one crosses the efficiency bar and so have to be kept in view while determining whether such a person deserves to be promoted.
13.
Examining the respective contentions in the light of the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Kulwantbir Singh's case (supra), we feel that on facts of the present case the claim of the petitioner could not be brushed aside on the basis of stale adverse remarks in the annual confidential report for the year 1973-74 nor for the punishment of censure in the year 1983 in view of the fact that from 1984 onwards the petitioners is deemed to have earned at least either 'good' or 'average' reports since no material showing any adverse inference has been brought on record by the respondent.
Since the petitioner's name was not sent to the Public Service Commission when persons junior to him were recommended to be promoted, we are of the view that this action of the respondents is clearly mala fide.
Had they been sincere, as they now asserted, whole of the confidential reports/service record of the petitioner ought to have been sent to the Public Service Commission when names of Sarv Sh. Yuv Raj Jaitly and Shian Singh were sent for consultation to the Public Service Commission.
We accordingly accept the petition, set aside Annexures P-13, P-15 and P-19 and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of District Treasury Officer from the date when persons junior to him were promoted and send the same to the Public Service Commission for approval.
No order as to costs.