VK Bali, J - Anurag Kirpal through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a direction to be issued to the respondents to grant him admission in the course of B Tech.
(Computer Science) at Punjabi University, Patiala, or in the alternative at College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
The facts on which the relief asked for stems need to be noticed first.
2.
Admissions to Bachelor of Engineering in various disciplines at the various Engineering Colleges located in Punjab and Chandigarh are made on the basis of common Entrance Test (hereinafter to be referred as C.L.T.).
All those candidates who have passed 10+2 (Science Stream) examination with English, Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics on its equivalent examination conducted by a recognised Board University are eligible to appear in the test and seek admission at various Colleges Universities in the Bachelor of Engineering.
Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar issued information brochure for CET for the year 1993 as it was authorised to hold the test by the Punjab Government by notification dated 2631993.
The petitioner being eligible applied for appearing at the CET.
which was held on 6.6.1993.
The result of CET was declared on 271993 and the petitioner obtained 11125 marks out of 300 and was placed at serial No. 2535 in order of merit.
The successful candidates thereafter were to appear in interview which was to be held with effect from 26.7.1993 to 281993 for various categories.
Institution-wise eligibility, number of seats, their specific requirement of reservation were based upon Institution to Institution.
For this purpose, another information brochure-cum-application form was issued for admission on CET 1993 basis.
In accordance with the brochure, the reservation was made in various Institutions for admission to Bachelor of Engineering course for different categories i.e. number of seats reserved for different categories was mentioned in this brochure.
It is maintained in the writ that the petitioner was eligible under the Freedom Fighters category and he had applied under the said category.
Since various Institutions had reserved different number of seats for different number of reserved categories the petitioner had applied in the college of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana in the course of B Tech.
(Agricultural Engineering) wherein 2% seats were reserved under the category of Freedom Fighters and their dependents.
It is stated that he was eligible for being considered against Freedom Fighters category at Punjabi University, Patiala, in the course of BTech.
(Computer Science) wherein one seat was reserved for the category of Freedom Fighters.
The venue of the interview was fixed at Gymnasium Hall, Panjab University Campus, Chandigarh.
Petitioner appeared in the interview that was held on 27.7.1993, for various categories i.e. sports, military, para military, backward class, handicapped, territorists victims and freedom fighters, etc. At the venue of interview, different tables were set up by various Institutions and various candidates were called for interview at various counters set up by the Institutions in accordance with their merit.
In the list of Freedom Fighters category, put up at the venue of interview, the name of petitioner appeared at serial No. 11 in the order of merit as he had secured 11125 marks.
One Manjit Singh who has been arrayed as respondent No. 4 in the writ petition was shown at serial No. 10 in the order of merit as he had obtained more marks than the petitioner i.e. 11325 marks.
In the category of Freedom Fighters, Manjit Singh was the first to be called for admission to B-Tech.
(Computer Science) course at the counter of Punjabi University, Patiala.
The positive case of the petitioner is that Manjit Singh gave up his claim to this course, left the counter of Punjabi University, Patiala and went to the counter of College of Engineering and Technology, Bhatinda and R.E.C.
Jalandhar.
Thereafter the name of petitioner was called at the counter of Punjabi University, Patiala for being considered for admission to B-Tech.
(Computer Science) Course at Punjabi University, Patiala.
The petitioner went to the counter and submitted all his documents for being verified by the concerned authorities.
Manjit Singh came back and staked his claim to the said course.
This was obviously objected to by the petitioner as Manjit Singh had already left the counter by giving up his claim and gone to the other counter.
It is maintained in the present writ petition that the respondents did not agree with the petitioner and gave admission to Manjit Singh in the course of BTech.
(Computer Science) on the ground that Manjit Singh had obtained more marks than the petitioner.
The repeated requests of the petitioner made in this regard resulted in fixing a date for settlement of dispute between him and Manjit Singh.
The date fixed by Punjabi University, Patiala was 381993.
The petitioner went and pleaded his cause but was not granted admission.
3.
Petitioner further maintains that on 27.7.1993 itself when he was denied admission in B Tech.
(Computer Science) course at Punjabi University, Patiala by holding that Manjit Singh was having a preferential right to the said seat, he immediately went to the counter of College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana where he was eligible to seek admission but on reaching there, he was told that he cannot be considered for admission to the said course because another candidate respondent No. 5 Ms. Geetika Rawlley had been admitted.
She had obtained 9950 marks out of 300 and was at merit No. 3375.
The entreaties of the petitioner to admit him as he had better claim than respondent when did not bring any tangible result, he has come to this court asking for the relief as has been indicated in the earlier part of judgment.
4.
On the array of facts as have been detailed above, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that petitioner is admittedly higher in merit than respondent No. 5 Ms. Geetika Rawlley and even if his claim was to be rejected vis-a-vis Manjit singh who was higher than him in merit, the same could not be ignored for admission in the College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
It is maintained by the learned counsel that the petitioner was denied admission in Punjabi University, Patiala on account of superior claim of Manjit Singh and there was no reason for him not to have gone to the counter set up by the Agricultural University, Ludhiana where he was assured of admission being definitely higher in merit from Geetika Rawlley who has actually been granted admission there.
5.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed in three separate written statements, one filed by Punjabi University, Patiala, the other by the College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and the third by Geetika Rawlley.
It has been pleaded that Manjit Singh was higher in merit than the petitioner in CET.
held on 6.6.1993.
He had applied for admission in the Punjabi University, Patiala, in the course of BTech.
(Computer Science) against the vacancies reserved for Freedom Fighters.
He alongwith the petitioner appeared at the counter established by it at the campus of Panjab University Chandigarh on 27.7.1993 and they both were told that the list for admission against the vacancies reserved for Freedom Fighters category will be finalised by the Committee constituted for the purpose on 381993 at Punjabi University Campus and they should appear before the Committee on that day.
Accordingly Manjit Singh and the petitioner appeared before the Committee consisting of Dean, Academic Affairs, Chairman, Head of the Computer Science and Applications Department, Professor Law Department and Lecturer Computer Science Department, on 381993.
The Committee decided that the seat meant for Freedom Fighters category in the course of BTech.
(Computer Science) should be given to Manjit Singh who had got 11325 marks whereas the petitioner had obtained 11125 marks.
Admission was, thus, given in accordance with the merit of CET.
It is further maintained in the written statement that Manjit Singh had not given up his claim for admission in the BTech.
Course in the University.
6.
The College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana in its reply has denied that petitioner ever came to its counter on 27.7.1993 and staked his claim for admission in BTech.
(Agricultural Engineering) and that being so, respondent No. 5 Geetika Rawlley who, of course, was lower in merit than him was admitted in the said course.
7.
Geetika Rawlley has also disputed the claim of the petitioner to have approached the counter of College of Agricultural Engineering Punjab on 27.7.1993.
8.
The petitioner has filed replication to re-assert the facts mentioned in the petition.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the petitioner who is admittedly higher than respondent No. 5 Geetika Rawlley deserves admission.
It is not disputed that whereas petitioner obtained 11125 marks out of 300, Geetika Rawlley obtained 9950 marks.
The petitioner was shown at serial No. 2535 in the order of merit and Geetika Rawlley was shown at serial No. 3375 i.e. about 800 position below the petitioner.
Even though the fact as to whether Manjit Singh gave up his claim for admission in Punjabi University, Patiala having left its counter and having gone to another counter or for that matter the petitioner approaching the counter of College of Agricultural Engineering Punjab and admission having been denied to him is a question of fact and normally it should not be gone into by his Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, yet it is not a rule of universal application and in exceptional cases, the Court can do so.
The present case really comes in the category of exceptions as not only that it is a case of career of student but also for the reason that in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, denial of the respondents that the petitioner did not approach the counter where he was certain of getting admission does not inspire any confidence.
Admission to either of the Institutions for the petitioner was of vital importance.
All through he worked in his academic career while doing 10+2 and appeared in the CET and secured marks good enough for admission even though in reserve category of Freedom Fighters.
According to the list displayed showing the merits of various candidates in the reserve categories and the number of seats available in various Institutions, it was not difficult for the petitioners to have made out that he would get admission, if not with the institution of his choice then atleast with the institution which was his second choice.
There being only one seat available with the Punjabi University, Patiala, if the same was straightaway filled by a person higher in merit than the petitioner, there was no question for the petitioner to have approached the counter established by the said institution i.e. Punjabi University, Patiala.
Not only that, if the seat available in Punjabi University was exhaled by admitting Manjit Singh then the petitioner would have been called to some other counter set up by the said university and in that case he would have been straightaway sent to a counter established by the Institution where a seat was available for him.
Petitioner thus, seems to be right in saying that Manjit Singh had given up his claim and for that precise reason he had approached the counter established by the Punjabi University, Patiala.
Further, it is admitted position that the petitioner was denied admission in Punjabi University, Patiala wherein Manjit Singh was preferred being higher in merit.
If that was so, there was no reason for the petitioner to have not approached the counter of College of Agricultural Engineering Punjab where a seat was still available wherein a person lower in merit than him and actually admitted.
It cannot be believed that the petitioner who all through worked in this academic carrier while doing 10+2 and appeared in the CET.
successfully would not approach the counter where a seat was available for him.
Be that as it may, a person lower in merit than the petitioner has been admitted and if the petitioner is denied admission, it would be curbing merit and that result this court would obviously like to avoid.
In view of what has been said above, this petition succeeds.
A direction is, thus, issued to the respondent No. 3 the College of Agricultural Engineering Punjab, Agricultural University Ludhiana to admit the petitioner in BTech.
(Agricultural Engineering) at College of Agricultural Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana within a fortnight from today.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.