J Eswara Prasad, J - The petitioners are working as Junior Managers in the respondent-Bharat Dynamics Limited, a Public Sector Undertaking, under the administrative control of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India The petitioners were initially appointed in Group 'C' category.
They were eventually promoted to Group 'D', and later to Group 'E'.
Some of the petitioners were promoted to Group 'F' in the time scale of Rs. 945-45-1395-50-1495.
The rest of the petitioners were working in Group 'E' in the time scale of Rs. 770-1490.
2.
On 9185, the respondent called for applications from in-service employees for the post of Junior Managers-Grade I in the time scale of Rs. 900-50-1450 by way of promotion.
The petitioners applied for the said posts and were promoted as Junior Managers by the order dated 6.10.86.
On promotion to the posts of Junior Managers in the time scale of Rs. 900-50-1450, the petitioners claim that they became entitled to the benefit of fixation of pay under FR.
22(c) (Central) as well as recruitment and promotion rules of to the respondent-organization with effect from 6.10.86.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the respondent wrongly fixed the pay of the petitioners depriving them of a sum of Rs. 250/- Rs. 200/- and Rs. 50/- per month respectively.
The petitioners made representations and issued a legal notice to the respondent.
The petitioners were ultimately informed that dearness allowance of a sum of Rs. 220/- was deducted from their pay in fixing their pay in the pay scales applicable to the officers.
the petitioners once again made representations to the respondent that dearness allowance was merged with their pay while their pay scale was Rs. 770-1490 and Rs. 945-1595 in the years 1983-84 itself as per the tripartite agreement entered into in the years 1978-79 and 1983-84 and that the same has become a part of their pay already drawn' in the revised pay scales of the employees.
4.
There was no reply to the subsequent representations of the petitioners from the respondent, and the petitioners have filed the present writ petition praying for a direction to the respondent to fix the pay of the petitioners under FR 22(c) from the date of their promotion to the post of Junior Manager without excluding dearness allowance from their basic pay and issue consequential directions to the respondent to fix their pay in the post of Junior Manager in the time scale of Rs. 900-50-1450 on the basis of actual basic pay with dearness allowance already merged and applying the provisions of FR 22(c).
5.
In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent, it is stated that the respondent-company is a Public Sector Undertaking under the control of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India.
The wage revision which took place in the years 1978 and 1983 are relevant for the purpose of this writ petition.
The respondent-undertaking has been following the pay pattern of Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd ('HAL', for short) which is a sister Defence Public Sector Undertaking, in pay fixation and implementation of wage revision, as resolved by the Board of Directors of the respondent.
FR 22(c) is applicable only to the Government employees and not to the employees of the respondent.
The respondent adopted the pay fixation and promotion rules as given by HAL for wage revision that took place in the year 1983 for its employees.
The Officers pay does not include any dearness allowance and the dearness allowance is excluded from the basic pay of the officers concerned.
In the wage revision in the year 1978, a sum of Rs. 170/- being the dearness allowance was merged in the basic scale of pay of non-executives.
Subsequently, an additional sum of Rs. 50/- being dearness allowance, was merged in the pay scale during the wage revision in 1983.
As such, in all, a sum of Rs. 220/- towards dearness allowance was merged in the basic scale of pay of non-executives.
On promotion to the category of Junior Officers, a sum of Rs. 220/- which formed dearness allowance component in the basic pay was deducted in order to ensure that the junior officers (petitioners herein) did not derive a double advantage.
If the dearness allowance component is not deducted from pay, the employees on promotion from Groups D, E and F to Grade-I Officers cadre, would derive a double advantage, inasmuch as the dearness allowance element would have been paid twice.
It was further submitted that the total pay packet of the petitioners on their promotion to the officer's cadre was more than the total pay packet drawn by them in the lower posts and that there was no diminition in the pay drawn by the petitioners.
There was no cut or deduction from the pay of the petitioners on their promotion.
6.
The learned Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners are governed by the Recruitment and Promotion Rules of the respondent undertaking.
He contended that the pay of the petitioners was revised in accordance with the settlement reached between the respondent and the employees' union and the revised pay was applicable to the petitioners and that no amount would be deducted from the pay of the petitioners, as there was no dearness allowance component merged in their pay after the revision of pay scales.
Referring to the Government of India communication dated 1111983, the respondent and other Public Sector Undertakings, learned Counsel submitted that the pay scales and allowances of the executives are revised and the revised pay scales are applicable to the petitioners.
He contended that there was no dearness allowance component in the basic pay of the petitioners.
He referred to the terms of settlement between the workmen and the management of the respondent in the year 1978.
He further argued that there was a settlement in the years 1983-84 between the management and the workmen with the approval of the Government of India and revised scales of pay were fixed which provide for dearness allowance apart from basic pay.
According to the learned Counsel FR 22(c) is applicable to the petitioners and that, at any rate, the revised pay fixation and the terms of the settlement reached between the management and the workmen was based on FR 22(c).
7.
The learned Counsel for the Respondent contended that the provisions of FR 22(c) are not applicable to the employees of the respondent, who are the employees of the Central Government.
He contended that the dearness allowance component of Rs. 220/- was deducted from the basic pay of the petitioners so that they will not get undue advantage of having a double benefit of dearness allowance merged with pay, and also dearness allowance based on pay on promotion, as junior officers.
The total pay packet of the petitioners was protected and care was taken to see that the total pay packet of the petitioners as junior officers is not less than the total pay they were receiving prior to their promotion.
He submitted that the respondent has been following the HAL pattern in the matter of fixation of pay for its employees and referred to the Minutes of the Board of Directors at the meeting held on 91170 and 16.3.71, as well as the minutes of the meeting held on 31578 to which the first petitioner was also a party as General Secretary of the employees' union.
Similarly, to the Memo of Settlement dated 29280, which is also to the same effect, the first petitioner was a party.
8.
The contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioners that FR 22(c) is applicable to the employees of the respondent-Undertaking, cannot be accepted.
FIR.2 makes it clear that Fundamental Rules apply to all Government servants whose pay is dubitable to civil estimates and to any other class of Government servants to which the President may, by a general or special order, declare them to be applicable.
The respondent is a Public Sector Undertaking under the control of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India, and is a company incorporated under the Companies Act.
The employees of the respondent are not Government servants and Fundamental Rules are not applicable to them.
9.
The next submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioners is that the employees of the respondent are governed by the BDL.
Recruitment and Promotion Rules and the fixation of pay on promotion is governed by Rule 11 of the said Rules.
The relevant portion of the said rule are as follows :  "FIXATION OF PAY ON PROMOTION.
111 The pay of an employee cleared for promotion to a higher post and appointed to such a post substantively or temporarily for more than one month is to be fixed in the higher grade as follows :  112 At the minimum of that grade or by giving him one increment in the lower post and fixing the pay at next stage above in the higher post whichever is more beneficial to the employee.
113 .......  114 If the employee has been drawing pay at the maximum of the lower post for more than three years, his pay will be fixed on promotion on the higher scale and stepped up further by one increment in the higher scale for every three completed years of service at the maximum of the lower grade."
From a reading of the said rules, it is seen that if an employee is promoted, his pay has to be fixed in the higher grade at the minimum of that grade or by giving him one increment in the lower post and fixing the pay at next stage above in the higher post whichever is beneficial to the employee.
It has therefore to be examined as to what is `par' within the meaning of the said rules.
10.
According to the learned Counsel for the petitioners, pay includes DA which was merged in the basic pay.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that DA, which was merged with basic pay, has to be deducted and after giving one increment, the basic pay in the promoted post has to be fixed.
He contended that the total pay packet of the petitioners in the promoted post was protected and it is kept higher than the total pay packet that was being received by the petitioners in the lower post.
11.
The learned Counsel for the respondent relied on a decision of the Bombay High Court in WP No. 4268/81, dated 22989, (Pandurang Triambak Yeole & Others v. The Personnel Officer : HAL.
Nasik Division).
It was held therein by a Division Bench that unless it is shown that in prescribing such guidelines or rules for pay fixation the authorities had acted ex facia wrongly, the Court cannot assume itself the power to prescribe scales or to devise the ways in which hardship, real or imaginary, could be mitigated by prescribing certain set of rules.
It was further held that in case the dearness allowance which was merged with pay was to be deducted, it would result in inequality between the petitioners therein and those who had already been promoted.
SLP No. 4964/90 against the aforesaid judgment of the Bombay High Court was dismissed by the Supreme Court by order dated 22989.
This Court in WP No. 3513/89, dated 27290, held the view that 'salary' and 'pay' are inter-changeable expressions and that it is reasonable to construe the expression 'pay' as totality of emoluments received by an employee, unless the context, specifically or by necessary implication excludes such interpretation.
12.
As per the settlement reached between the management and the workmen Union of the respondent, to which the first petitioner was a party as the then General Secretary, it was recorded that the respondent has been generally following the wages and pay scales on par with HAL and other Bangalore based industries.
While fixing pay of the employees of the respondent under the terms of the settlement in 1978 for the employees who were on the rolls of the company as on 1183, revised pay scales included local DA among other allowances.
It is, therefore, clear that the basic pay of the petitioners included the DA component.
While fixing the basic pay of the petitioners in the promoted post of Officers, the DA component of pay of Rs. 220/- was deducted and the pay of the petitioners was fixed in the higher post.
Care was taken to see that the total emoluments of the petitioners in the higher post are not less than what they received in the lower post.
The first petitioner was receiving a total pay packet of Rs. 3000-45 in the non-executive scale in Group `F'.
The total pay packet he was receiving on promotion to Grade-I in Executive scale was Rs. 3,194-40.
Similarly, the total pay packet of other petitioners in Grade I executive scale was higher than the total pay packet they received in the non-executive scale in Group E or Group F, as the case may be.
13.
The pay scale for the post of Junior Manager Grade-I is Rs. 900-50-1450.
The sources for the appointment to the said posts are by direct recruitment, as well as by promotion from among the in service employees.
If the contention of the petitioners is accepted, it will lead to disparity in the pay scales between the direct recruits and promotees, which is not permissible.
So long as there is no diminition in the pay packet of the petitioners on promotion to the higher post of Officers Grade-I, the petitioners cannot have any grievance.
They cannot be permitted to have undue advantage by getting the benefit of dearness allowance in a sum of Rs. 225/- by granting the relief which they claim now.
As already held by this Court, the salary and pay are inter-changeable expressions, and it is reasonable to construe the expression 'pay' to locality of emoluments received by an employee, unless the context specifically or by necessary implication excludes such interpretation.
So long as there is no reduction in the total emoluments-call it as 'pay' or 'salary' received by the petitioners in the higher cadre, they cannot have any grievance and the relief prayed for in the writ petition cannot be granted.
The DA element of Rs. 220/- is reduced from the basic pay of the petitioners in order to maintain equality of pay of the officers recruited by direct recruitment and of those recruited by promotion.
This does not, in any way, violate the recruitment and promotion rules of the respondent-Undertaking.
As required by the rules, one increment in the lower post was given to the petitioners in fixing the basic pay in Grade-I and the action of the respondent is in compliance with rules.
14.
There are no merits in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.