Bakthavatsalam, J - The writ petition is for the issue of a writ of certiorarified mandamus to quash the proceedings of the 1st respondent in P.W.D.N.
No. G3/3783/84 dated 26990 and to direct the 1st respondent to consider the petitioner's applications dated 28.2.1983 and 2011984 and to provide any suitable job to the petitioner with the 1st respondent.
2.
The petitioner is the wife of one Govindan, who died on 13.5.1977 while he was working as a watchman in Velacherry Town Panchayat, after undergoing an operation under Family Planning Scheme.
After the death of the husband, the Velacherry Town Panchayat has been merged with the 1st Respondent Corporation with effect from 161978.
The petitioner submitted an application on 28183 to the 1st respondent seeking suitable appointment for herself on compassionate ground.
At that time she was aged 26 years.
Again the petitioner made another application for suitable appointment and 2011984, relying upon GOMs.
No. 225, date 15.2.1972 and GOMs.
No. 1579 Labour Employment Department dated 2171981.
Thereafter the petitioner was directed to furnish legal heirship certificate, death extract in connection with her husband's death, identification certificate, etc. and accordingly the petitioner furnished those particulars in 1989 itself.
Thereafter on 3051989 the petitioner was informed that she could approach the Development Officer, Saidapet as the Family Benefit Scheme Fund had been settled by the Development Office, Saidapet.
Thereafter the petitioner approached the 2nd respondent for a suitable job.
In the meanwhile the 2nd respondent addressed a letter to the 1st respondent seeking certain particulars about the petitioner's husband.
Subsequently, the 2nd respondent sent a letter to the petitioner stating that since the Velacherry Town Panchayat has been merged with the 1st respondent Corporation, the 1st respondent alone could provide employment other and it appears that the Collector also recommended the case of the petitioner to the 1st respondent by a letter dated 19290.
However, by the impugned order the 1st respondent has rejected the request of the petitioner mainly on the ground that Velacherry Panchayat has been merged with the 1st respondent after the death of the petitioner's husband and that the Family Benefit Fund has been disbursed by the Development Officer, Saidapet.
Aggrieved thereby, the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
Notice of motion has been ordered on 9491.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the 1st respondent had not rejected originally the application of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds, and only directed the petitioner to furnish certain certificates and particulars that the Velacherry Town Panchayat has, been merged with the 1st respondent Corporation on and from 1678, and therefore, the 1st respondent alone can give employment of the petitioner on a compassionate ground; that Development Officer, Saidapet has nothing to do with the employment to the petitioner; that the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 19290 has stated clearly that the 1st respondent alone can provide employment to the petitioner and none else; that though the petitioner has been agitating for employment on componsionate ground with the 1st respondent right from 1983, only in 1990, the 1st respondent had informed the petitioner that the petitioner should approach the Development Officer, Saidapet and thus the petitioner has been driven from pillar to post for the last eight years, and the petitioner was under a bona fide belief that she would be provided with a job but ultimately turned out to be futile one.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied on GOMs.
No. 73, Employment Services dated 26.10.1983, read with U.0.
Note No. 14924/N2/77-2 dated 28.4.77 and GOMs.
No. 312, Rural Development and Local Administration Department dated 29578 by which Velacherry Town Panchayat has been included within the limits of the Madras Corporation.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that according to the said Government Order the 1st respondent has to take over all the assets and liabilities of the Velacherry Town Panchayat and the claim of the petitioner will also come within the term `liability' and, therefore, the 1st respondent is bound to give employment to the petitioner.
4.
Per contra, Mr. Tamil Mani, learned counsel for the 1st respondent contended that on the date of death of the petitioner's husband, he was not an employee of the 1st respondent and was an employee of the Velacherry Town Panchayat; that on the date of death of the petitioner's husband no Government Order was in existence enabling the petitioner to claim appointment on compassionate grounds and that the Government Orders relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner are not applicable to the case of the petitioner; that in none of the Government Orders referred to above, it is mentioned that local authority will also come within the purview of the said Government Orders; that there was no liability on the part of the 1st respondent to give employment to the petitioner on a compassionate ground and that the 1st respondent-Corporation has got certain procedures with regard to the appointments to the legal heirs of the employees of the Corporation on compassionate ground and since the petitioner's husband was not an employee of the Corporation of Madras at the time of his death, the petitioner cannot seek employment on compassionate ground.
5.
The 2nd respondent has not filed any counter.
6.
I have considered the arguments of the respective counsel and perused the relevant files.
There is no dispute that the husband of the petitioner was working as a watchman under the Velacherry Town Panchayat at the time of his death, and there cannot be any dispute that on and from 1678 the Velacherry Town Panchayat has come within the control and jurisdiction of the Madras Corporation.
When the petitioner approached the 1st respondent for suitable job on compassionate grounds in the year 1983-84 the 1st respondent directed the petitioner in the year 1989 to approach the Development Officer, Saidapet, who is stated to have settled the Family Benefit Fund to the petitioner consequent upon the death of the petitioner's, husband.
When the petitioner approached the District Collector, she was directed to approach the 2nd respondent to employment.
Moreover, the 2nd respondent his letter dated 19290 has clearly stated that it is only the 1st respondent who can decide about the employment to the petitioner on compassionate ground.
It is also not denied that the 1st respondent is providing employment to the deceased employees of the Corporation on compassionate ground.
The only objection of the 1st respondent is that the petitioner's husband was working in Velacherry Town Panchayat at the time of his death an, therefore, he cannot claim employment under the 1st respondent.
I am unable to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
It is not the fault of the petitioner, that the Velacherry Town Panchayat has been included in the limits of Madras Corporation.
Admittedly at the time of merger, the entire assets and liabilities of the Velacherry Town Panchayat have been taken over by the Madras Corporation.
As such, in my view, though the Government Orders referred to above are not strictly applicable to the petitioner's case herein, when the Corporation of Madras is providing appointment to the legal heir of the deceased employees, on compassionate ground, there is no reason why the same practice is not followed in the case of the petitioner, whose husband died while he was in the service of the Velacherry Town Panchayat, which has been merged with the Corporation.
Further the reasons given by the 1st respondent in the impugned order rejecting the claim of the petitioner are unreasonable.
The inclusion of Velacherry Town Panchayat, where the petitioner's husband was working at the time of his death, within the Madras Corporation limits is not because of the fault of the petitioner as I have stated already.
The petitioner has rightly applied for appointment on compassionate grounds to the 1st respondent in 1984 and only after nearly five years the petitioner had been informed to approach the Development Officer, Saidapet.
Later, the 2nd respondent directed the petitioner to approach the 1st respondent, who alone could consider the appointment of the petitioner on compassionate ground.
Thus it is clear that the petitioner has been driven from pillar to post for the last seven years unnecessarily.
When the Corporation of Madras has taken the entire assets and liabilities of the Velacherry Town Panchayat, it is only the 1st respondent who alone can consider the appointment to the petitioner on compassionate ground.
For all practical purposes, in my view, the petitioner has to be treated as the wife of the deceased employee of the Corporation so as to enable her to seek appointment for herself on compassionate ground, otherwise Article 14 of the Constitution of India will stare at the face of the Corporation.
8.
Though the principle of promissory estoppel may not be applicable strictly to this case, but still it can be said that had the petitioner been informed, immediately after the receipt of her application for an appointment on compassionate ground, she could have saved six or seven years by seeking employment elsewhere.
But unnecessarily the petitioner had been kept under the false hopes from 1984, when the petitioner made her application for appointment on compassionate ground, till 1989, when she was informed that she could approach the Development Officer, Saidapet, and that too, after directing the petitioner to furnish certain documents in support of her claim and after receiving the same from the petitioner.
When the petitioner was asked to furnish certain document in support of her claim, she was put under a belief that she may be given appointment on compassionate ground in the 1st respondent-Corporation itself.
Though the petitioner had not altered her position at any point of time to attract the principles of promissory estoppel, in this connection it is relevant to note the following observation of the Supreme Court reported in Union of India v. Godfrey Phillips India Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806 :  "Now the doctrine of promissory estoppel is well established in the administrative law of India.
It represents a principle evolved by the equity to avoid injustice and, though commonly named promissory estoppel, it is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of estoppel.
The basis of this doctrine is the interposition of equity which has always been true to its form, stepped in to mitigate the rigour of strict law.
This doctrine through of ancient vintage, was rescued from obscurity by the decision of Mr. Justice Denning as he then was in his celebrated judgement in Central London Property Trust Ltd v. High Trees House Ltd (1956 1 All ER 156).
The true principle of promissory estoppel is that where one party as by his word or conduct made to the other a clear and unequivocal promise or representation which is intended to create legal relations or affect a legal relationship to arise in the future knowing or intending that it would be acted upon by the other party to whom the promise or representation is made and it is in fact so acted upon by the other party the promise or presentation would be binding on the party making it and he would not be entitled to go back upon it, if it would be inequitable to allow him to do so, having regard to the dealings which have taken place between the parties.
It has often been said in England that the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot itself be the basis of an action; it can only be a shield and not sword but the law in India has gone far ahead of the narrow position adopted in England and as a result of the decision of this court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1979)(2) SCR 641, it is now well settled that the doctrine of promissory estoppel is not limited in its application only to defence but it can also found a cause of action.
The decision of this Court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills case (supra) contains an exhaustive discussion of the doctrine of promissory estoppel and we find ourselves wholly in agreement with the various parameters of this doctrine outlined in that decision."
The Supreme Court has again in Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2414 affirmed the said principle referring to the judgment of Lord Denning in Central Newbury Car Auctions Ltd. v. Unity Finance Ltd, 1956 3 All ER 905 at p. 909 and that passage has been quoted with approval in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co Ltd v. State of UP, 1979(2) SCR 641.
In the said decision (AIR 1987 SC 2414) the Supreme Court has observed :  "We do not think that in order to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel it is necessary for the promisee to show that he suffered detriment as a result of acting in reliance on the promise.
But we may make it clear that if by detriment we mean injustice to the promisee were to recede from his promise then detriment would certainly come in as a necessary ingredient.
The detriment in such a case is not some prejudices suffered by the promisee by acting on the promise, but the prejudice which would be caused to the promisee the promissor were allowed to go back on the promise."
So on the principle laid down by the Supreme Court as above, I am of the view, that the petitioner had been hoping to get an appointment on compassionate ground for all these years till 1989, and it is not open to the 1st respondent now to say that the petitioner can approach the Development Officer, Saidapet for appointment on compassionate ground and the petitioner's husband was not an employee of the Corporation at the time of his death.
Under such circumstances, I am of the view, the impugned order is liable to be set aside and is accordingly set aside.
The Writ Petition shall stand allowed.
The 1st respondent is directed to consider the petitioner for suitable appointment on compassionate ground taking into account that the petitioner is a young widow aged 34 years who lost her husband at her early age and the 1st respondent shall pass orders in this regard on or before 131992.
No costs.
Petition allowed.