AL Bahri and GC Garg, JJ - The petitioner joined the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short `the Board') as T/mate on March 1, 1969.
He was promoted on October 27, 1990 as Assistant Lineman on regular basis.
He was further promoted as Lineman in August, 1988.
A criminal case under First Information Report No. 211 dated October 18, 1990 for offences under Sections 363/366/120-B/354/323/342 of the Indian Penal Code was registered at Police Station Narnaund against the petitioner and others.
As a result thereof, he was placed under suspension with immediate effect vide order dated October 22, 1990.
The petitioner was, however, on his representation, reinstated by order dated June 17, 1991 without prejudice of the proceedings pending against him.
The petitioner was tried and by judgment dated November 18, 1992 of the Additional Sessions Judge, Hissar, was convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years.
The sentence awarded to the petitioner was suspended by the High Court vide order dated December 2, 1992 during the pendency of his appeal subject to his furnishing the requisite bonds to the satisfaction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Hissar.
The copy of order suspending the sentence of the petitioner is at Annexure P-2.
2.
Consequent upon the conviction of the petitioner by the Additional Sessions Judge, the services of the petitioner were terminated by order dated December 28, 1992, Annexure P-3.
3.
It is that order of termination which has been challenged in this writ petition alleging that the order of conviction which has been made the basis of termination order has not become final, the appeal being pending and in any case the sentence having been suspended.
The contention is that the order of termination during the pendency of the appeal and after suspension of sentence, could not be passed till such time the conviction is finally upheld.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his submission relied upon Om Parkash v. The Director, Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Deptt.
Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1, Major Surinder Kumar Lakara v The Union of India and another, 1991(5) SLR 191 : 1992(1) SCT 187 and Gurcharan Dass v. The Chairman, Posts & Telegraphs Board, Ministry of Communications, Government of India, New Delhi & others, 1983(1) SLR 729.
4.
It was not disputed by the counsel for the petitioner that no exception could be taken to the order of termination if the order of conviction and sentence had become final.
5.
In Major Surinder Kumar Lakara's case it was the contention that the order of dismissal cannot be passed when the order of sentence had been suspended, was not decided on merits.
The ground that appeal against the conviction had in the meantime been accepted.
6.
In Om Parkash's case (supra), the petitioner was convicted for the offences under Sections 420/511 and 465/471 of the Indian Penal Code on the allegations that he had submitted false medical reimbursement claims, but instead of sentencing the petitioner to any term of imprisonment, he was released on probation under Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (for short the Act').
Subsequent to his conviction, the petitioner therein was dismissed from service only on the ground that he had been convicted.
It was the validity of this order that was called in question.
The submission was that Section 12 of the Act prohibits dismissal from service on account of conduct which lead to conviction as the official had been dealt with under Section 4 of the Act.
The question that fell for decision before the Full Bench thus, as noticed by the Full Bench itself was "the only question that calls for decision in this respect is whether his having been so dealt with exonerates the petitioner from liability to departmental proceedings for the original conduct which lead to his conviction or not."
It was in this situation, the Full Bench observed.
"The petitioner before us has been dismissed from service on account of conviction alone when no finding about his conduct (which let to his conviction) justifying his dismissal, the impugned order cannot be sustained."
7.
The question posed in the present case was thus never before the Full Bench.
As already noticed, the petitioner in this case has not been dealt with under the Act.
Learned counsel for the petitioner thus, can derive no assistance from the aforesaid case.
8.
In Gurcharan Dass's case (supra), IS Tiwana, J (as his Lordship then was), following the judgment of the Full Bench in Om Parkash's case (supra) and in the absence of any reasoning, quashed the order of dismissal.
It is thus again not an authority for the proposition canvassed by the petitioner.
9.
In the present case, the petitioner has been convicted and sentenced for the offences aforesaid though the sentence has been suspended during the pendency of the appeal.
The conviction of the petitioner stands, the order has been passed terminating the services of the petitioner because of his conviction for the offences noticed above.
10.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of dismissal cannot be passed till such time the order of conviction becomes final upto the Supreme Court, cannot be accepted.
Having regard to the realities with which we are faced, it can safely be said that the appeal in the High Court and then in the Supreme Court in a given case can well take 10 to 15 years or even more for final disposal especially in a case where the sentence is suspended or the accused is released on bail.
It would thus, not only deprive the competent authority to consider the matter, but compel him to pay to him the salary or the suspension allowance all this time while in most cases the employee would retire by the time the matter is finally adjudicated upto the highest Court.
In other situation, however, the employee would be entitled to reinstatement as and when the order of conviction and sentence is set aside.
We thus, find no merit in this writ petition and dismiss the same, in limine.
Petition dismissed.