MR Agnihotri, J - Petitioner Smt. Sharda Rani is MA, M.Ed, and PhD in Psychology.
She applied for the post of Lecturer in Psychology advertised by Dayanand Mahila Mahavidyala, Kurukshetra, in 1987 and was interviewed by the Selection Committee of the College on 28th July, 1987.
However, she was placed on order of merit at serial number 2 in the panel of selected candidates-one Smt. Kiran Gupta being at serial number 1 in the panel and one Smt. Saroj Sharma at serial number 3.
The proceedings of the Selection Committee were signed by the Vice Chancellor, Kurukshetra's nominee, Director, Higher Education, Haryana's nominee, Subject Expert and the President of the Managing Committee of Dayanand Mahila Mahavidyala.
2.
Though offer of appointment was made to Smt. Kiran Gupta at serial Number 1, yet she did not joint within time as she was already working as Lecturer in Adarsh Mahila Mahavidyala, Bhiwani, from where she had not resigned till then.
After availing repeated extensions, it was only on 1st December, 1987, when Smt. Kiran Gupta joined the post but only for two days and left the Mahavidyala on 3rd December, 1987, to join back her previous employment at Bhiwani.
Despite this appointment was not offered to the petitioner and instead Smt. Saroj Sharma, the candidate placed by the Selection Committee at serial Number 3, was appointed on ad hoc basis.
Aggrieved against this, the petitioner represented to the authorities against of the Kurukshetra University, who by their direction dated 11th December, 1987, directed the respondent Mahavidyala that "so long as panel exists, the appointment is to be made from amongst the candidates in the panel."
Despite this, the petitioner was not appointed even though on 25th April, 1989, the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, brought on record that "on representation from Smt. Sharda Rani, the matter has been examined and it had been found that injustice has been done in her case as she was not given appointment, even though she was legitimately entitled to be appointed against the regular post on account of her selection through duly constituted committee."
Even thereafter, the Management did not appoint the petitioner and readvertised the post on 8th July, 1989, without prejudice to her rights to claim appointment on the basis of earlier selection.
Aggrieved against this action of the respondents, the petitioner invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for the issuance of writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the basis of her selection.
3.
Notice of motion was issued for 23rd August, 1989, and the Motion Bench on that data directed that one post shall be kept reserved for the petitioner if the same had not been filled up till that date.
Thereafter, on 27th November, 1989, the Motion Bench admitted the writ petition after hearing the learned counsel for the parties and directed the respondents to take the petitioner in service forthwith.
4.
The above interim order of the Motion Bench dated 27th November, 1989, was challenged by the Management before Hon'ble the Supreme Court in S.L.P.
No. 15535 of 1989.
While dismissing the special leave petition, the Supreme Court passed the following order :-  "It is clear that the order of the High Court dated 271189 is purely an interim order.
We do not wish to disturb particularly as counsel for the respondent No. 1 states that she has reported for duty yesterday though this is denied by the counsel on behalf of the appellant.
However, we are of the opinion that in the circumstances, the writ petition be disposed of by the end of January, 1990.
It is also clear that Miss Monika Dhingra is an affected party and should be heard before the High Court.
Miss Monika Dhingra may, therefore, be impleaded there as respondent and writ petition be disposed of with these observations.
This Special Leave Petition is disposed of.
Miss Monika Dhingra may file a counter-affidavit, if any, within two weeks from today."
5.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 on behalf the Managing Committee of Dayanand Mahila Mahavidyala as also by Miss Monika Dhingra, the additionally impleaded respondent.
Though the factual position has been admitted by the respondents, yet the petitioner is ought to be non-suited on the ground that with the joining of Smt. Kiran Gupta though belatedly and even for two days only, the process of first selection was complete and it was a fresh vacancy which the Management was not bound to fill from the first panel and could advertise the same, treating Smt. Kiran Gupta having resigned the post.
Maintainability of the writ petition has also been challenged on the ground that the petitioner having appeared in the interview for the second post advertised in 1989, she stands estopped from claiming appointment on the basis of her earlier selection.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I am of the considered view that the Management has certainly been unfair to the petitioner and considerations other than merit have prevailed with the authorities while refusing appointment to the petitioner.
In fact, the petitioner has been discriminated twice by the respondents.
First time when she was not permitted to join even if Smt. Kiran Gupta, candidate at number 1 in the merit list, did not join despite repeated communications and extensions in the date of joining, and for the second time when Smt. Saroj Sharma, candidate at number 3 in the merit list, was appointed on ad hoc basis without offering the post to the petitioner, who was at number 2 in the merit list.
Even the communications and clarifications received from the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, were disregarded, though the authorities had found her entitled for the aforesaid appointment.
In these circumstances, the Management of the Dayanand Mahila Mahavidyala was bound to give appointment to the petitioner unless they had decided not to fill the posts at all.
The mere fact that the petitioner filed the writ petition and also took a chance in competing in the second selection, will not take away her right to claim appointment on the basis of her earlier selection.
7.
Consequently, I allow this petition and direct the respondents to treat the petitioner as having been validly appointed on the basis of her earlier selection to the post of Lecturer in Psychology.
Since the respondents have already been directed by the Motion Bench to take back the petitioner in service forthwith on 27th November, 1989, and in pursuance thereof the petitioner has actually joined, which fact stands noticed and upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in their order in S.L.P.
No. 15535 of 1983, referred to above, the appointment of the petitioner shall be deemed to have been made on regular basis and she shall be entitled to have all the benefits flowing therefrom, to which she would have been entitled, had the appointment been offered to her immediately after the first selection.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Sd/-  MR Agnihotri,  Judge.
Petition allowed.