This Letters Patent Appeal arises out of the order dated 15122005 whereby the writ petition SWP No. 15122005 filed by the appellant has been dismissed.
2.
The appellant/writ petitioner was directly recruited to the post of Naik in Border Security Force on 111987 in relaxation of Recruitment Rules and then promoted to the post of Head Constable on 971990.
3.
For promotion to the post of Sub-Inspector in terms of Boarder Security Force (Subordinate Officers and Under Officers) Promotion and Seniority Rules, 1975 passing of Platoon Commandos Course was pre-requisite.
The petitioner under-went the said Course and was declared to have cleared the same on 1042001.
The petitioner was considered for promotion in 2001 but was not cleared.
4.
Border Security Force General Duty Cadre (Non-Gazetted) Recruitment Rules 2002 (hereinafter called 2002 Rules) came to be notified vide GSR No. 128 dated 22nd Nov 2002 in supersession of Border Security Force (Subordinate Officers and Under Officers) Promotion and Seniority Rules, 1975 (hereinafter called 1975 Rules).
5.
Rule 5 of 2002 Rules provides that every post remaining unfilled and every vacancy that may arise there-after shall be filled in accordance with the provisions contained in the schedule and the procedure as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.
6.
As per the Schedule appended relating to the post of Sub Inspector at S.No.
2 under Column 12 in case of recruitment by promotion/deputation/ absorption to be made, under sub-head promotion, Head Constable of the Force having not less than five years regular service as Head Constable together with a total of 18 years of service and possessing essential qualifications, prescribed there-under, are eligible for being considered for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector.
7.
Admitted position is that the petitioner though has five years regular service as Head Constable, did not have 18 years of regular service.
8.
Another DPC was convened by the respondents on 1232003 in which the petitioner alongwith other Head Constables was considered for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector but his result was with-held awaiting the Govt of India's decision on relaxation of the eligibility condition of having total 18 years service.
Later vide order No. 67/List D/Estt- 11/4/6508 dated 532004 of Inspector General, Border Security Force was communicated that he was ineligible for promotion so should appear before the DPC when he becomes eligible i.e. has 18 years service at his credit.
9.
Feeling aggrieved of the order dated 532004 the appellant filed the writ petition for questioning the legal validity of the said order principally on the ground that in view of his direct recruitment to the post of Naik, the pre-requisite condition of having 18 years for being eligible for promotion was not applicable to him.
10.
Learned writ Court on finding the above plea not tenable has dismissed the writ petition by the order impugned in this appeal.
11.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
12.
Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the appellant submits that the petitioners could not be expected to have 18 years Service at his credit for having been recruited directly to the post of Naik in relaxation of the Rules.
It is only that person who is recruited at the base level of the post of follower, can have 18 years service at his credit at the time he reaches the level of Head Constable with five years regular service i.e. with the service of 3 years as Follower would get promoted to the post of a Constable, then with 2 years service to the post of L Naik and further with 2 years service to the post of Naik, from there after 2 years of service to the post of head Constable and after rendering 5 years service becomes due for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector.
13.
Mr. Raina contends that petitioner, being a direct recruit to the post of Naik cannot be equated with a Head Constable who has reached there from the post of a Follower.
He argues that once the petitioner reached the level of the post of Head Constable with a 5 years regular service he lost his birth marks i.e. the manner in which he reached to that level.
He submits that for being considered for promotion his eligibility condition is only that he has five years regular service like the other Head Constables in the cadre.
The requirement of 18 years total service would apply to those Head Constables only who have reached there in the cadre of Head Constables starting from the base level post i.e. Follower.
In support of his contention, he relies upon the following authorities :  AIR 1985 SC 1416, Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel 1991(2) SCT 603 : AIR 1991 SC 1244, State of Bihar v. Sri Akhouri Sachindra In case Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416, the Apex Court held as under :-  "The position that the pleasure doctrine is not based upon any special prerogative of the Crown but upon public policy has been accepted by this Court in The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. v. Babu Ram Upadhya, [1961] 2 S.C.R. 679, 696 and Moti Ram Deka etc. v. General Manager, NEF Railways, Maligaon, Pandu etc., [1964]5 S.C.R. 683, 734-5.
This Court has also accepted the principle that society has an interest in the due discharge of their duties by government servants.
In Roshan Lal Tondon v. Union of India, [1968]1 S.C.R. 185, Ramaswami, J, speaking for the Court said (at page 195) : "It is true that the origin of Government service is contractual.
There is an offer and acceptance in every case.
But once appointed to his post or office the Government servant acquires a status and his rights and obligations are no longer determined by consent of both parties, but by statute or statutory rules which may be framed and altered unilaterally by Government.
In other words, the legal position of a Government servant is more one of status that of contract.
The hall-mark of status is the attachment to a legal relationship of rights and duties imposed by the public law and not by mere agreement of the parties.
The emolument of the Government servant and his terms of service are governed by statute or statutory rules which may be unilaterally altered by the Government without the consent of the employee.
It is true that Article 311 imposes constitutional restrictions upon the power of removal granted to the President and the Governor under Article 310.
But it is obvious that the relationship between the Government and its servant is not like an ordinary contract of service between a master and servant.
The legal relationship is something entirely different, something in the nature of status.
It is much more than a purely contractual relationship voluntarily entered into between the parties.
The duties of status are fixed by the law and in the enforcement of these duties society has an interest.
In the language of jurisprudence status is condition of membership of a group of which powers and duties are exclusively determined by law and not by agreement between the parties concerned."
In case State of Bihar v. Sri Akhouri Sachindra, AIR 1991 SC 1244, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "12.
In the instant case, the promotee respondents Nos. 6 to 23 were not borne in the cadre of Assistant Engineer in the Bihar Engineering Service, Class II at the time when the respondents Nos. 1 to 5 were directly recruited to the post of Assistant Engineer as such they cannot be given seniority in the service of Assistant Engineers over the respondents Nos. 1 to 5.
It is well settled that no person can be promoted with retrospective effect from a date when he was not borne in the cadre so as to adversely affect others.
It is well settled by several decisions of this Court that amongst members of the same grade seniority is reckoned from the date of their initial entry into the service.
In other words, seniority inter se amongst the Assistant Engineers in Bihar Engineering Service, Class II will be considered from the date of the length of service rendered as Assistant Engineers.
This being the position in law the respondents Nos. 6 to 23 cannot be made senior to the respondents Nos. 1 to 5 by the impugned government orders as they entered into the said service by promotion after the respondents Nos. 1 to 5 were directly recruited in the quota of direct recruits.
The judgment of the High Court quashing the impugned Government Orders made in annexures 8, 9 and 10 is unexceptionable."
14.
Per contra the contention of Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for respondent Union of India is that petitioner for being eligible to promotion has necessarily to satisfy the eligibility condition i.e. 5 years regular service in the cadre of Head Constable, but was not fulfilling the eligibility criterion of having total 18 years of service at his credit, yet he was allowed to appear before Departmental Promotion Committee held in January, 2003 alongwith similarly placed personnel as well as those who fulfilled the eligibility criterion.
While allowing the petitioner and other Head Constables who had not completed the mandatory eligibility as per 2002 Rules, it was stipulated that said persons shall be allowed to appear before the DPC provisionally on the following conditions :-  (i) Result will be with-held; (ii) The candidature of said lot, the DPC (Departmental Promotion Committee) will be subject to Govt's decision as to the necessity for relaxation; (iii) Mere allowing such lot of HCs (Head Constables) to appear before the DPC (Departmental Promotion Committee) will not confer any claim/right for empanelment/promotion.
(iv) Such candidates will be allowed to appear only after getting their signatures on certificate incorporating provisional nature of their candidature.
He submits further that on finalization of DPC proceedings held in January, 2003, 605 Head Constables were adjudged "Fit" for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector, and were brought on approved list-D as per Appendix-A to BSF HQ Order No. 17/62/2002/Pers/BSF/M/20187-20487 dated 12th March, 2003.
The result of 14 Head Constables who were allowed to appear before the Departmental Promotion Committee provisionally was with-held.
He further submitted that the BSF HQ had moved a proposal to the Government for relaxation in the notified Recruitment Rules viz relaxation in the eligibility service condition of total eighteen years service mandated in the Recruitment Rules, for consideration of this lot of Head Constables for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspectors, but the Government did not accept the said proposals.
According to Mr. Sharma, since the petitioner did not fulfill the condition of having total 18 years service at his credit, he was not eligible for promotion.
Had the Government relaxed the eligibility condition the petitioner could have been considered.
15.
It is not in dispute that 2002 Rules prescribe the eligibility condition for promotion from the post of Head Constable to the post of Sub Inspector, to be held the candidate must have 5 years regular service in the cadre of Head Constable with total service of 18 years in the Force.
The petitioner does not fulfill the eligibility condition, therefore, he has no right for consideration for promotion.
The contention of Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the petitioner that condition of having total 18 years service for a Head Constable to be eligible for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector cannot apply to petitioner, is without any merit.
The eligibility condition prescribed in 2002 Rules is applicable to all personnel in the cadre of Head Constable, irrespective of the mode by which they have come to be placed in that cadre.
After the petitioner entered into the cadre of Head Constable his birth marks got obliterated, therefore, the fact that he had been directly recruited to the post of Naik lost significance.
While being in the cadre of Head Constable, for becoming eligible for promotion he is required to satisfy in terms of 2002 Rules.
The eligibility conditions prescribed apply equally to all who are in that cadre including the petitioner.
If the petitioner was directly recruited as Naik in relaxation of Rules, it would not mean that he would be entitled to same relaxation for all the times to come.
The eligibility condition envisaged by 2002 Rules in term of Rule 5 is applicable to all the vacancies which were existing or which were to fall vacant after coming into force of 2002 Rules, therefore, after the commencement of the Rules the petitioner cannot be held to be eligible for promotion.
16.
The authorities being relied upon by Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the petitioner, in our view, are distinguishable and in no manner advance the case of the petitioner.
17.
Learned Writ Court was right in holding that plea of the petitioner was not tenable as the Rules are very specific and clear, indicating the eligibility for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector, regular service of 18 years with 5 years as Head Constable is essential requirement which admittedly is lacking in the case of the petitioner.
For the above reasons, we do not find any merit in the Letters Patent Appeal, as such, we dismiss the same.
Connected CMP shall also stand disposed of.
Appeal dismissed.