M. Ibrahim Kalifulla, J - The appellant is aggrieved against the order of the learned single Judge dated 322005 passed in WP No. 34 of 2004, in and by which, the learned single Judge rejected the appellants application for the issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondents for absorption in the regular services of Madurai Kamaraj University with retrospective effect and for continuity of service with all benefits.
2.
According to the appellant, he was working as Laboratory Attender in the first respondent University from 6.6.1990 in the Bio-technology department under the Headship of the second respondent, that he was being paid the consolidated pay of Rs. 2,000/- per month, that such employment was related to a scheme called "Rockfeller foundation Project", that subsequently, his employment was for a different scheme, called "Coffee Board", and that he was continued in service of the first respondent under the said scheme till the date of filing of the writ petition.
The appellant claims that the first respondent passed a resolution on 20121985 in Resolution No. 538 providing for regularisation of such category of employees and that in spite of nearly 14 years of service, his service was not regularised, while on the other hand, the respondents were attempting to terminate his services.
On the above said averments, the appellant sought for issuance of a writ of mandamus as stated above.
3.
The claim of the appellant was registered by the first respondent contending that the appellant was never in the services of the first respondent, that his engagement under the "Rockfeller Foundation project" was only between 1481997 and 21122000 that the project itself came to an end on 31122000 and thereafter, there was no scope for engaging the services of the appellant.
The first respondent denied the stand of the appellant that he was engaged for the scheme called "Coffee Board".
According to the first respondent, even the engagement of the appellant under the "Rockefeller Foundation Project" was on an ad hoc basis and such engagement did not ensure any right on the appellant to seek for regularisation.
4.
Apart from the resolution of the first respondent referred to by the appellant in his affidavit filed in support of the writ petition, the appellant also relied upon few orders of the learned single Judges of this Court dated 5.3.1998 made in WP 15484 and 16102003 made in WP Nos. 18269 of 1998 and 18271 of 1998.
He also sought reliance upon another order of the learned single Judge dated 4.3.2005 made in WP No. 3197 of 2004 who earlier rejected the appellant's writ petition Nos. 34 & 2075 of 2004 by an order dated 322005.
According to the learned counsel, the above orders passed in the above writ petitions were all cases where the concerned petitioners were similarly placed like that of the appellant, whose services were directed to the absorbed based on the resolution of the University dated 20121985 in Resolution No. 538.
5.
Mr. Silambanan, learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, contended that the appellant alone should not be treated differently and he should also be granted the relief of re-instatement and absorption.
6.
As against the above submission, Mr. Chandrasekaran, learned counsel appearing for the respondents contended that the appellant was never in the services of the first respondent-University, that the engagement of the appellant as Laboratory Attender was for certain schemes, which was in the nature of projects carried out by the Professors in different Departments and for the assistance rendered by the appellant to such Professors were paid by them on ad hoc basis and that he was never appointed in the services of the first respondent.
7.
Learned counsel also placed reliance upon a recent decision of the Honourble Supreme Court reported in (2006) 4 SCC page 1, Secretary, State of Karnataka and others v. Umadevi and others and submitted that the Honourable Supreme Court has deprecated the practice of regularising irregular and illegal appointments and therefore, the appellant is not entitled for any relief in the writ petition as well as writ appeal.
8.
On the above referred to facts relating to the engagement of the appellant in the different projects of the first respondent-University, we are able to deduce that the appellant was not appointed on regular basis by the first respondent.
The appellant was not appointed by the first respondent for any particular post that was existing in the first respondent University.
9.
The various payment vouchers produced on behalf of the appellant would only disclose that the concerned Professors of different departments have paid certain specific sum for having availed the services of the appellant on certain specific dates.
10.
As far as the identity card issued in the name of the first respondent-University is concerned, here again, as rightly contended by the learned counsel for the first respondent, the same was not issued by the Registrar of the first respondent but by the concerned Professor and head of the department.
The designation mentioned therein is also stated to be as the casual labourer in the laboratory.
The appellant has not produced any acceptable document to show that he was appointed either on a temporary basis or on casual basis or under any other category for any particular post in the fist respondent-University.
All the above factors and even based on the averments of the appellant's affidavit filed in support of the writ petition, we can safely conclude that the appellant was only engaged by some of the professors and Head of the department of the first respondent-University for assisting them in the Laboratory in the course of certain projects and some of which were ongoing projects in the first respondent-University.
Therefore, we can safely conclude that the so-called employment claimed by the appellant in the first respondent-University was highly irregular in nature and on that basis it is not safe to conclude that any right had accrued in favour of the appellant in order to consider the same for his regularisation or absorption in the first respondent-University.
In the above said background, when we apply the decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the first respondent, we find that the said decision only supports the stand of the first respondent and no relief can be granted to the appellant in this writ petition.
The Honourable Supreme Court has laid down as a general proposition of law as to how any claim for irregularisation in the public employment can be considered.
Paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 47 and 54 clinches the issue before us.
For the sake of appreciation, the above said paragraphs are extracted :  3.
A sovereign Government, considering the economics situation in the country and the work to be got done, is not precluded from making temporary appointments of engaging workers on daily wages.
Going by a law newly enacted.
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, the object is to give employment to at least one member of a family for hundred days in an year, on paying wages as fixed under that Act.
But, a regular process of recruitment or appointment has to be resorted to, when regular vacancies in posts, at a particular point of time, are to be filled up and the filling up of those vacancies cannot be done in a haphazard manner or based on patronage or other considerations.
Regular appointment must be the rule.
4.
But, sometimes this process is not adhered to and the Constitutional scheme of public employment is by passed.
The Union, the States, their departments and instrumentalities have resorted to irregular appointments, especially in the lower rungs of the service, without reference to the duty to ensure a proper appointment procedure through the Public Service Commission or otherwise as per the rules adopted and to permit these irregular appointees or those appointed on contract or on daily wages to continue year after year, thus, keeping out those who are qualified to apply for the post concerned and depriving them of an opportunity to complete for the post.
It has also led to persons who get employed, without the following of a regular procedure or even through the backdoor or on daily wages, approaching Courts, seeking directions to make them permanent in their posts and to prevent regular recruitment to the concerned posts.
Courts have not always kept the legal aspects in mind and have occasionally even stayed the regular process of employment being set in motion and in some cases, even directed that these illegal, irregular or improper entrants be absorbed into service.
A class of employment which can only be called litigious employment', has risen like a phoenix seriously impairing the constitutional scheme.
Such orders are passed apparently in exercise of the wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Whether the wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution is intended to be used for a purpose certain to defeat the concept of social justice and equal opportunity for all, subject to affirmative action in the matter of public employment as recognized by our Constitution, has to be seriously pondered over.
It is time, that Courts desist, from issuing orders preventing regular selection or recruitment at the instance of such persons and from issuing directions for continuance of those who have not secured regular appointments as per procedure established.
The passing of orders for continuance, tends to defeat the very Constitutional scheme of public employment.
It has to be emphasized that this is not the role envisaged for High Courts in the scheme of things and their wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India are not intended to be used for the purpose of perpetuating illegalities, irregularities or improprieties or for scuttling the whole scheme of public employment.
Its role as the sentinel and as the guardian of equal rights protection should not be forgotten.
5.
This Court has also on occasions issued directions which could not be said to be consistent with the Constitutional scheme of public employment.
Such directions are issued presumably on the basis of equitable considerations or individualization of justice.
The question arises, equity of whom ?
Equity for the handful of people who have approached the Court with a claim, or equity for the teeming millions of this country seeking employment and seeking a fair opportunity for competing for employment ?
When one side of the coin is considered, the other side of the coin, has also to be considered and the way open to any law as laid down by the Constitution and not to make directions, which at times, even if do not run counter to the Constitutional scheme, certainly tend to water down the Constitutional requirements.
It is this conflict that is reflected in these cases referred to the Constitution Bench.
xxx  47.
When a person enters a temporary employment or gets engagement as a constructual or casual worker and the engagement is not based on a proper selection as recognized by the relevant rules or procedure, he is aware of the consequences of the appointment being temporary, causal or contractual in nature.
Such a person cannot invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for being confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post could be made only by following a proper procedure for selection and in concerned cases, in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
Therefore, the theory of legitimate expectation cannot be successfully advanced by temporary, contractual or casual employees.
It cannot also be held that the State has held out any promise while engaging these persons either to continue them where they are or to make them permanent.
The State cannot constitutionally make such a promise.
It is also obvious that the theory cannot be invoked to seek a positive relief of being made permanent in the post.
54.
It is also clarified that those decisions which run counter to the principle settled in this decision, or in which directions running counter to what we have held herein, will stand denuded of their status as precedents".
11.
Having regard to the categoric pronouncement of the Honourable Supreme Court making it clear that any use of power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India should not be ventured to regularise or to absorb such nebulous category of engagement in public services, we hold that the appellant is not entitled for any relief in this writ petition as well as in this writ appeal.
12.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant based upon earlier orders in certain other writ petitions as well as the so-called resolution of the first respondent-University is also of no avail to the appellant, in view of the clarification made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court has made it clear that even in the decisions which run counter to the principle settled in the decision of the Supreme Court or any other directions, will stand denuded of their status as precedents.
Therefore, the said contention of the learned counsel for the appellant cannot also be countenanced.
For all the above reasons, the writ appeal is liable to be dismissed.
13.
In the result, the writ appeal is dismissed.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is also dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.