Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, has been filed by the petitioner against the respondents on 2392002 with the prayer that by an appropriate writ, order or direction, the order dated 2412000 (Annexure 9) passed by the Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (respondent No. 4) by which apart from charge No. 1, rest charge Nos. 2 and 3 were also found proved against the petitioner and penalty of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect were imposed upon the petitioner and the order dated 20102000 (Annexure 11) passed by the respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner by which the appeal of the petitioner was dismissed and further, the order dated 5122001 (Annexure 13) passed by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary, Department of Home (Appeal), Govt. of Rajasthan, Jaipur by which the review petition of the petitioner was rejected, be quashed and set aside.
2.
It may be stated here that when the petitioner was working as Driver in capacity as Constable, a complaint (Annexure 2) was made against him by one Smt. Sujata on 2071998 stating inter alia that on that day i.e. 2071998 at about 9.00 P.M., the petitioner tried to outrage her modesty and snatched her chain and on the basis of that complaint, a criminal case for the offence under Sections 341, 324, 354, 382 IPC was got registered against the petitioner.
During investigation of that case, an affidavit (Annexure 3) dated 2371998 was submitted by the complainant Smt. Sujata stating that the person, who teased her was not the petitioner and since during trial, the complainant Smt. Sujata and her husband Kanwarjeet Singh became hostile, therefore, the petitioner was acquitted of all the charges framed against him for the offence under Sections 354, 382, 324 IPC through judgment and order dated 8101998 (Annexure 4) passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bikaner.
3.
It may further be stated here that during the pendency of above criminal case against the petitioner, a charge-sheet under Rule 16 of the Rajasthan Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as "the CCA Rules") was issued by the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police, Bikaner against the petitioner through Memorandum Annexure 5 dated 1781998 by which the following three charges were framed against the petitioner :-  (i) That on 2071998 when the attendance of the police officials was taken, the petitioner was found absent and for that, he had not informed and thereafter, he was marked absent in the attendance register.
(ii) That on 2071998 at about 9.00 P.M. without obtaining permission he went to Shiv Mandir, Mukta Prasad Colony where he tried to outrage the modesty of one Sujata and he also snatched her golden chain and further, when her husband Kanwarjeet Singh tried to catch hold him, he caused injuries by knife.
(iii) That on the basis of complaint filed by Smt. Sujata, FIR No. 260/98 for the offence under Sections 341, 324, 382, 354 IPC was registered against the petitioner and in consequence of that, the petitioner was arrested on 2171998 and he remained in police custody upto 2571998 and thus, while working as police official, he had committed criminal act by which the image of police lowered down."
A detailed reply to the above charges was submitted by the petitioner through Annexure 6 and after conclusion of departmental enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report Annexure 7 to the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police, Bikaner by which he found charge No. 1 proved against the petitioner, but he did not find the charge Nos. 2 and 3 proved against the petitioner because the complainant Smt. Sujata, PW-4 has become hostile and she has filed her affidavit stating that the person, who teased her was not the petitioner.
However, the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (Disciplinary Authority) did not accept the report (Annexure 7) of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charges Nos. 2 and 3 and while disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer on charges Nos. 2 and 3, he came to the conclusion that apart from charge No. 1, the petitioner was also guilty of the charge Nos. 2 and 3 and thus, after holding the petitioner guilty of all the three charges levelled against him, he imposed the penalty of stoppage of annual grade increments with cumulative effect through order dated 2412000 (Annexure 9).
The gist of that order Annexure 9 passed by the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police may be summarized in the following manner :-  (i) That he was not satisfied with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge Nos. 2 and 3.
(ii) That petitioner was acquitted because the complaint Smt. Sujata was declared hostile, but the possibility that affidavit would have been filed by the complainant Smt. Sujata under pressure of the petitioner could not be ruled out and he does not want to give any importance to the affidavit of complainant Smt. Sujata in departmental enquiry.
Therefore, after giving above findings, he came to the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of all the three charges levelled against him and thus, he imposed penalty of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect against the petitioner.
4.
Aggrieved from the said order Annexure 9 dated 2412000 passed by the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police, Bikaner, the petitioner preferred appeal through Annexure 10 before the Appellate Authority respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner, who through order Annexure 11 dated 20112000 dismissed the appeal of the petitioner.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a review petition through Annexure 12, but the same was also rejected by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary through order Annexure 13 dated 5122001.
Hence, this writ petition with the prayer as stated above.
5.
In this petition, the learned counsel for the petitioner has not assailed the findings recorded by the authorities below in respect of charge No. 1, but he has assailed the findings of the Disciplinary Authority (respondent No. 4) as contained in the order Annexure 9 dated 2412000, Appellate Authority (respondent No. 3) as contained in the order Annexure 11 dated 20102000 and Reviewing Authority (respondent No. 2) as contained in the order Annexure 13 dated 5122001 in respect of charge Nos. 2 and 3.
6.
The main case of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that since the complainant Smt. Sujata herself has been declared hostile, therefore, charge Nos. 2 and 3 should have not been found proved against the petitioner especially when the Enquiry Officer had not found the charge Nos. 2 and 3 proved against the petitioner and furthermore, the Disciplinary Authority respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police while disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer on charge Nos. 2 and 3, has not assigned any cogent reasons and the findings of the Disciplinary Authority in respect of charge Nos. 2 and 3 are based on conjectures and surmises and they are not supported by any evidence and they are wholly perverse and erroneous one and thus, the same cannot be sustained and liable to be set aside.
7.
A reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondents and it was submitted by them that no doubt the petitioner was acquitted in criminal case, but in departmental enquiry, charges could be found proved against him.
Hence, no illegality or irregularity has been committed by the Disciplinary Authority in holding the petitioner guilty of the charge Nos. 2 and 3.
Thus, no interference is called for and this writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondents and gone through the entire materials available on record.
9.
Before proceeding further, legal position in respect of departmental enquiry especially when there is acquittal in criminal case has to be mentioned here.
Disciplinary Authority disagreeing with enquiry officer.
10.
It may be stated here that after receiving the enquiry report the Disciplinary Authority may find it difficult to agree with the findings in the enquiry report.
The rules generally provide that in case of such disagreement he must record his reasons and also record his own findings if the evidence already on record is sufficient for that purpose or remit the case to the enquiry authority for further enquiry and report.
In other words, while disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority is not only required to record his reasons but also record his own findings on such charges by analyzing the evidence for the purpose of coming to the conclusion as to how and in what manner the charges as against the employee can be said to have been proved by such evidence on record.
11.
It is settled position of law that the appellate authority in a disciplinary proceeding acts in a quasi judicial capacity and the order passed by it has to be a reasoned one showing application of mind to the question raised by the appellant and if that is not done the appellate order is vitiated.
12.
Applying the above principles to the present case, it appears that the Disciplinary Authority-Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (respondent No. 4) while disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge Nos. 2 and 3, has not assigned any good valid and cogent reasons and he has simply stated that he would not give any importance to the affidavit filed by the complainant Smt. Sujata.
In my considered opinion, the findings recorded by the Disciplinary Authority (respondent No. 4) on charges Nos. 2 and 3 are based on no evidence and they appear to be wholly erroneous and perverse one.
Apart from this, in absence of statement of the complainant Smt. Sujata, charge Nos. 2 and 3 as framed against the petitioner cannot be said to have been proved even in departmental enquiry and therefore, the grounds, which have been given by the Disciplinary Authority (respondent No. 4) while reversing the findings of the Enquiry Officer on charge Nos. 2 and 3, cannot be regarded as good and valid one and they appear to be whimsical and based on conjectures and surmises.
There are no material or evidence available on record to support the findings recorded by the Disciplinary Authority on charge Nos. 2 and 3.
13.
Thus, for the reasons stated above, the findings recorded by the Disciplinary Authority-Superintendent of Police (respondent No. 4) through order Annexure 9 dated 2412000 in respect of charge Nos. 2 and 3, which were confirmed in appeal by the Appellate Authority-Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner through order Annexure 11, dated 20102000 and in review by the Reviewing Authority through order Annexure 13 dated 5122001, cannot be sustained and liable to be quashed and set aside and the petitioner is entitled to be acquitted of the charge Nos. 2 and 3 as done by the Enquiry Officer through enquiry report Annexure 7.
14.
The next question for consideration is when the petitioner has been acquitted of the main charge Nos. 2 and 3 and only charge No. 1 which pertained to absence from duties, has been found proved against the petitioner, whether punishment of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect imposed upon the petitioner through order Annexure 9 dated 2412000, can be sustained or not.
On Punishment  15.
In Indian Oil Corporation Ltd v. Ashok Kumar Arora, 1997(2) SCT 52 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1030, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while considering the question as to whether the High Courts could in exercise of their powers of judicial review interfere with the punishment imposed by a disciplinary authority pointed out :-  "At the outset, it needs to be mentioned that the High Court in such cases of departmental enquiries and the findings recorded therein does not exercise the powers of appellate court/Authority.
The jurisdiction of the High Court in such cases is very limited for instance where it is found that the domestic enquiry is vitiated because of non-observance of principles of natural justice, denial of reasonable opportunity; findings are based on no evidence and or the punishment is totally disproportionate to the proved misconduct of an employee...." 16.
Imposition of punishment is within the power and discretion of the authority and Civil Courts have no jurisdiction to substitute the punishment imposed by such authority.
Vide State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh Conductor, 1996(2) SCT 609 (SC) : 1996(8) SCC 350.
17.
The punishment or penalty to be imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct.
A disproportionate penalty would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Vide Bhagat Ram v. State of HP, AIR 1983 SC 454.
18.
Although the choice and quantum of punishment is within the jurisdiction and discretion of the authorities, yet it must suit the offence and "it should not be vindictive or unduly harsh" nor "so disproportionate to the offence so as to shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias".
(See Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2386).
19.
In the present case, looking to the entire facts and circumstances of the case, since the petitioner has been acquitted of the main two charge Nos. 2 and 3, therefore, the penalty of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect cannot be sustained because it appears to be so harsh and totally disproportionate to the proved misconduct and further, it was not commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and in my considered opinion, looking to the charge No. 1 found proved against the petitioner, if the petitioner is punished with the penalty of censure, it would meet the ends of justice.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition filed by the petitioner is partly allowed in the following manner :-  (i) That the order dated 2412000 (Annexure 9) passed by the Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (respondent No. 4) to the extent of holding the petitioner guilty of the charge Nos. 2 and 3, which was affirmed in appeal through order dated 20102000 (Annexure 11) passed by the respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner and also in review petition through order dated 5122001 (Annexure 13) passed by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary, Department of Home (Appeal), Govt. of Rajasthan, Jaipur is quashed and set aside and the petitioner is acquitted of the charge Nos. 2 and 3.
(ii) That the order dated 2412000 (Annexure 9) passed by the Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (respondent No. 4) to the extent of holding the petitioner guilty of the charge No. 1, which was affirmed in appeal through order dated 20102000 (Annexure 11) passed by the respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner and also in review petition through order dated 5122001 (Annexure 13) passed by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary, Department of HOme (appeal), Govt. of Rajasthan, Jaipur is maintained.
(iii) That, however, the order dated 2412000 (Annexure 9) passed by the Superintendent of Police, BIkaner (respondent No. 4) to the extent of imposing punishment of withholding of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect against the petitioner, which was affirmed in appeal through order dated 20102000 (Annexure 11) passed by the respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner and also in review petition through order dated 5122001 (Annexure 13) passed by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary, Department of Home (Appeal), Govt. of Rajasthan, Jaipur is modified in the manner that instead of punishment of stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect, the petitioner is punished with the penalty of censure in respect of charge No. 1.
(iv) That the impugned orders Annexure 9 dated 2412000 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Bikaner (respondent No. 4), Annexure 11 20102000 passed by the respondent No. 3 Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Bikaner Range, Bikaner and Annexure 13 dated 5122001 passed by the respondent No. 2 Dy.
Secretary, department of Home (Appeal), Govt. of Rajasthan, Jaipur stand modified accordingly to the extent as indicated above.
Petition partly allowed.