SS Saron, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed by the petitioner, Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner-Corporation) for quashing the award dated 1.12.1988 Annexure P-1 passed by respondent No. 1 Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak.
The facts relating to the case are that respondent No. 2 Ramesh Singh, workman was offered appointment by the petitioner-Corporation on 13111984 as Seed Production Assistant on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 600-1100.
He accepted the offer and was appointed.
In his appointment letter, it was made clear that his appointment was purely on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement till a regular candidate from the Employment Exchange or Government was available.
Besides, the services were terminable at any time without any notice and assigning any reason.
The petitioner-Corporation on 2121986 terminated the services of respondent No. 2 workman.
It was indicated in the order of termination that as per terms and conditions of appointment the services of respondent No. 2 were terminated with immediate effect as they were no longer required by the Corporation.
This termination led to the raising of an industrial dispute and the State Government referred the matter under Section 10 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') to the Labour Court vide its order dated 29.9.1988.
The reference order was to the effect as to whether the termination of the service of Sh. Ramesh Singh was justified and in order and if not, to what relief was he entitled.
2.
The learned Labour Court, after granting opportunity to the workman and the management to lead their respective evidence vide award dated 1121986 set aside the impugned termination/non-renewal of contract and ordered reinstatement of the workman along with continuity of service and backwages as well as other resultant benefits.
Aggrieved against the same, the petitioner- Corporation has filed the present writ petition.
It has been primarily averred that the case of the workman falls within the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act, according to which termination of the services of a workman as a result of the non-renal of contract of employment on its expiry does not amount to retrenchment and, therefore, Section 25-F of the Act is not attracted.
Besides, the services of respondent No. 2 workman were dispensed with an account of non-renewal of the contract and that therefore the learned Labour Court erred in passing the impugned award Annexure P1.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the respondent and with his assistance have also gone through the records of the case.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 2 workman contends that the provisions of Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act are inapplicable inasmuch as there was no fixed period of contract for which the respondent-workman had been appointed.
Rather the appointment order was on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement till a regular candidate from Employment Exchange or the Government was available.
In order to appreciate the contention as stated in the writ petition of the petitioner-Corporation, the provision of Section 2 (oo) (bb) of the Act may be noticed which read as under :  2.
"Definitions - In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context -  (oo) "Retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) x x x (b) x x x  (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) x x x " 4.
Section 2(oo) (bb) defines retrenchment to mean the termination by the employer of the services of the workman for any reason whatsoever otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action.
However, it does not include the termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein.
5.
As already noticed the appointment order in respect of the workman is not on contract basis by the employer.
It is rather a stop-gap arrangement till a regular candidate from Employment Exchange or Government was available.
It is not the case of the petitioner-Corporation in its writ petition that the services of the respondent No. 2 workman had been terminated as a regular candidate from the Employment Exchange or the Government had become available.
In these circumstances the possibility of the services of the respondent- workman being terminated in colourable exercise of power or misuse of power by the Corporation cannot be ruled out.
Therefore, in the above circumstances the fact that a regular candidate from the employment Exchange or the government had not become available and there is nothing on record to show or even pleaded by the petitioner-corporation as to why the services of the workman were being dispensed with, there is a reasonable possibility that the order was passed in colourable exercise of power or misuse of power.
The letter of appointment also records that the services of the workman are terminable at any time without any notice and assigning any reason.
However, there is no fixed term in the letter of appointment.
In the case of Executive Engineer CPWD, Indore v. Madhukar Purshottam Kolharkar and another, (2002) 9 Supreme Court Cases 622 the workman therein was engaged on daily wages on purely temporary basis.
In his appointment order it was mentioned that his service could be terminated at any time without giving notice to him.
On termination of his services, it was contended that the same did not amount to retrenchment.
It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as follows :-  "On the question whether the termination of services of the respondent would attract the proviso (sic.)
to Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the High Court had correctly noticed that the same is not applicable to the facts of this case in the absence of fixed term in the order of appointment."
6.
The ratio of the above said judgment is applicable to the facts of the case in hand inasmuch as there is no fixed term of appointment of the respondent- workman in his appointment letter.
Even if the appointment is to be taken for a fixed term till the appointment of regular candidate, apart from the fact that no regular candidate was available I have already held that the possibility of colourable exercise of power or misuse of power by the Corporation cannot be ruled out.
Therefore, the case set up by the petitioner-Corporation in its writ petition that the termination of workman does not amount to retrenchment as the services of the respondent-workman had been terminated as a result of non-renewal of the contract of employment, is without any basis and is not supported from the material on record.
7.
It is not in dispute that the respondent-workman was in "continuous service" of the petitioner-Corporation as defined in Section 25-B of the Act inasmuch as he had actually worked under the employer for 240 days during a period of twelve months preceding the date of his termination, which is the relevant date from which the calculation of actually working is to be made.
The respondent-workman had been in continuous service from the date of his appointment i.e. from 13111984 upto the date of his termination from service on 2121986.
Besides, the workman was admittedly not paid any retrenchment compensation as enjoined by Section 25-F of the Act which in no uncertain terms provides that no workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until he has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of notice.
Besides the workman is to be paid at the time of retrenchment compensation which is equivalent to 15 days average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months.
Therefore the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act having not been complied with, the order of termination of the workman is not sustainable.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 2 workman has stated that the workman is continuing in the service of the Corporation after the passing of the award.
Therefore, there being apparent violation on the part of the petitioner-Corporation to comply with the provisions of the Act before terminating his services, I find that there is no error of jurisdiction in the impugned award.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.