SS Saron, J - The present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed for the grant of disability pension being attributable to Military Service under Para 164-A of the Defence Service Regulation read with Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulation of the Army 1961 Part-I.
The facts leading to the filing of the petition are that the petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Medical Corps of the Army on 23.4.1941.
He served the army upto 461947 when he was invalidated out of service on account of disability suffered by him which was assessed at 30% by the Medical Board held at Pune on 8.2.1947.
During the period of service, the petitioner was in active service for three years ie from 23.9.1941 to 1791944 at Iraq which was known as Pai-Force i.e. desert area and an extremely hot climate.
Besides for a period of 4-1/2 months ie from 531945 to 19.7.1945, he was at Burma, a Hot Harmed Climate.
It is submitted that during his service in the adverse terrain and adverse conditions, eyes of the petitioner were affected and he suffered loss of eye sight.
On examination by the Medical Board, he was placed in Medical Category of `CEE', with disability assessed at 30%.
Inspite of the disability he was considered fit to continue in service but was released from service on 2011947.
On 461949, the character of the petitioner was assessed as `Good', as stated in his discharge certificate.
The petitioner could not complete service for earning pension nor he was granted disability pension as the authorities took the decision that the disability was not attributable to military service conditions.
The petitioner appealed against this decision on 2521949 to the Appeal Tribunal but of no avail.
The petitioner made a representation dated 4111989 (Annexure P-1).
After reminders the Army medical Corps sent a reply on 6121990 (Annexure P-2) rejecting the claim of the petitioner for disability pension.
He made another representation on 1211991 (Annexure P-3), to which a final reply rejecting the petition was given by the Headquarters Central Command Lucknow on 2341991 (Annexure P-4).
The petitioner has filed the present petition for the grant of disability pension, as referred to above.
2.
Notice in the case was issued and case was admitted on 3.11.1992.
Written statement has been filed by the respondent, in which preliminary objection has been taken that the petitioner was released on 2011947 and the writ petition having been filed after more than 45 years, is required to be dismissed on that ground alone.
Besides, it is contended that the petitioner had not approached this Court with clean hands and in view of Defence Service Regulations 592 and 595, the pension documents are retained only for 25 years and thereafter the same were to be destroyed.
The petitioner knew that the documents in the present case had been destroyed much earlier and he had approached this Court in 1992.
Thus he was not entitled to equitable relief in the exercise of extraordinary writ jurisdiction by this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
Besides, it is also contended that at that time of release of the petitioner from service the disability pension was not a condition of service and he was not entitled to any such pension.
On merits, it is accepted that as per records available the petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 9.8.1941 and was released from service on 2011947.
Facts regarding assessment of disability of 30% by Medical Board cannot be verified due to non-availability of medical documents.
The other material aspects have also been denied due to non-availability of medical documents.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and considered their respective contentions.
Shri Kamal Sehgal, appearing for the respondent has raised preliminary objection of delay and laches in filing writ petition.
He has contended that the petitioner is not entitled to any equitable relief in view of the gross delay of 45 years in approaching this Court.
Therefore, the petitioner is liable to be non-suited on this ground.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner however, contends that the delay attributed to the petitioner is not liable to work to his disadvantage as disability pension is a continuing recurring right and with the expiry of each month, a fresh cause of action accrues for the grant of disability pension.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the case titled Sardara Singh v. Union of India, 1992(6) Services Law Reporter 683 (DB) (P&H) and Bhag Singh v. Union of India and others, 1996(4) Recent Services Judgments 55 (DB) (Himachal Pradesh).
In Sardara Singh's case (supra), the writ petition for claiming disability pension was filed after 40 years.
The petitioner had been regularly representing the authorities and the claim was rejected by the authorities on the ground that disability was not attributable to military service.
It was held that admittedly the petitioner suffered disability during service career and that the delay in approaching the Court could not defeat the claim of disability pension.
Accordingly, direction was issued to commute the disability pension and pay the same.
However, interest was declined in view of the delay in approaching the Court.
In Bhag Singh's case (supra), the Hon'ble Himachal Pradesh High Court on the point of laches held that the petitioner hailed from rural area of the hilly state and that at the time of making petition he was completely paralysed besides he was un-married and there was nobody to care for him.
It was held that the delay in itself, if any, in a way, does not prejudice interest of the employer and that the sole ground that the poor soldier had not in a way claimed pension for sometime does not mean that the right he enjoyed or still enjoys to have disability had been extinguished.
Such a right was held to survive and the plea of delay or laches in preferring the petition in the aforesaid background was found to be unacceptable.
The grant of disability pension is not a bounty to be granted at the sweet will of the employer.
It is an earned right of the employee.
Specially when pension is payable each month, it is a recurring right and can be enforced against the employer.
Therefore, in the circumstances in case the petitioner is indeed held to be entitled to the grant of pension the delay in claiming the same is not to work to his disadvantage.
The petition, therefore, cannot be dismissed on the sole ground of laches keeping in view the ratio of the afore-referred to judgments.
4.
It is, however, to be seen whether petitioner is indeed entitled to the grant of disability pension.
The petitioner has placed reliance on the provisions of Para 16-A of the Defence Service Regulation read with Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulation of the Army 1961 Part I.
Besides, he has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case titled Darshan Singh v. Union of India, 1986(3) Services Law Reporter 451 (P&H), which was also a case of loss of eye sight.
The learned counsel for the respondent has referred to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Sardar Ram Singh v. Union of India, CWP No. 14096 of 1995, decided on 1531996 and also the case of Lt. Col. Balwant Singh v. Union of India, 2002(1) SCT 914 (P&H) : 2001(4) Services Law Reporter 780, to contend that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of disability pension.
5.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties.
In Darshan Singh's case (supra), the petitioner therein was held entitled for the grant of disability pension.
It was contended by the petitioner of the said case that at the time of recruitment he was found medically fit in all respects.
However, after undergoing recruitment training, he was assigned hard and strenuous duties and was made to work even beyond normal hours of work and as a result thereof, pain developed in his eyes.
It was also contended that he was given treatment in the Military Hospital but the pain subsisted and his eye sight deteriorated as the Army authorities neglected to provide him glasses.
He stated that his disability was assessed at 40% for the purpose of pension.
No written statement had been filed in the said case, despite several opportunities.
As such averments in the petition to the effect that the disability was attributable to army service had remained uncontested.
Accordingly, in terms of Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961 Part-I, petitioner in the said case was held entitled to the grant of disability pension.
6.
In the case in hand, the petitioner has not placed any material on record to show that he had 30% disability at the time of his discharge from the Army and that the said disability was suffered on account of military service rendered by him.
There is merely a bald assertion on his behalf that he was discharged from Army due to disability suffered during Army service with disability assessed at 30% by the Medical Board held at Pune on 8.2.1947.
There is no document or material on record to support this assertion of the petitioner.
The respondent in its reply has stated that the fact regarding assessment of disability being 30% by Medical Board cannot be verified due to non-availability of medical documents relating to the same.
The petitioner has placed on record, representation dated 4.11.1981 (Annexure P-1) which is an application for the grant of disability pension and appears to have been filed in response to some advertisement or requisition in the `Sainik Samachar' date 6.3.1988.
In column 12 relating to the specific nature of the complaint, he claims for the grant of disability pension as he was boarded out of service on medical grounds with permanent category `CEE'-C disability 30%.
Besides, the petitioner has placed on record a letter dated 6121990 (Annexure P-2) written by the respondent authorities to the petitioner in reference to his another petition dated 25.11.1990.
It is stated therein that his request at this belated stage for arranging a Re-Survey Medical Board, could not be acceded to for the following reasons :-  "(a) There is no provision to bring individuals, who have never been granted disability pension attributable to/aggravated by Military Service, before Re- Survey Medical Board.
You were/are neither a pensioner nor your disability has ever been accepted as attributable to/aggravated by Military Service.
(b) Your Service/Medical documents are not available in this office being time expired (more than 43 years old) as already intimated to you vide our letter dated 29 Oct, 1990.
3.
It is also added for your information that degree/percentage of disability is not the sole criteria for grant of disability pension.
4.
In view of the above, it is regretted, that further correspondence on the subject will not serve any useful purpose."
7.
Apart from this, petitioner has placed on record another application dated 1211991 (Annexure P-3) which is again an application for the grant of disability pension under relaxed conditions, in which he has reiterated that his eyes were affected due to his service in different countries abroad/field service areas during World War II.
Lastly, the petitioner has placed on record a letter dated 2341991 (Annexure P-4), which is in response to a letter of the petitioner dated 2831991, the respondent authorities have stated that in this connection reference may be made to the Army Medical Corps records letter dated 6121990 i.e. the letter Annexure P-2.
Apart from the above said material, there is nothing else on the record and these documents do not substantiate the claim of the petitioner that he was indeed found to be having 30% disability when he was discharged from the service.
The records maintained by him are in a haphazard manner.
In the case of Sardar Ram Singh (supra), it was found from the perusal of the file that the petitioner was not medically boarded out and his case was sent to the Pension Establishment on completion of his tenure/service limits and that he was not discharged from service on medical grounds.
It was held that some of the representations made by the petitioner of the said case were of no avail as there was no statutory Rule where a representation could be made by the petitioner therein against the rejection of the disability pension which on appeal had been confirmed.
The writ petition was accordingly dismissed.
In the case of Lt. Col. Balwant Singh (retd.
), the Medical Board gave a finding that invalidating disease was neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
The petitioner did not challenge the findings of the Medical Board.
Consequently, the writ petition was dismissed.
8.
The case of the petitioner though may be a hard one.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case and there being no record available even with the authorities due to lapse of time and even the petitioner being unable to produce any material on record to substantiate his claim that he was discharged from Army on account of disability suffered by him during Army service and neither he being able to place any document on record that the disability was assessed at 30% by the Medical Board at Pune on 8.2.1947, the petitioner is not entitled to grant of disability pension.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.