GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against order dated 712002 (Annexure P.9) vide which the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (for short, `the Tribunal') allowed the original application filed by respondent No. 2-Gurbin Singh and quashed the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect imposed on him.
2.
For deciding the issues raised in the writ petition, we may briefly notice the facts.
Respondent No. 2 joined the service of Union Territory, Chandigarh as Constable on 3041976.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 121985 and as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on 6121993.
In September, 1994, he was posted as Night Duty Officer at Police Station, North.
On the night intervening 19th and 20th September, 1994, he was checked at 11.25 P.M. by Duty Officer-Shri SC Sagar, Deputy Superintendent of Police (Central) who found him smelling alcohol.
He was then taken to Sector 16 General Hospital, Chandigarh for medical examination.
There the doctor also found him smelling alcohol.
The samples of his blood and urine were sent to Chemical Examiner of Government of Punjab, Patiala who submitted report dated 11111994 (Annexure P.2) with the following finding:  "Alcohol was detected in the contents of exhibit No.
I and No. II.
Blood alcohol concentration was estimated as 86.25 mg. per 100 ml.
of blood."
In the meanwhile, Senior Superintendent of Police, Union Territory, Chandigarh (petitioner No. 4) ordered a disciplinary enquiry against respondent No. 2 under Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, as applicable to Union Territory, Chandigarh and appointed Shri SC Sagar, Deputy Superintendent of Police (Central) as Enquiry Officer.
Later on, Shri Ashok Bector, Deputy Superintendent of Police (Traffic), Chandigarh was asked to conduct the enquiry.
He charged respondent No. 2 with the following allegation :  "It is alleged against you, ASI Gurbin Singh No. 434/CHG, that while you were performing duty as duty officer in PS/North from 8 PM to 8 AM on 19994 were detected at 1125 PM smelling of alcohol by Sh. SC Sagar, DSP/Central.
You were got medically examined from General Hospital Sector 16, Chandigarh.
She Puran Singh, Duty Medical Officer at General Hospital, Sector 16 medically examined you and opined that "Smelling of Alcohol is present".
Your samples of Blood and Urine were also taken for chemical examination.
The consuming of liquor and performing an important govt. duty in the Police Station after consuming alcohol, tantamounts to serious lapse, misconduct and unbecoming of a good police officer.
Hence, the departmental proceedings as ordered by SSP vide No. 27566/UT/(E-1) dated 20.10.94, will be constituted against you by me."
(Underlining is ours).
3.
After conducting detailed enquiry in which respondent No. 2 was given full opportunity of defence, the Enquiry Officer submitted report dated 8121994 with the finding that charge of performing duty after consuming alcohol has been proved against the delinquent (respondent No. 2 herein).
Petitioner No. 4 accepted the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer and issued show cause notice dated 12.1.1995 to respondent No. 2 proposing forfeiture of his two years service.
In his reply (Annexure P.6 dated 2611995), respondent No. 2 controverted the finding of the Enquiry Officer by asserting that he had not consumed alcohol but had taken medicine because he was ill. After considering his reply, petitioner No. 4 passed order dated 1561995 vide which he forfeited one increments of respondent No. 2 with permanent effect.
Appeal filed by him was dismissed by Inspector General of Police, Union Territory, Chandigarh vide order dated 6121995.
His revision was also dismissed by Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration.
Chandigarh vide order dated 2461996.
4.
Respondent No. 2 challenged the order of punishment as well as the appellate and revisional orders before the Tribunal mainly on the grounds that copy of the enquiry report had not been supplied to him before issuance of show cause notice, the charge levelled against him was totally unfounded and the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer was not based on any tangible evidence.
5.
The petitioners contested the application filed by respondent No. 2 by asserting that the punishment imposed on respondent No. 2 was legally correct and justified.
6.
The Tribunal allowed the application of respondent No. 2 and quashed the order of punishment.
It held that non-supply of copy of enquiry report before issuance of show cause notice amounted to violation of the rules of natural justice and that mere smelling of alcohol did not constitute misconduct warranting imposition of penalty.
7.
We have heard Mrs. Lisa Gill, counsel for the petitioners and Shri RK Sharma, counsel for respondent No. 2 and have carefully gone through the records.
In our opinion, the impugned order is liable to be set aside because the reasons assigned by the Tribunal for invalidating the punishment imposed by petitioner No. 4 are legally unsustainable.
8.
In Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : JT 1990(4) SC 456 and Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 1, their Lordships of the Supreme Court interpreted Article 311(2) (as amended by 42nd amendment) and held that before issuing show cause notice, the punishing authority is obliged to supply copy of enquiry report to the delinquent so as to enable him to make representation against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and that non-compliance of this requirement will amount to violation of the rules of natural justice.
However, in B Karunakar's case (supra), the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court further held that failure of the disciplinary authority to furnish copy of enquiry report will by itself be not sufficient to nullify the punishment and the Court will have to examine whether violation of this facet of natural justice has caused prejudice to the delinquent.
This is clearly borne out from the following of the 7 propositions laid down by the Court :  "(ii) In the matter of all punishments both Government servants and others are governed by their service rules.
Whenever, therefore, the service rules contemplate an inquiry before a punishment is awarded, and when the Inquiry Officer is not the disciplinary authority the delinquent employee will have the right to receive the Inquiry Officer's report notwithstanding the nature of the punishment.
.... .... .... (iv) In the view that we have taken, viz., that the right to make representation to the disciplinary authority against the findings recorded in the inquiry report, is an integral part of the opportunity of defence against the charges and is a breach of principles of natural justice to deny the said right, it is only appropriate that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) should apply to employees in all establishments whether Government or non-Government, public or private.
This will be the case whether there are rules governing the disciplinary proceeding or not and whether they expressly prohibit the furnishing of the copy of the report or are silent on the subject.
Whatever the nature of punishment, further whenever the rules require an inquiry to be held, for inflicting the punishment in question, the delinquent employee should have the benefit of the report of the Inquiry Officer before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charges levelled against him.
Hence, question (iv) is answered accordingly.
(v) The next question to be answered is what is the effect on the order of punishment when the report of the Inquiry Officer is not furnished to the employee and what relief should be granted to him in such cases.
The answer to this question has to be relative to the punishment awarded.
When the employee is dismissed or removed from service and the inquiry is set aside because the report is not furnished to him, in some cases the non-furnishing of the report may have prejudiced him gravely while in other cases it may have made no difference to the ultimate punishment awarded to him.
Hence, to direct reinstatement of the employee with back wages in all cases is to reduce the rules of justice to a mechanical ritual.
The theory of reasonable opportunity and the principles of natural justice have been evolved to uphold the rule of law and to assist the individual to vindicate his just rights.
They are not incantations to be invoked nor rites to be performed on all and sundry occasions.
Whether in fact, prejudice has been caused to the employee or not on account of the denial to him of the report, has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case.
Where, therefore, even after the furnishing of the report, no different consequence would have followed, it would be a perversion of justice to permit the employee to resume duty and to get all the consequential benefits.
It amounts to rewarding the dishonest and the guilty and thus to stretching the concept of justice to illogical and exasperating limits.
It amounts to an unnatural expansion of natural justice which in itself is antithetical to justice."
(Underlining is ours).
In Krishan Lal v. State of J&K, (1994) 4 SCC 422; SK Singh v. Central Bank of India and others, (1996) 6 SCC 415; and State of UP v. Harendra Arora and another, 2001(2) SCT 109 (SC) : (2001) 6 SCC 392, the Supreme Court laid emphasis on the prejudice aspect and held that the High Court and the Tribunal cannot nullify the punishment unless the petitioner-applicant showas that he had been prejudiced due to non-supply of copy of enquiry report before issuance of show cause notice.
9.
In the present case, the Tribunal has taken note of one of the several propositions laid down in B Karunakar's case (supra), but over-looked the all important issue whether non-supply of copy of enquiry report before issuance of show cause notice caused any real prejudice to respondent No. 2 in submitting reply to the show cause notice.
The Tribunal also failed to notice that copy of the enquiry report had, in fact, been sent to respondent No. 2 along with show cause notice and in his reply, respondent No. 2 had neither made any grievance on this score nor pleaded prejudice on account of non-supply of copy of enquiry report before hand.
Therefore, we are inclined to agree with learned counsel for the petitioners that the impugned order is vitiated by an error of law.
10.
We are further of the view that the finding recorded by the Tribunal on the merits of the allegation levelled against respondent No. 2 is based on a misreading of the charge which constituted the foundation of enquiry and as such, the same is liable to be set aside.
A reading of the summary of allegations levelled against respondent No. 2 showas that his act of performing duty after consuming liquor was treated as a serious misconduct and unbecoming of a good police officer.
This was amply supported by the report of the Chemical Examiner who found alcohol in the blood sample of respondent No. 2.
The oral testimony of the departmental witnesses also proved that respondent No. 2 was performing duty after consuming alcohol.
The Enquiry officer analysed the evidence produced before him and held respondent No. 2 guilty of the charge.
His finding was confirmed and approved by the punishing authority, the appellate authority and the revisional authority.
In State of Punjab v. Ram Singh, 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2188, the Supreme Court considered the question whether consumption of liquor by the employee while on duty amounts to misconduct and held as under :  "Thus it could be seen that the word misconduct though not capable of precise definition, its reflection receive its connotation from the context, the delinquency in its performance and its effect on the discipline and the nature of the duty.
It may involve moral turpitude, it must be improper or wrong behaviour, unlawful behaviour, wilful in character, forbidden act, a transgression of established and definite rule of action or code of conduct but not mere error of judgment, carelessness or negligence in performance of the duty, the act complained of bears forbidden quality or character.
Its ambit has to be construed with reference to the subject matter and the context wherein the term occurs, regard being had to the scope of the statute and the public purpose it seeks to serve.
The police service is a disciplined service and it requires to maintain strict discipline.
Laxity in this behalf erodes discipline in the service causing serious effect in the maintenance of law and order.
The next question is whether the single act of heavy drinking of alcohol by the respondent while on duty is a gravest misconduct.
We have absolutely no doubt that the respondent, being a gunman having service revolver in his possession, it is obvious that he was on duty; while on duty he drank alcohol heavily and became uncontrollable.
Taking to drink by itself may not be a misconduct.
Out of office hours one may take to drink and remain in the house.
But being on duty, the disciplined service like police service, the personnel shall maintain discipline and shall not resort to drink or be in a drunken state while on duty.
The fact is that the respondent after having had heavy drink, was seen roaming or wandering in the market with service revolver.
When he was sent to the doctor for medical examination, he abused the medical officer on duty which showas his depravity or delinquency due to his drinking habit.
Thus it would constitute gravest misconduct warranting dismissal from service.
The authorities, therefore, were justified in imposing the penalty of dismissal.
The Court below failed to properly appreciate the legal incidence and the effect of the rules."
(Emphasis added).
11.
Unfortunately, the Tribunal over-looked the concurrent findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, the disciplinary, appellate and revisional authorities that respondent No. 2 was found performing duties after consuming alcohol and interfered with the punishment by misreading the charge levelled against him.
In this process, the Tribunal also over-looked the true ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ram Singh's case (supra).
12.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the order of the Tribunal is vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of the record and is liable to be set aside.
Ordered accordingly.
13.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Order dated 712002 is declared illegal and quashed and the Original Application filed by respondent No. 2 is dismissed.
Petition allowed.