Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner raises a challenge to the admission of respondents No. 4 to 6 to the course of Bachelor of Dental Surgery (For short BDS) in Guru Ram Dass Institute of Dental Sciences and Research, Amritsar, on the sole ground that the authorities varied the terms and conditions of the brochure subsequent to the date of examination and as such it offends the principles enunciated by the Full Bench of this Court in the cases of Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and other, 1997(4) RSJ 512 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) (FB) and Raj Singh v. Maharshi Dayanand University, 1994(4) RSJ 289 : 1994(2) SCT 766 (P&H)(FB).
2.
The petitioner cleared her matriculation examination by securing 896% marks conducted by the CBSE and passed her 10+2 (Medical) examination by securing 70% marks.
According to the petitioner respondent No. 3 is a Sikh institution and 50% seats are reserved exclusively for Sikh students.
As per the terms and conditions of the brochure, out of the prescribed seats certain percentage of seats was reserved for sufferers of Dharam Yudh Morcha/Punjabi Suba Morcha.
Clause 1110 of the brochure deal with the eligibility of this reservation.
The said clause reads as under :-  "1110.
In case of candidates claiming benefits under the "Dharam Yudh Morcha/Emergency/Punjabi Suba Morcha sufferer category" an affidavit from the parents/guardian of the candidate that the grandparent of the candidate has been a sufferer of Dharum Yudh Morcha/Emergency/Punjabi Suba Morcha and also a certificate to that effect from the President/Secretary, Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, should be submitted along with the application.
However, candidates from States other than Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and UT of Chandigarh may send the certificate within seven days of declaration of the result.
The required affidavit must, however, be sent along with the application."
3.
The petitioner along with the other candidates qualified in the entrance test and was ranked 356.
The counseling for allocation of the said seats was held on 2882001.
In the counseling a criteria was adopted by the respondents after due consideration that the sufferers/eligible candidates under the category would be considered who remained in imprisonment/jail for a period of 30 days.
4.
Though the petitioner was higher in merit but was excluded on the basis of this criteria and out of 28 eligible candidates, 11 candidates were granted admission to the BDS course under this category.
5.
Upon notice, the respondents filed different written statement but stand of all the respondents was common.
The stand taken by the University as well as the other candidates has been explained in paragraph No. 4 of the reply, which reads as under :-  "That it would be pertinent to mention here that in order to categorise the various candidates under the Dharam Yudh Morcha/Punjabi Suba Morcha/Emergency Sufferers category, a Committee was framed by the President, Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee (SGPC) and a meeting was held on 2982001 in the Institute, where all the 28 Candidates falling under this Category were called.
In the said meeting, all the 28 candidates were either present or represented by their Wards and it was unanimously decided that in order to claim benefit under the Dharam Yudh Morcha category, a minimum period of one month in imprisonment was required.
Any person having less than 30 days of imprisonment in jail in Dharam Yudh Morcha, would not be considered in this category.
This was read out and explained to all the 28 candidates and their presence was marked in the Register.
Further a list of 11 candidates who qualified as per these conditions was prepared and they were selected in accordance with the merit.
In this regard, the original record of the proceedings of this meeting will be shown to the Court at the time of hearing."
6.
We had also called for the original records.
The attendance register retained by the Institute showing attendance of the candidates/their parents/guardians on 2882001, as well as merit list was produced before the Court.
As is clear from the above noticed facts, the dispute before this court is very limited in its nature and scope.
The petitioner is admittedly higher in merit.
But was excluded on the basis of minimum prescribed/declared criteria.
The contention is that the declaration made on 2882001 materially changes the terms and conditions of the brochure subsequent to the date of examination, which is impermissible and as such the admission of respondents No. 3 and 4 should be set aside who are lower in merit, but fulfill the criteria adopted by the respondents and made uniformlly applicable to all the persons.
7.
Certainly under Clause 1110 of the brochure afore-referred, no minimum criteria had been provided.
The period of 30 days detention has been subsequently added by the respondents on or before the date of counseling i.e 2882001.
The addition made by the respondents, in our view, neither alters nor changes the basic class of reservation under the brochure.
The reservation still relates to the same class i.e. sufferers of Dharam Yudh Morcha.
The criteria has been added in order to specify which will be the persons who would fall under this particular category.
What has been added is a mere explanation of the clarification of the existing clause and nowhere alters or destroys the basic terms and conditions of the brochure.
It is nowhere in contradiction to the brochure.
The criteria adopted after due declaration in the counselling is reasonable and has a definite nexus to the object sought to be achieved by providing such an reservation.
The declaration of 2882001 is merely elucidated and is in furtherance to the existing clause of the brochure.
The term "sufferers of Dharam Yudh Morcha" was uncertain and indefinite in its terms and as such the authorities concerned, thus, made an attempt to provide definite criteria with intention to remove ambiguity or use of unlimited discretion in the process of granting of seats.
In this regard reference can be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajiv Kapoor and others v. State of Haryana and others, JT 2000(3) SC 635 : 2000(2) SCT 514 (SC), where the Court held as under :-  "We are unable to appreciate this reasoning.
The Government orders dated 21597 did not introduce, for the first time, either the constitution of a Selection Committee or evolving the system of interview for adjudging the merits of the candidates in accordance with the laid down criteria.
It merely modified the pattern for allotment of marks under various heads from the total marks.
Therefore, even if the modified criteria envisaged under the orders dated 21597 is to be eschewed from consideration, the earlier orders and the criteria laid down therein and the manner of assessment of merit by the Selection Committee after interview, were still required to be complied with and they could not have been given a complete go-bye, as has been done by the High Court."
8.
The respondents have produced before us the attendance register which contains the signatures of the father of the petitioner showing that her name was at Serial No. 15 and her father signed the attendance register and participated without prejudice what was declared by the authorities in regard to introduction and implementation of the minimum prescribed criteria of 30 days detention for allotment of seats.
The petitioner has actually participated without prejudice in furtherance to the declaration made by the respondents before counselling.
Thus, she cannot take advantage and challenge the same method of allotment of seats at this stage now.
9.
We may also note that admission of 11 candidates has been made in this category and the petitioner has only impleaded two of the respondents.
If the court has to set aside the admission at this stage now all selected candidates would obviously be a necessary party to the present petition.
Further more, the admissions have been granted and course has already commenced.
Thus, we do not find it just and equitable to disturb the admissions at this stage.
We may also further notice that following the minimum prescribed criteria, admittedly the admissions have been made on merits.
As such the action of the respondents does not call for any interference by this Court.
For the reasons aforestated, we do not find any merit in this petition and the same is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.