OP Sharma, J. (Oral) - The case of the petitioners is that they have been appointed as Medical Assistants on stop-gap basis by the Chief Medical Officer, Poonch against the clear vacancies and as such are entitled to regularisation.
Besides seeking regularisation, they have also challenged the selection of respondents No. 6 to 10 on the ground that interview was an eyewash to accommodate their favourites.
2.
A perusal of the photostat copies of the appointment orders issued in favour of the petitioners indicates that they were appointed between 1992 and 1994 as Medical Assistants on stop-gap basis each time for a period of 30 days.
One of the petitioners namely, Shabir Hussain was appointed for 30 days even in leave vacancy as per order dated 1491992, but only for 30 days.
Similarly, petitioner Javed Iqbal was also appointed on leave chance, but again for 30 days only.
It appears the Chief Medical Officer was aware of the fact that he was not competent to make such appointments because under rule-14 of the J&K Civil Services (Classification), Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, such appointments could be made only in accordance with rule-14 after obtaining the approval of Chief Minister in coordination which is possible only if the requirements of said rule are satisfied.
The orders indicate that Chief Medical Officer had not even informed the Director, Health Services for making such appointments muchless his approval.
These appointments are thus void ab-initio creating no right in the petitioners.
So the appointments of petitioners were not covered under any rules and, therefore, the question for regularisation does not arise.
3.
However, it is the admitted case of the petitioners that respondents No. 6 to 10 have been selected by the Service Selection Board constituted under the J&K Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1992 issued vide notification SRO 194 dated 18.8.1992, the body constituted for making such selections.
It is admitted that the post of Medical Assistant carrying pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 was to be filled only after the selection is made in accordance with SRO 194/92.
Respondents No. 6 to 10 have admittedly been selected by the Service Selection Board.
It is admitted by the petitioners that they also appeared in the interview but were not selected.
Having appeared in the interview they are estopped from challenging selection in view of the law laid down in case Madan Lal v. State of J&K, AIR 1995 SC 1088 : 1995(2) S.C.T.
880 holding that :-  "In the case of Om Parkash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla, AIR 1986 SC 1943 it has been clearly laid down by a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court that when the petitioner appeared at the examination without protest and when he found that he would not succeed in examination he filed a petition challenging the said examination the High Court should not have granted any relief to such a petitioner.
9.
Therefore, the result of the interview test on merits cannot be successfully challenged by a candidate who takes a chance to get selected at the said interview and who ultimately finds himself to be unsuccessful.
It is also to be kept in view of that in this petition we cannot sit as a Court of appeal and try to assess the relative merit of the concerned candidates who had been assessed at the oral interview nor can be petitioners successfully urge before us that they have given less marks though their performance was better........" So the petitioners cannot challenge the selection of respondents No. 6 to 10.
4.
This apart, the petitioners have not challenged the selection of respondents No. 6 to 10 on any ground whatsoever.
They have only stated that interview was an eye wash.
But neither they have impleaded Service Selection Board as party nor the members of Interview Committee in the absence of which selection of respondents No. 6 to 10 cannot be challenged.
5.
Mr. Hussain next argued that in SSWP No. 210/93 decided on 531993 learned Single Judge of this Court has directed the respondents to treat the writ petition as representation and decide the same according to the rules applicable for regularisation.
However, this is not a decision of the case on merit and as such not relevant.
Since the petitioners have not impleaded Service Selection Board or the members of Service Selection Board, they cannot challenge the selection of respondents No. 6 to 10.
Moreover, the petitioners have not challenged the selection of private respondents on any ground whatsoever in the absence of which they have right to be appointed on being selected by the competent authority.
There is no rule muchless statutory rule in terms of which such appointments made illegally by incompetent authority can be regularised.
The appellants on stop-gap basis cannot be regularised without offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as held in J&K Public Service Commission v. Narinder Mohan, AIR 1994 SC 1808 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
626 wherein it has been laid down that even where rules have not been framed the executive instructions should be in accord with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Their Lordships while depreciating the tendency to offending Articles 14 and 16 held that :  "The rules or instructions should be in compliance with the requirements of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The procedure prescribed shall be just, fair and reasonable.
Opportunity shall be given to eligible persons by inviting applications through the public notification and recruitment should be according to the valid procedure and appointment should be of the qualified persons found fit for appointments to a post or an office under the State."
Their Lordships further held :-  "A little leeway to make ad hoc appointment due to emergent exigencies, does not clothe the executive Govt. with power to relax the recruitment or to regularise such appointment in order to claim such appointments to be regular or in accordance with rules.
Back-door ad hoc appointments at the behest of power source or otherwise and recruitment according to rules are mutually antagonistic and strange bed partners.
They cannot co-exist in the same sheath.
The former is in negation of fair play.
The latter are the product of order and regularity......." So the argument that petitioners should be regularised is against law laid down by the apex Court and cannot be countenanced in view of the observations made in SWP No. 210 of 1993.
6.
Mr. Hussain next relied on the decision of the apex Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh seeking regularisation.
But the ratio of the judgment has been explained in Narinder Mohan's case, AIR 1994 SC 1808 held that :-  "...In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(4) SCC 118 at 152 : 1992 AIR SCW 2315, this Court noted that the normal rule is recruitment through the prescribed agency but due to administrative exigencies, an ad hoc or temporary appointment may be made.
In such a situation, this Court held that efforts should always be made to replace such ad hoc or temporary employees by regularly selected employees, as early as possible.
The temporary employees also would get liberty to compete alongwith others for regular selection, but if he is not selected, he must give way to the regularly selected candidates.
Appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc or temporary employee.
Ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee.
He must be replaced only by regularly selected employee.
The ad hoc appointment should not be a device to circumvent the rule of reservation.
If a temporary or ad hoc employee continues for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State.
It is to be remembered that in that case, the appointments are only to Class-III or Class-IV posts and the selection made was by subordinate selection committee.
Therefore, this Court did not appear to have intended to lay down as a general rule that in every category of ad hoc appointment, if the ad hoc appointee continued for long period, the rules of recruitment should be relaxed and the appointment by regularisation be made....." This is the last word on the subject and, therefore, observations in Piara Singh's case as explained above cannot be construed to mean that ad hoc appointments (appointees ?)
cannot be replaced by regularly appointed persons.
Since respondents No. 6 to 10 have been selected by Recruitment Board duly constituted for making such selection, the petitioners are not entitled to challenge their selection except on the ground of bias or mala fide which has not been pleaded.
There is thus no substance in this petition which is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.