GS Singhvi, J - Whether the Vice Chancellor, Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak (hereinafter described as `the University') could institute an enquiry against the management of MLR Saraswati College of Education, Charkhi Dadri on the charge of mis-utilisation of college funds is the main issue which arises for adjudication in this petition.
An ancillary issue which calls for determination by the court is whether the Enquiry Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor can proceed in the matter without supplying copies of the documents which constitute basis of the allegation of mis-utilisation of college fund ?
2.
The facts necessary for deciding this case are that the services of Dr. Mrs. SK Hooda, who worked as Principal of MLR Saraswati College of Education (hereinafter referred to as `the College') till 1997, were terminated on 4121997 and the charge of the post held by her was given to Shri JP Gupta.
This action of the management was reversed by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana (respondent No. 2) who accepted the appeal filed by Dr. Mrs. SK Hooda.
However, in view of the stay order passed by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 1210 of 1998 filed by the petitioners, the status of Mrs. SK Hooda has remained unchanged.
According to the petitioners, their action of filing the writ petition in the High Court to challenge the reinstatement of Mrs. SK Hooda caused great annoyance to the officer holding the post of the Director, Higher Education and fuel was added to the fire when petitioner No. 2, who is also President of the Haryana Private College Association, raised public grievance against the alleged highhanded action of the authorities of the Education Department and the affiliating University against the members of the association.
The last mentioned assertion is sought to be supported by the show cause notice dated 1641988 (Annexure P.2) issued by the Registrar of the University and the reply (Annexure P.3) dated 2841998 submitted by petitioner No. 2.
3.
The petitioners have alleged that with a view to wreck vengeance against the petitioners, the respondents have manipulated initiation of an enquiry into the allegation of mis-utilisation of college funds by the management and for this purpose, the Vice-Chancellor of the University has been persuaded to constitute a three-member Committee.
Their contention is that the Vice Chancellor has no jurisdiction to order an enquiry against the College and, in any case, the enquiry should not be allowed to proceed unless the copies of the documents which constitute the basis of allegation of mis-utilisation of funds are made available to the petitioners and they are given reasonable opportunity of defence.
4.
In the reply filed by them through Smt. Raj Rani Wig, Deputy Director Colleges office of Director of Higher Education, respondents No. 1 and 2 have admitted the facts relating to the case of Mrs. SK Hooda but, they have denied the allegation that the respondents have instituted enquiry against the petitioner due to extraneous reasons.
In a separate written statement the University has pleaded that on receipt of the request from the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, the Vice Chancellor ordered enquiry against the management of the College on the allegation of mis-utilisation of funds but no progress could be made in that enquiry due to non co-operation of the petitioners.
The University has defended the initiation of enquiry by contending that as per memo No. 5/1-89/Audit Cell/(C)-89 dated 5121989 written by the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, the responsibility of auditing the amalgamated fund continues to remain with the Universities granting affiliation to the colleges.
5.
The first contention urged by Shri OP Goyal, learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Vice Chancellor of the University does not have the jurisdiction to order an enquiry into the alleged mis-utilisation of the college funds by the petitioners and, therefore, the order Annexure P4 issued by the Registrar of the University and the consequential action taken by the three-member Committee should be declared nullity.
Learned counsel took us through the provisions of the Maharishi Dayanand University Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1975 Act') to show that the University has no concern with the college fund.
He submitted that the memo dated 5121989 issued by the Director of Higher Education does not have the effect of enlarging the ambit of Section 5 of the 1975 Act which delineates the powers of the University.
Shri Goyal further submitted that the Vice-Chancellor of the University should not have succumbed to the dictates of respondent No. 2 and he should have applied his own mind before ordering an enquiry against the petitioners.
6.
The learned Deputy Advocate General and Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Senior Counsel appearing for the University conceded that the provisions of the 1975 Act do not empower the Vice-Chancellor to order an enquiry into the allegation of mis-utilisation of funds by an affiliated college.
But, at the same time, Shri Aggarwal defended the impugned order by contending that the Vice- Chancellor did not commit any impropriety by ordering an enquiry against the petitioners in view of the request received from the Director, Higher Education.
Shri Aggarwal placed reliance on the letter Annexure R.3/1 written by respondent No. 2 to the Vice Chancellor and urged that the communication sent by a responsible officer of the government could legitimately be taken note of for ordering an enquiry against the petitioners.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions.
Section 5 of the 1975 Act reads as under:  "5.
The University shall exercise the following powers and perform the following duties, namely: (a) to provide the research and instruction in such branches of learning as the University may think fit and to take such steps as it considers necessary for the advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge; (b) to hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles to persons as may be laid down in the statutes, ordinances and regulations; (c) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions on approved persons in the manner laid down in the statutes; (d) to institute prizes, medals, research studentship, exhibitions and fellowships; (e) to receive gifts, donations or benefactions from the govt. and to receive gifts, donations and transfers of moveable or immoveable property from transferers, donors, testators, as the case may be; (f) to institute principalships, professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other teaching or academic posts required by the University and to appoint persons to such posts; (g) to cooperate with educational and other institutions in India and abroad having objects similar to those of the University in such manner as may be conducive to their common objects; (h) to provide instructions, including correspondence and such other courses to such persons as are not members of the University, as to may determine; (i) to recognise persons for imparting instruction in any college or institution admitted to the privileges of the University; (j) to admit to its privileges, colleges and institutions not maintained by the University; to withdraw all or any of these privileges in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed by the statutes; and to recognise halls not maintained by the University and to withdraw any such recognition; (k) to declare a college, an institution or a department as autonomous college or an institution or department, as the case may be; (1) to borrow with approval of the State Govt. on the security of the property of the University, money for purposes of the University; (m) to supervise, control and regulate the residence, conduct and discipline of the students of the University and of colleges and institutions within the jurisdiction of the University; (n) to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the University in such manner as the University may deem fit for advancing the objects of the University; (o) to make special arrangements for the education of women students and the students belonging to weaker sections of the society, in particular Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as the University may consider desirable; and (p) to do all such things, as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the University."
8.
A bare reading of the provisions quoted above shows that none of the clauses of Section 5 empowers the University to institute an enquiry into the alleged mis-utilisation of college funds by an affiliated College like the petitioner.
This has not been contested even by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Therefore, we have no hesitation to record a conclusion that the direction given by the Vice Chancellor of the University for holding an enquiry against the petitioners on the charge of mis-utilisation of college funds is without jurisdiction and the order Annexure P4 issued by the Registrar and the action taken by the three-member Committee are liable to be declared as nullity.
9.
The argument of Shri Aggarwal that the action of the Vice Chancellor to take cognizance of the communications sent by the Director, Higher Education and to take action in furtherance thereof should not be treated as improper does not commend our approval.
Rather, it is our considered view that a high functionary like the Vice Chancellor of a University is not expected to treat the letter written by an officer of the rank of Director, Higher Education as a command or mandate and he is not expected to act on such communication ignoring the statute which governs the functioning of the University.
Without dilating further, we deem it proper to close this aspect of the matter with the hope that in future the Vice Chancellor of the University will act in a manner befitting the high office which he holds and will not conduct in a manner which may suggest that he is subordinate to the authorities of the Education Department.
10.
The second contention of Shri Goyal is that the enquiry being held by the three-member Committee should be quashed on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
He submitted that repeated failure of the Committee to supply copies of the basic documents to the petitioners has deprived them of an opportunity to defend themselves effectively.
However, in our opinion, it is not necessary to adjudicate upon this issue in view of our conclusion that the very initiation of enquiry by the Vice-Chancellor of the University is liable to be nullified on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P4 is declared illegal and quashed.
The consequential action taken by the three-member Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor of the University is also declared as null and void.
However, it is made clear that this decision shall not preclude respondents No. 1 and 2 from taking appropriate action into the alleged mis-utilisation of funds by the management of the College.
Petition allowed.