SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 25.3.97 passed by a learned single Judge of this court whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
2.
The fact of the matter lies in a very narrow compass.
3.
An advertisement was issued in a daily newspaper on 20.11.77 for filling up of the post of Sports Organiser, inter alia, containing the following stipulations :-  "One Post reserved for SC or ST but others can apply."
4.
The petitioner claimed himself to be member of Scheduled Caste.
He was issued with an offer of appointment on 14779 stating :-  "You will be required to show the original certificates and submit attested copies of such certificates at the time of joining the post."
5.
Allegedly the appellant produced all his testimonials including Caste Certificate issued by one Sri MK Chatterjee, an Information Officer of Government of West Bengal.
However, certain discrepancies were found therein which were directed to be rectified.
The petitioner further filed another Caste Certificate.
He was promoted to the post of Sports Organiser on 24181.
A charge-sheet was issued against him on 3.3.89, which reads thus :-  "(1) He furnished false information of FCI/HFC, Barauni Unit vide his application dated 21.11.77 regarding his caste by declaring himself a Scheduled Caste candidate while submitting his application for the post of Sports Organiser which was reserved for Scheduled Caste though he does not belong to Scheduled Caste.
(2) He deposited Indian Postal Order No. D-14/096888 amounting to Rs. 2/- (Rupees two), instead of Rs. 750 (Rupees seven & paise fifty) to be deposited by other than Scheduled Caste candidates, for the post of Sports Organiser in the then scale of pay of Rs. 650-1120/- which had been demanded by FCI/HFC as per Press Advertisement from Scheduled Caste candidates only for the above post though he does not belong to Scheduled Caste.
(3) He submitted forged Scheduled Caste Certificate of Shri M.K.
Chatterjee, Information Officer, Govt. of West Bengal.
(4) He has always given a wrong impression to FCI/HFC during his service that he is Scheduled Caste by mentioning himself a Scheduled Caste in almost all the documents/applications and during the course of employment and never submitted Scheduled Caste Certificate of 'Paramanik' community from the appropriate authority.
(5) He submitted attested copy of affidavit from 1st Class Magistrate, Sealdah that he belongs to S/C 'Paramanik' community, and attested copy of certificate issued by Shri Ganapati Sur, M.L.A., West Bengal certifying him as S/C 'Parmanik' community though he does not belong to Scheduled Caste.
6.
He submitted his reply and thereafter prayed for grant of leave on 22493.
When he went to join his duties, he was not allowed to join and instead he was served with a letter dated 13593 enclosing therewith another letter dated 6593 communicating that he had been dismissed from services.
A writ application was filed by the petitioner which was marked as C.O.
No. 7721(W) of 1993.
By an order dated 19595 one of us quashed the said order, inter alia, observing :  "It is true that the writ court does not exercise its jurisdiction in favour of a person who approaches this court with unclean hands.
Equity begets equity.
I would not have hesitated to dismiss the writ application only on the ground that the petitioner had filed a caste certificates allegedly granted to him and his daughters by the Sub-Divisional Officer, Barasat, which have lateron been cancelled, but keeping in view of the fact that the petitioner alleges that the said order was passed behind his back and without giving an opportunity of hearing to him and particularly in view of the fact that the statements made by petitioner in his affidavit-in-opposition to the supplementary affidavit filed by the respondents have not been controverted as also keeping in view of the fact that a copy of the said order of cancellation had been forwarded to the aforementioned Sri Suresh Kumar, C.P.C., before passing of such an order of cancellation.
I am of opinion that the sub- divisional officer ought to have given a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and as such I do not propose to dismiss the writ application on the said ground alone.
However, it is directed that it would be open to sub- divisional officer, Barasat to take appropriate action as against the petitioner either for cancellation of the said certificate afresh or take other proceedings as against him as is permissible in law.
However, the observations aforementioned may not be taken to mean as an order quashing the said order of cancellation of caste certificate inasmuch as the same did not fall for decision in the instant case or such an order can be passed without giving a notice to the Sub-Divisional Officer, Barasat."
7.
It was held that the petitioner has been prejudiced by non-service of the report of the enquiry officer.
Upon giving liberty to the respondent to proceed with the enquiry by placing the petitioner under suspension and continuing the enquiry from the stage of furnishing a copy of the report, the petitioner was directed to be reinstated and was placed under suspension.
Pursuant to the said judgment by an order dated 21695 whereagainst he filed his representation.
An order of dismissal thereafter was passed on 23995.
The petitioner filed a writ application and the learned trial Judge dismissed the same by reason of the impugned order.
8.
Mr. Majumder the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has raised a number of contentions in support of this appeal.
The learned Counsel submitted that as the learned trial Judge himself has held that certain charges had not been proved, he ought to have considered as to whether the other charges are sustainable keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was appointed as a general candidate and not as a reserved candidate.
9.
It was further submitted that the post of Sports Organiser being a single post, the same could not have been reserved and in support of the said contention reliance had been placed on Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and Ors. reported in AIR 1988 SC 959 and Union of India and Ors. v. R Ayyappan reported in 1998(4) SCC 24.
The learned Counsel submitted that at the time of Joining the post by the petitioner his documents were checked and nothing was stated on his joining report to the effect that he had not submitted his proof of being a member of the Scheduled Caste from a competent authority.
However, the enquiry officer in his report stated :  "From the remarks of Personnel Deptt.
's Official on Joining Report it is observed that Caste Certificate and related documents were not found correct in respect of Shri.
TN Manna on the date of joining itself.
But the question remains to be examined as to how Sri Manna was allowed to join as Sportsman Trainee when the Appointment Letter was for Sports Organisor.
Beside, this when, the joining report for Sportsman Trainee itself was provisional, how part-II order was issued subsequently and how Sri Manna was confirmed in the post.
Since this matter itself needs separate enquiry to fix up the responsibility of the officers responsible for irregularities, if any, found by the Investigating Officer in respect of the scrutinising the letter, issue of permission to join etc., hence this aspect is not being taken into account as part of the enquiry.
However the argument of Defence Asstt.
that issue of charge-sheet to Shri TK Manna, Delinquent Employee, is not tenable, cannot be accepted because even if there has been slip on the part of Personnel Deptt's officials in doing checking of the documents, it does not mean that Shri TK Manna can be dissolved (absolved ?)
of the charges."
10.
The very fact, contends Mr. Mazumder that the petitioner was confirmed in his service would clearly go to show that he was appointed as a general category candidate and, thus, he became a permanent employee.
Despite the same, Mr. Ghosh contends that the enquiry officer wrongly observed :-  "Since this matter itself need separate enquiry to fix up the responsibility of the officer responsible for irregularities if any, found by the Investigating Officer in respect of scrutinising the application, issue of interview letter, issue of appointment letter, issue of permission to join, etc.
Hence this aspect is not being taken into as part of the enquiry."
11.
It was further submitted that as the petitioner was promoted, the charges of misconduct, if any, must be held to have been condoned in the year 1977 and, thus, the said charges being stale could not have been enquired into.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on The State of Punjab v. Dewan Chuni Lal reported in AIR 1970 SC 2086.
Reliance has also been placed on Subol Chandra Shah v Union of India & Ors. reported in 1994(2) LLJ 287.
It has further been submitted that as the appellant was in service for a long time, the impugned order must be held to be bad in law.
Mr. Mazumder has also placed reliance upon Nayagarh Co-operative Central Bank v. Narayan reported in AIR 1977 SC 112 and Satnam Gauda v. Berhampur University reported in AIR 1990 SC 1075.
The learned Counsel sought to distinguish the decisions relied upon by the learned trial Judge in Kumari Madhuri Patil v. Additional Commissioner reported in 1994(4) SLR 206 : 1995(1) SCT 261 (SC) and G Sundarsan v Union of India reported in AIR 1996 SC 668 : 1995(4) SCT 397 (SC) on the ground that in those cases jobs were obtained fraudulently which were detected later on but in the instant case the caste certificate was produced by the petitioner at the time of joining itself.
12.
Mr. Malay Basu, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the petitioner not only took the benefits of a Scheduled Caste candidate at the time of filing of his application for appointment which was available but in terms of the stipulations made in the advertisement only six scheduled caste candidate were called for interview and the petitioner having been found suitable for the post was offered appointment.
It was urged that even at the time of submitting his joining report he had asserted that he is a member of the Scheduled Caste.
As certain discrepancies with regard to the certificate were detected, he was allowed to join provisionally as per rule.
According to Mr. Basu, the petitioner had all along contended that he was member of Scheduled Caste community but despite the same, he failed to produce proper certificate.
It has been submitted that a thorough enquiry was held wherein the petitioner was found guilty of the charges and there is absolutely no reason as to why this court should interfere therewith.
The learned Counsel submits that the question to the effect that post being a single post could not have been reserved had been raised for the first time before this court and, thus, the same should not be entertained.
13.
The charges levelled against the petitioner are absolutely clear and unambiguous.
Before the said charge-sheet was issued, the petitioner had never contended that he was not a member of the Scheduled Caste.
He took the benefit of depositing the fees prescribed for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes while submitting application for his appointment.
Admittedly he had filed a caste certificate although the same was not issued by a proper authority.
He had again filed a caste certificate which was said to be forged but the said charges had not been established as the authorities issuing the said certificate had not been examined.
But the fact remains that the petitioner had sought to prove that he was a member of the Scheduled Caste.
Having repeated before his employer all along that he was member of the Scheduled Caste, could he be permitted to raise a question before the disciplinary authority that he was appointed as a general category candidate ?
Such a question having been examined and it having been found by the disciplinary authority that he made a false representation that he was a member of the Scheduled Caste community, in our opinion, he is estopped and precluded from raising this question now.
14.
The parameters of judicial review of this court in interfering with such a matter is well known.
See Union of India v. Upendra Singh reported in 1994(3) SCC 357 : 1994(2) SCT 771 (SC), para 6, State of Maharashtra v. Mahdhukar Narayan Mardikar reported in AIR 1991 SC 207 : 1991(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 579 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
102, para 8.
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. KS Gandhi reported in 1991(2) SCC 716 : 1991(2) SCT 611 (SC) and Union Bank of India v. Vishwa Mohan reported in 1998(4) SCC 310 : 1998(2) SCT 382 (SC).
15.
The petitioner cannot also be heard to say that only because he was promoted, no disciplinary proceedings could have initiated against him.
16.
In Union Bank of India v. Vishwa Mohan reported in 1998(4) SCC 310, it was held :-  "The High Court also committed an error when it assumed that when the respondent was promoted as a bank officer, he must be having a good report otherwise he would not have been promoted.
This finding is totally unsustainable because the various acts of misconduct came to the knowledge of the Bank in the year 1989 and thereafter the first charge-sheet was issued on 1721989.
The respondent was promoted as a bank officer sometime in the year 1988.
At that time, no such adverse material relating to the misconduct of the respondent was noticed by the Bank on which his promotion could have been withheld."
The learned Judges further observed :-  "It needs to be emphasised that in the banking business absolute devotion, diligence, integrity and honesty needs to be preserved by every bank employee and in particular the bank officer.
If this is not observed, the confidence of the public/depositors would be impaired."
17.
The same principles would apply in a case of an employee holding a job of Public Sector Undertaking.
18.
It is true that two of the charges have been found by the learned trial Judge to have not been proved but in view of the aforementioned decision, the principle of severability of the charges could be invoked.
19.
It is now a well settled principle of law that fraud vitiates all solemn acts.
In Kumari Madhuri Patil v. Addl.
Commissioner, Tribal Development and Ors. reported in 1994(5) SLR 206, it has been held that it is for the concerned delinquent officer to prove that he belongs to the Scheduled Caste specified in the Presidential Notification in relation to the State to which he belongs and was born.
Reference in this connection may also be made to G Sundarasan v Union of India reported in AIR 1996 SC 668.
20.
In Lalan Kumar Singh v. State of Bihar reported in 1995(2) PLJR 309, one of us (SB Sinha, J) had held :-  "In a case of this nature where fraud had been committed by the officers of the State in a well planned and systematic manner and the petitioners have derived benefit therefrom and thus, in our opinion, these are not fit cases, where we should exercise our discretionary jurisdiction."
The said decision has been upheld by the Apex Court.
21.
Although it may be true that a single post cannot be reserved but the petitioner cannot be permitted to raise the said question for the first time in the writ application.
Even in the earlier writ application the said question had not been raised.
The appellant is estopped and precluded from doing so and in any event, he must be held to have waived his right, if any.
In this case, the disciplinary authority has issued a reasoned order.
No infirmity in the disciplinary proceeding has been pointed out.
Reliance placed by Mr. Mazumder to the judgment of a single Judge of this Court in Subol Chandra Shah v Union of India reported in 1994(2) LLJ 287 is misplaced.
The delay always is not fatal as would appear from Union Bank of India Bank v. Vishwa Mohan reported in 1998(4) SCC 310.
Each case has to be considered in its own facts.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by us in State Bank of India v. Santi Gopal Biswas & Anr., APOT No. 30/99, GA No. 43 of 1999 and GA No. 182 of 1999, disposed of on 21.5.1999.
22.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.