KK Srivastava, J - This Civil Writ petition filed by HSMITC through its Chief Engineer, MITC Chandigarh and another raises a question of the applicability of the standing order 16-A of the petitioner-Corporation.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the petitions that this Court had in the case filed by Madan Lal Kohli and others had allowed the plea raised by Madan Lal Kohli and others and applied the said standing order 16-A to them.
Against the decision of the LPA Bench of this Court, the appeals were filed before the Hon'ble Apex Court which has reversed the judgment of the LPA Bench of this Court and the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court is reported in Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewell Corporation and others v. Madan Lal Kohli and others, A.I.R. 1998 SC 2799 : 1998(4) S.C.T.
321.
The relevant discussion is to be found in para 6 of the judgment at page 2800 which reads as under :  "A careful reading of this Standing Order would indicate that the age of superannuation of all workmen is 58 years and in case of regular workmen in the status of Class IV of the Government and temporary work-charged and regular work-charged workman, who answer the description of Class IV would retire at the age of 60 years.
In other words, the Standing Order provides that all persons engaged on regular basis against a regular post will fall into one category who would retire at the age of 58 years.
Class IV is separately carved out into a different category.
In that category workmen are enabled to have a longer period of service, namely, 60 years and all workmen whether regular or temporary are enabled to have a longer period of service whereas in the other category, namely, class III, the employees would retire at the age of 58 years.
Any other interpretation of the Standing Order would leads to anomalous and startling results.
If the Corporation has chosen to give a benefit only to Class IV employees and not to Class III employees, no fault can be found with them.
The only challenge before the High Court was as to the applicability of Standing Order 16-A and the manner in which the same should be applied.
No other question was raised.
2.
In the instant case also the same controversy was involved and respondent No. 2-Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala vide his award dated 1351997 followed, the law laid down in Madan Lal Kohli's case (supra).
3.
In view of the decision of the appeal by the Hon'ble Apex Court, the matter stands concluded and as a result thereof this writ petition deserves to be allowed and the impugned award deserves to be set aside.
Resultantly, this petition is allowed and the impugned award of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala is set aside.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.