GS Singhvi, J - Whether the government's decision not to extend the petitioner's period of probation suffers from an error of law warranting interference by the High Court.
This is the only point which calls for adjudication in the writ petition filed by Shri Harpal Singh Chahal.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Employment Officer on 2171995 in view of the recommendation made by the Punjab Police Service Commission.
He was placed on probation for a period of two years.
After about 5 months of his joining service, a criminal case was registered against the petitioner under Section 13(2) read with Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 on the allegation of accepting bribe of Rs. 3,500/-.
He was arrested on 18121995.
After about 20 days, he was placed under suspension vide government order dated 1111996.
That order was revoked on October 30, 1996.
Now, the service of the petitioner has been terminated on the ground of unsatisfactory work and conduct during the period of probation.
3.
Shri Majithia vehemently argued that the impugned order should be quashed on the ground of arbitrariness, mala fides and breach of the condition of appointment.
He further argued that the respondent-government was under obligation to give atleast one month's notice before terminating the services of the petitioner and its failure to do so should be sufficient to grant a declaration that the impugned order is a nullity.
Learned counsel also challenged the impugned order on the ground of violation of Article 311 of the Constitution and the principle of natural justice.
He submitted that termination of service on the ground of unsatisfactory work and conduct casts stigma on the career of the petitioner and as no notice and opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner, the impugned order should be declared as void.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered submissions of the learned counsel but are unable to agree with him.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed on probation for a period of two years and in terms of Rule 11 of the Punjab Employment (Class I and II) Service Rules, 1963, the maximum period of probation could be up to three years.
There is no provision in the Service Rules which empowers the government to extend the period of probation of a person like the petitioner beyond three years.
Therefore, a decision on the suitability or otherwise of the petitioner had to be taken at the time of expiry of the maximum period of probation.
This is precisely what the respondent-government had done.
It cannot, therefore, be said that impugned order is without jurisdiction.
5.
We are also of the opinion that the petitioner cannot seek invalidation of the order terminating his service on the ground that one month's notice had not been given to him.
A look at para 2 of the order of appointment shows that the requirement of giving such notice was to be fulfilled only if an order terminating the petitioner's service was passed during the period of probation or the petitioner was to seek voluntary termination of service during the period.
However, that is not the fact situation obtaining in this case.
In fact, the petitioner's probation period was extended up to three years and at the time of expiry of the extended period of probation, the government decided to discontinue his service on the ground of unsatisfactory work and conduct.
Therefore, we do not find any merit in the argument of the learned counsel that the order dated 2171998 is vitiated due to violation of the conditions of employment.
6.
Shri Majithia's argument that the impugned order should be declared stigmatic and quashed on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice cannot be upheld in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the State of Orissa and another v. Ram Narayan Das, AIR 1961 SC 177 and Satya Narain Athya v. High Court of M.P., 1996(2) SCT 162 : AIR 1996 SC 750.
The proposition of law laid in these decisions is that termination of service of a probationer due to unsatisfactory work and conduct does not cast stigma so as to render the order punitive in nature and Article 311 of the Constitution and principles of natural justice are not required to be complied with.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
It is, however, made clear that in the event of acquittal the petitioner shall be entitled to seek reinstatement in service along with other service benefits.
Petition dismissed.