VS Aggarwal, J (Oral) - The Management of the Shahbad Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd by virtue of the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India challenging the award of the learned Court, Ambala dated 2541996.
By virtue of the impugned award the learned Labour Court held that termination order of the respondent/workman was illegal.
He was entitled to continue in service with all back wages and consequential benefits.
He was to be reinstated with full back wages.
2.
Perusal of the impugned award reveals that workman had been allowed to remain on duty in off season from 171991 to 3171991, 181991 to 3181991 and from 391991 to till completion of work of maintenance and overhauling job.
In other words he was a seasonal worker and was engaged during all the season period for doing the repairs and overhauling work.
Once it is so, the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in case Morinda Co-op.
Sugar Mills Ltd v. Ram Kishan, JT 1995(6) SC 547 and in case of Anil Bapurao Kanase v. Krishna Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd and another, 1997 SCC (L&S) 1537 : 1997(3) SCT 642 (SC); comes into play.
In case of Morinda Co-op.
Sugar Mills Ltd, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "The question is whether such a cessation would amount to retrenchment.
Since it is only a seasonal work, the respondents cannot be said to have been retrenched in view of what is stated in clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the view taken by the Labour Court and the High Court is illegal.
However, the appellant is directed to maintain a register of all workmen engaged during the seasons enumerated hereinbefore and when the new season starts the appellant should make a publication in neighbouring places in which the respondents normally live and if they would report for duty, the appellant would engage them in accordance with seniority and exigency of work."
Keeping in view the aforesaid pronouncement the award of Labour Court cannot be sustained.
The workman was a seasonal worker and cannot take benefit of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
For these reasons the writ petition is accepted and impugned award is quashed.
3.
It is directed that the management-petitioner would maintain a register and engage the workmen when the season starts each year in the order of seniority.
Until all the employees are engaged in addition to the employees already working, the management shall not go for fresh engagement of new workmen.
Petition accepted.