AM Mir, J - Through the medium of this petition, selection of respondent No. 6 for MBBS/BDS Course of 1995 session, vide Notification No. 16-J- MBBS/BDS/CASE 1995 dated 1111995, is sought to be quashed.
Besides this, a writ in the form of mandamus commanding the respondents 1 and 2 to admit the petitioner for MBBS course in Government Medical College, Jammu, under the A.L.C.
category, is also prayed for.
In addition to these reliefs, the petitioner has further asked for a direction to respondent No. 4 to decide the revision petition which was filed by the petitioner against the ALC category certificate issued by respondent No. 5 in favour of respondent No. 6.
Not only this, a probe into the correctness of the category certificate is sought to be ordered.
Brief Facts :  Petitioner and respondent No. 6 appeared in the Entrance Test which was conducted by respondent No. 2 in response to the Advertisement Notification No. CAEEE/SGR/95 Dated 10.7.1995 (Annexure P1), (hereinafter called the Notification).
Both the candidates applied under ALC category.
The last date for submission of admission forms was 27.7.1995.
However, this date was later on extended to 281995.
Respondent No. 6 submitted the application form and enclosed with it a certificate which had been issued by Tehsildar on 881991 under S.R.O.
272 of 1982.
He, however, obtained an ALC certificate on 481995 after the expiry of the last date.
Petitioner's case was complete in all respects and he was in possession of a valid certificate required under the notification on the date he submitted his application form.
Respondent No. 2 made selection of three candidates under the ALC category.
These three included respondent No. 6 also.
The other two candidates who were selected had obtained 166 and 157 marks respectively.
So far as respondent No. 6 is concerned, he had secured 157 marks.
The petitioner as is admitted by respondent No. 2 secured 150 marks and figured at S.No.
4 of the ALC category in the merit list.
According to the petitioner, respondent No. 6 (Pankaj Soodan) did not have the requisite category certificate on the date of submission of form, so he could not be selected in this category, as his form was incomplete.
He was of course required to be considered in the open merit category, as required under the Notification.
If that would be done then the third seat in the ALC category would go to the petitioner.
The illegal selection of respondent No. 6 has jeopardised the right of the petitioner.
Hence challenge to the selection of respondent No. 6 and prayers as indicated above.
2.
The objections filed by the official respondents are duly supported by an affidavit.
It is averred therein that the selection of three candidates was made under ALC category as all of them produced certificates.
It is admitted that respondent No. 6 attached ALC certificate dated 881991 counter-signed by the Dy.
Commissioner Poonch on 4101994 with his application form.
At the time of selection he also made available another certificate issued on 4895 by Tehsildar Haveli under SRO 126 of 1994 in a revalidated form.
That the writ petition is not maintainable as an alternate remedy of revision is open to the petitioner.
The petition is also not maintainable because of earlier petition having been dismissed.
3.
It is pertinent to mention here that prior to filing of this petition OWP No. 905/95 was filed by the petitioner challenging the validity of the certificate issued in favour of respondent No. 6 on the ground that same was obtained by fraud.
That the petition was dismissed on 271295 on the ground that an alternate remedy was available to the petitioner.
Thus before filing of this petition, a revision petition was filed by the petitioner against the issuance of the certificate before respondent No. 4.
However, during the pendency of that revision petition, two facts dawned upon the petitioner.
One that he figured at S.No.
4 in the ALC category and second that on the last date fixed for, submission of the form, respondent No. 6 did not have a valid certificate.
Thus this petition in the present form was filed by him on 241996.
4.
During the course of pendency of this petition, writ petitioner through applications insisted that respondent No. 4 be directed to dispose of the revision.
This Court with all its enthusiasm urged upon the Deputy Commissioner concerned to dispose of the revision petition.
Respondent No. 4 in the first instance returned a finding in this revision on 261997.
This finding remands the case to Tehsildar Haveli for determination of income of the parents.
Subsequently he reviews this finding on 191997 and assumes unto himself the inquiry with regard to income and thus makes his own earlier order of remand redundant.
A reference to these orders shall be made at a later stage.
Suffice to say here that two findings in the revision are a bundle of contradictions.
Be that as it may, the prayers made in the petition with regard to disposal of the revision and conducting a probe into the validity of the certificate have become infructuous.
What remains for the court to determine is, as to whether or not the selection of respondent No. 6 was in accordance with law.
5.
If the answer to the above is that it conformed to law, then the petitioner has no right.
If on the other hand, the selection of respondent No. 6 is held to be illegal, then the third seat in ALC category would go to the petitioner.
In other words, the selection of respondent No. 6 in ALC category was violative of petitioner's right.
In that case the Court has no option except to quash the selection of respondent No. 6 and make the petitioner to step into his shoes.
6.
Two issues arising out of the pleadings upon which answer to the above question rests are as under:-  1.
Did respondent No. 6, at the time of making application, had a valid category certificate in his possession ?
2.
Could the certificate issued in favour of respondent No. 6 on 481995 be relied upon by respondent No. 2 ?
3.
In case issues 1 and & 2 are answered in negative, what is the effect ?
We will have to make an attempt to get an answer to issues No. (1) and (2) from the Notification and the connected rules.
Para-III of the Notification while referring to candidates applying under reserved category in terms of SRO 126 dated 2661994 postulates as under :-  "They must attach with their application forms the required category certificate in the prescribed format issued by the Competent Authority."
This condition makes it clear that the category certificate required to be attached with the form must be one issued by the competent Authority under SRO 126.
Para-V of the Notification further lays down as under:-  "In the absence of the reserved category certificate, the candidate shall be considered under the open merit category, if otherwise eligible for the same."
Para VI while making a reference to those of the certificates, which are under process, says that such certificates shall not be entertained and candidates banking upon such certificates will also be considered under the Open Merit category.
It reads as under :-  "No under process certificate shall be entertained and such candidates will be considered under the Open Merit category, if otherwise eligible for the same."
Para VIII of the Notification also makes it necessary for the candidate to attach attested copies of the category certificate with other certificates if selection is claimed under a reserved category.
Para IX of the Notification specifically lays down that incomplete forms shall not be accepted.
7.
Respondent No. 6, as revealed by the counter, attached with his application form a certificate having been issued by Tehsildar Haveli (Poonch) on 681991 under SRO 272 of 1982.
The same seems to have been counter-signed by Deputy Commissioner Poonch on 4101994.
8.
Respondent No. 2 treated the certificate to be a valid certificate and acted upon the same.
Considered respondent No. 6 under the reserved category of ALC and selected him.
The question is as to whether this was a valid certificate.
9.
SRO 272 was passed on 2nd July, 1982 and on the date of Notification i.e. 671995 SRO 272 stood fully repealed.
Much later SRO 126 was passed on 2661994 and that ruled the roost on the date of publication of the Notification.
The candidates belonging to reserved category were as such under Para-III of the Notification required to attach with their application forms, category certificate duly issued by the competent authority under SRO 126 dated 2661994 on a given format.
The certificate issued by the Tehsildar under SRO 272 of 1982 cannot be said to be a certificate issued in terms of SRO 126.
The counter-signatures of the Dy.
Commissioner on 4101994 would in no case validate a certificate which was not otherwise valid.
The certificate does not conform to the condition No. 3 of the Notification.
Format of the certificate under SRO 126 is totally different from one attached by respondent No. 6 with his application form.
10.
A proviso was, however, added to rule 38 of SRO 126 by SRO 138 dated 2661994.
This proviso laid down that any certificate issued under the rules repealed thereunder shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of operation of these rules.
Yet SRO 171 was issued on 1971995 which substituted the above proviso of rule 38.
This substituted rule provides that any certificate other than the certificate of Schedule Caste, schedule tribe, ex-servicemen, Handicapped and candidates possessing outstanding proficiency in sport, issued under rules repealed, shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of operation.
SRO 138 was, as already expressed, issued on 2661994.
Even by virtue of the fiction of law created by this SRO the life of the certificate could not be protracted beyond 2561995.
Thus on 381995, the last date fixed for submission of the application form, this certificate would not hold good.
Besides this, I would here like to make a reference to the findings returned by the Deputy Commissioner concerned in revision petition on 261997 and 191997.
Two conditions, according to him, are required to be satisfied for issuance of the ALC certificate under SRO 126: (i) the factum of residence of the parents in the actual line area; and (ii) the income slab.
As far residence is concerned, the Dy.
Commissioner has not dealt with the evidence led.
However, he in the earlier order agreed that respondent No. 6 was the resident of ALC.
So far as income factor was concerned, the Deputy Commissioner noticed that the Tehsildar below did not count the income of the candidate's mother towards the income of the family because she had sworn an affidavit showing that she was not feeding the boy.
Feeling not satisfied, the Deputy Commissioner vide his order dated 261997 remands back the case to Tehsildar Haveli, to determine the income of the family afresh.
However, vide his subsequent order dated 191997 he takes a `U' turn and decides the matter himself and concurs with the finding of Tehsildar on income factor also.
I am conscious that the findings of the revisional forum have not been challenged before me; therefore, I refrain from commenting on the validity of the orders passed by the Deputy Commissioner.
However, I referred to these findings just to show that all does not seem to be well with the certificate.
Suffice it to say that the certificate dated 681991 was not a certificate in terms of SRO 126.
The same in terms of SRO 138 was not valid as on 381995.
(The last date for filing application form).
Respondent No. 6, as such, did not attach with his application form a valid certificate, as required by the Notification and the rules.
11.
A Bench of this Court had an occasion to deal with a similar situation in a case titled Jyoti Gupta v. State and others, reported in 1996 KLJ 332.
That case related to a certificate which was produced after SRO 272 of 1982 was repealed.
The Court held that the certificate granted to the petitioner was not in pursuance to the provisions of SRO 126 of 1994 or SRO 272 of 1982.
The implication of Rule 38 of SRO 126 of 1994 was also considered in that case.
His Lordship observed that :-  "Where specific requirements were provided, for issuance of reserved category certificates and it was made clear that any certificate which was not in conformity with such requirements, was not liable to be entertained or accepted.
A certificate produced had necessarily to conform to the conditions laid down in the notice."
In other words the ratio laid down was that the conditions laid down in the Advertisement Notice are to be religiously followed and if the same is not done, the application form was not complete at all.
12.
Even before the Supreme Court of India, a like issue came up for consideration in case titled UPSC v. Alpna reported in 1994(2) S.L.R.
Page 59.
In this case applications were invited for appearing at a competitive examination for the posts of Munsiffs.
The eligibility qualification fixed for appearance in the test was Bachelor of Laws of a University.
The last date for receipt of application forms was 1281988.
Respondent was not qualified to apply on the last date fixed.
She did not possess prescribed qualification on such date fixed for receipt of application forms.
The Apex Court held that her application was incomplete; therefore, liable to be rejected.
Their Lordships held that a candidate who had not passed the Law Degree examination before August 12, 1988 would obviously not be satisfying the requirement of the advertisement notice.
As such, she was not eligible to contest.
This view was taken despite the fact that Rule 37 of the State Public Service Commission Rules, provided that applications of candidates, who had appeared in the examination, the result whereof was awaited, may be accepted provisionally but no such candidate shall be permitted to take the interview unless he is declared successful at the examination.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that as the advertisement notice carried no such stipulation, therefore, Rule 37 (supra) could not be pressed into service.
The findings of the High Court, which allowed the candidates participation, in this case, was reversed and it was held that the candidates must be eligible on the last dated fixed by the advertisement notice for filing the application forms.
13.
Thus issue No. 1 is replied in negative and it is held that respondent No. 6, at the time of filing the application form, or on the last date fixed for submission of forms (3.5.1995) did not have a valid certificate in his possession and the one attached by him could not be considered.
14.
The answer to issue No. 2 also is `NO' as the very Clause VI of the Notification makes it clear.
At best this could be termed to be a certificate `under process' and such a certificate could not be acted upon.
The conditions laid down in the advertisement notice are categoric that an application form like the one deposited by the respondent No. 6 was an incomplete one.
15.
Had the Competent Authority acted upon the terms and conditions of the Notification, and the rules on the subject, the respondent No. 6 could not have been selected under ALC category.
The seat upon which respondent No. 6 was selected would have admittedly gone to the petitioner.
The petitioner would have got his due and he could have been saved from the avoidable loss of time and money.
The wayward functioning of the Competent Authority has spoiled two precious years of petitioner's life.
It has also landed respondent No. 6 into a position which he would not deserve.
More than two years of the session have passed.
Respondent No. 6 also has, by dint of the recklessness of the Competent Authority, `wasted two years of his life and also spent a considerable amount of money in the legitimate expectation that he was duly selected.
16.
Although I am certain about the illegal selection of respondent No. 6 yet I would not like to quash his selection at this stage.
This is so because the session is in the midway of its completion.
I would not like to disturb respondent No. 6 at this stage on the sole ground of equity.
His ouster at this stage will not help the petitioner who cannot start his studies in the session from 3rd year.
17.
Therefore, in view of the circumstances, I, without quashing the selection of respondent No. 6, dispose of this petition, with a direction that one seat from ALC category for the ensuing session of 1998 will be reserved for the petitioner.
The petitioner shall be selected as the first candidate in the category to the course of MBBS of the ensuing session of 1998.
In view of the circumstances of the case, parties to bear their own costs.
18.
The Competent Authority is also directed to be sufficiently guarded and circumspect in future in dealing with cases of this nature.