GS Singhvi, J - These petitions have been filed for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners as JBT teachers on the basis of their selection made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short, `the Board').
In view of the similarity of the prayer made in all the petitions, we are deciding them by a common order.
2.
The facts which are more or less common to these petitions are that 3088 posts of JBT teachers were notified vide advertisement No. 4 of 1993.
The qualifications prescribed for recruitment to these posts were matriculation along with two years' diploma course in JBT/Diploma in Education.
The category-wise details of these posts are as under:-  (i) General = 829  (ii) Scheduled Castes = 1040  (iii) Backward Classes = 417  (iv) Ex-Servicemen = 802  3.
The respondent-Board forwarded a list of 941 selected candidates who possessed the qualification of diploma course in JBT Of these, 597 were general, 146 Scheduled Castes, 128 backward classes and 70 Ex- servicemen/dependents of Ex-servicemen.
Some of the candidates who possessed the qualification of BA, B.Ed.
filed CWP No. 15026 of 1993 Indu Sharma v. State of Haryana & others.
That writ petition is still pending before the High Court.
By an interim order passed in C.W.P.
No. 15026 of 1993, this court directed the Board to forward the list of selected candidates who possessed the qualification of BA, B.Ed.
In compliance of this direction, the Board forwarded a list of 1472 candidates vide memo No. SSSB (Confd.
)-95/ 139 dated 2551995.
This list consisted of 1229 general candidates, 56 Scheduled Castes, 121 backward classes and 66 Ex-servicemen and their dependents.
It was subsequently modified by indicating that number of Scheduled Castes, backward classes and Ex-servicemen was 57, 122 and 69 not 56, 121 and 66 as indicated in the memo dated 2551995.
After appointment of the selected candidates by the department, 2147 posts remained unfilled.
The department sent a fresh requisition to the Board on 12121994 for recruitment against 5160 posts of JBT teachers.
This included the backlog of 2147 posts which remained unfilled due to the fact that the Board did not recommend the names of the candidates as per the requisition sent by the department.
The categorywise detail of the posts which were advertised by the Board vide advertisement No. 10 of 1994 is as under:-  (1) General = 2035 (2) Schedule Castes = 1313 (3) Backward Classes = 583 (4) Ex-Servicemen = 959 Vide letter dated 19.4.1995 the department forwarded another requisition for recruitment against 1044 posts of JBT teachers which became available due to promotion, retirement and creation of posts for new schools opened by the government.
These posts were divided into various categories in the following manner:-  (1) General = 544  (2) Schedule Castes = 215 (3) Backward Classes = 104 (4) Ex-Servicemen = 184 In this manner, the total number of posts which were available for the purpose of selection by the Board in various categories were as under:-  (1) General = 2846  (2) Schedule Castes = 1528 (3) Backward Classes = 687 (4) Ex-Servicemen = 1143 4.
After making selection, the respondent-Board forwarded a list of 1277 candidates having the qualification of JBT/D.Ed.
vide letters No. SSSB (Confd)-95/152 dated 5.6.1995 and No. 175 dated 471995.
These consisted of 894 general, 169 Scheduled Castes, 136 backward classes and 78 Ex-servicemen.
All these candidates were given appointment by the department.
The Board also forwarded a separate list of candidates possessing qualification of BA, B.Ed.
or its equivalent.
Of these, the department appointed 1720 general, 834 Scheduled Castes, 429 backward classes and 689 Ex-servicemen.
5.
The petitioners have alleged that although they fulfil the conditions of eligibility and vacant posts continued to remain available with the respondents in different districts, they have not been appointed and the respondents have with an ulterior motive left the posts unfilled.
In all the petitions, the petitioners have claimed that their names appear in the merit list prepared by the Board and they have a legal as well as constitutional right to be appointed against the posts which remained unfilled due to the failure of the respondents to offer appointment to the candidates of their category or which remained unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidates who were offered appointment.
6.
In the initial reply filed by them, the respondents No. 1. and 2 as well as the respondent no. 3. pleaded that in all 5652 candidates were recommended by the Board to the Education Department and they have been given appointment.
On.
311997, this Court gave direction to the respondents to give details of the vacancies as well as the details of the number of candidates appointed on the recommendations of the Board and the number of posts which remain unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidates.
In compliance of that direction, the respondents No. 1 and 2 have filed an additional written statement through Daya Saini, Assistant Director, office of the Director, Primary Education, Haryana.
Similarly the respondent-Board has filed written statement through its Secretary, Shri.
SS Dalal.
7.
During the course of hearing, Shri.
NC Wadhwa, Director, Primary Education, Haryana appeared in person and produced before the Court the record of the department showing the availability of vacant posts.
Shri Wadhwa stated that as many as 410 candidates who were given appointment on the recommendations of the Board did not join and these posts have remained unfilled.
He stated that as many as 165 general category, 125 Scheduled Castes, 37 backward classes and 84 Ex-servicemen did not join duty and these posts have remained unfilled.
He further stated that the department had forwarded the case to the government for grant of permission to make appointment against the unfilled vacancies but on 4101996 Hon'ble the Education Minister, Haryana decided that the vacant posts be re-advertised and, therefore, appointments could not be given to the selected candidates against the unfilled posts.
When we enquired from Shri Wadhwa as to whether there is any provision in the rules requiring the permission of the government for appointment of the selected candidates against the unfilled posts, he expressed his inability to point out any such rule.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned Assistant Advocate General and have perused the record produced before us by the Director, Primary Education, Haryana.
It is clearly borne out from the record that the respondent-Board forwarded different lists of the selected candidates to the appointing authority.
Out of the appointed candidates a number of person did not join their duty.
On 221996 the Superintendent, E-II Branch in the Directorate of Primary Education, Haryana indicated that 246 posts of general category and 66 posts of backward classes have remained unfilled and, therefore, permission of government be sought for making appointment against these posts.
The Superintendent, E-II Branch in the Government Secretariat prepared a note on 2221996 proposing that the candidature of those persons who did not join be cancelled and new candidates be given appointment from the waiting list.
This proposal was approved by the Joint Secretary, Education, Haryana.
The Commissioner and Secretary, Education, Haryana opined that a request may be made to the Chief Secretary to grant permission for cancelling the candidature.
It appears that the office of the Chief Secretary called upon the department to furnish the details of the candidates who did not join after appointment.
On 1641996, the office of the Chief Secretary called for certain clarifications from the Commissioner & Secretary, Education Department as would appear from DO Note No. 42/13/96-5 GSI.
Thereafter the file continued to travel from one official to another.
Finally it was found that 165 candidates of general category, 125 Scheduled Castes, 37 backward classes and 84 Ex-servicemen/dependents of Ex-servicemen have not joined.
Consequently, a proposal was sent to the government to fill up 165 general category posts and 37 posts of backward classes.
It was recorded in the said note that the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Ex-servicemen were not available.
A proposal to this effect was forwarded by the Director to the government on 2491996.
The Education Department submitted it to the Education Minister, Haryana on 2491996.
It, however, appears that for a period of ten days the file remained with the Education Minister and on 4101996, the Education Minister recorded a note that these vacant posts be filled by issuing fresh advertisement.
This proposal has been approved by the Chief Minister on 10101996 as would appear from the note recorded by the Dy.
Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Haryana.
9.
After having given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, we are of the opinion that denial of appointment to the selected candidates whose names were included in the list prepared by the Board is ex-facie arbitrary and unjustified.
Action of the Board in not forwarding the entire select list to the department is quite mysterious.
It is rather surprising that the Board should have sent separate lists and that too after a gap of one month in the first instance and four months in the second instance.
Absence of any plausible explanation about these intervals creates a suspicion about the bona fides of the authorities of the Board.
The learned Assistant Advocate General was at a loss to explain as to why the Board had not forwarded the complete select list to the appointing authority and why the names were forwarded in batches.
The learned counsel was also unable to explain as to why unduly long time was given to the candidates who were offered appointment after receipt of the list vide memo dated 5101995.
She could not place before us any rule empowering the appointing authority to give more than ten months' time to a selected candidate to join duty.
The failure of the respondents to take appropriate steps to make appointment against the vacancies which remained unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidates is patently arbitrary because due to inaction of the departmental authorities and others, the other selected candidates have been deprived of a valuable right to be considered for appointment against the available posts.
10.
We are also of the opinion that the decision taken by the government not to fill up the vacant posts and to re-advertise the same is arbitrary.
In the first place, the Director, Primary Education was not required to seek government's permission to make appointment against the unfilled vacancies.
At the cost of repetition, we deem it necessary to mention that no rule has been brought to our notice which requires the permission of the government before the Director can give appointment to the selected candidates against the vacant posts.
It is the Director who is competent to approve the select list prepared by the Board and the appointments are required to be made by the concerned District Education Officers as per his directions.
Secondly, no reason has been assigned by the government for not giving permission to make appointment against the posts which remained unfilled.
Rather, the record shows that the proposal made by the Directorate as early as in February, 1996 was scuttled in a most casual and perfunctory manner and even after the receipt of the revised proposal in September, 1996 the matter was kept pending till 4101996 without any rhyme or reason.
11.
Ordinarily, we may have accepted the argument of Ms. Bahri that the Court should not give a direction for appointment of selected candidates in view of the government's decision to issue fresh advertisement.
However, in the facts of this case we are fully convinced that the decision taken by the government is wholly arbitrary and unjustified and there is no legal justification to deny appointment to the selected candidates.
The facts of the case unmistakably show that the selected candidates including those belonging to backward classes have been denied appointment without any rhyme or reason.
Rather it is a case of total non-application of mind.
12.
We are aware of the settled legal position that a candidate who is recommended to be appointed does not get an indefeasible right.
In State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha, AIR 1973 SC 2216; Jitender Kumar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 1850 and Shankarshan Dash v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 1612 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
194 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
555 it has been held that the selection does not confer an absolute right upon a candidate to be appointed against the available vacant post and it is open to the employer to refuse appointment on valid grounds.
At the same time, in Shankarshan Dash's case, their Lordships have observed as under:-  ".....However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies or any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted."
These observations directly apply to the present case because, as already mentioned above, the decision of the government not to approve the proposal of the respondent No. 2 is wholly arbitrary and capricious.
13.
Reference also deserves to be made to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 169 and Asha Kaul v. State of Jammu & Kashmir, AIR 1993 SCW 2314 : 1993(2) SCT 744.
Neelima Singla's case relates to the recruitment to the Haryana Civil Services (Judicial Branch).
In that case, the Public Service Commission had prepared a select list which included the name of the petitioner.
However, the Commission forwarded the names of only 17 candidates of general category although in all 28 vacancies were available.
The apex Court held that it was not within the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission not to communicate the entire list of the qualified candidates to the government.
The Court further held that the government could not have denied the right to make final selection for appointment from amongst the complete list of selected candidates.
14.
In Asha Kaul's case, the apex Court made reference to the decision in State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha (supra), Jitender Kumar v. State of Punjab (supra) and Shankarshan Dash v. Union of India (supra) and held that it is not open to the government to approve a part of the list sent by the Commission and disapprove the remaining.
15.
On the basis of above discussion we hold that the respondents have acted illegally by not giving appointment to the selected candidates in spite of the availability of vacant posts.
16.
During the course of hearing we enquired from Shri Wadhwa as to within what time it will be possible for the Directorate to appoint the selected candidates against the unfilled vacancies.
He gave out that this exercise can be completed within a period of three weeks.
17.
We, therefore, allow the writ petitions and direct the Director, Primary Education, Haryana to issue instructions to the competent authorities to appoint the selected candidates against the vacant posts of JBT teachers which remained unfilled due to non-joining of those who were appointed earlier.
While appointing the candidates, the Director and the appointing authorities shall follow the order of merit prepared by the Board.
This exercise shall be completed within three weeks from today.
18.
A copy of this order be given dasti to the learned Assistant Advocate General for immediate compliance by the Bench Reader after due attestation under his signatures.
Petitions allowed.