Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner ws appointed as a Peon on purely ad hoc basis for a period of 89 days vide order, dated September 24, 1993.
He was granted periodic extensions by different orders from time to time.
Every time, he was given a starting salary of Rs. 770/- per month.
He was not given any increment.
In the year 1996, the Corporation decided to fill up the 25 posts of Peons on regular basis.
Consequently, it notified the vacancies to the Employment Exchange.
It also asked the persons working with it to appear in the interview.
A Committee was constituted for making the selections.
The needful having been done on November 26, 1996, the Corporation issued an order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.16 with the writ petition by which the services of the petitioner, who was not found suitable, were ordered to be terminated so as to make room for a person who had been duly selected.
Aggrieved by the order of termination the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
He challenges the order on the ground that the action of the Corporation is violative of the provisions of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
It was also contended that the action in terminating the petitioner's services is violative to the right to life as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner prays that the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.16 with the writ petition, be quashed and that he be reinstated in service.
3.
The respondent-Corporation contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that in pursuance of the directions issued by this Court and the instructions issued by the State Government to fill up the vacant posts on regular basis, the Corporation had sent a requisition to the Employment Exchange to sponsor the names of the candidates for selection and appointment on regular basis.
The candidates working on ad hoc or temporary basis including the petitioner were also informed to appear for the interview.
The Selection Committee constituted for the purpose had interviewed all the candidates including the petitioner.
The selected candidates were ordered to be appointed on regular basis.
On the joining of the candidates recommended by the Committee, the services of the ad hoc employees including the petitioner were terminated.
In this situation, the respondent points out that the petitioner has no cause of action which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
It was also averred by way of a Preliminary Objection that the petitioner has not impleaded the candidates who were selected on regular basis as parties to the writ petition.
Consequently, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed for want of necessary parties.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
The first submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the termination of petitioner's services on account of the selection and appointment of the persons sponsored by the Employment Exchange is illegal and violative of the provisions of the 1959 Act.
Secondly, it has been submitted that the order takes away the right to livelihood and is, thus, violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Lastly, it was also contended that the petitioner had completed 240 days of service.
The termination of the services without compliance with the provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is wholly illegal and untenable.
Learned counsel has also referred to the decision of this Court in The Municipal Committee, Amritsar v. The State of Punjab and others, 1971(2) SLR 420 and that of the Apex Court in Shri DK Yadav v. M/s. J.M.A.
Industries Limited, 1993(4) SLR 126 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
537.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Mahajan who has appeared on behalf of the respondent-Corporation.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed for a fixed term of 89 days.
He had no right to continue in service.
It is also not disputed that directions had been given by this Court that the State Government should fill up all available vacancies on regular basis.
This was obviously done with a view to end ad hocism.
On the directions of this Court, the respondent-Corporation decided to request the Employment Exchange to forward the names of eligible persons to be considered for appointment to the posts of Peons.
It is true that the provisions of 1959 Act do not apply to the posts of Peon etc. Consequently it was not necessary in law to make such a reference.
However, an employer is not precluded from making selection out of the eligible candidates.
It can advertise posts, it can make the selections out of the available applicants, it can get the names from any source including the Employment Exchange.
This is precisely what appears to have been done in the present case.
The purpose of the respondent in sending the requisition to the Employment Exchange was only to ensure that there is adequate number of persons from amongst whom the selection is made.
The names of eligible persons were sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
All the candidates including those who were already working with the respondent- Corporation on ad hoc basis were considered.
The petitioner was duly interviewed.
Thereafter the selected candidates have been appointed.
The process followed by the respondent-Corporation was in strict conformity with the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India which was calculated to avoid arbitrariness in the selection and appointments.
It was intended to make selection from out of larger number of persons.
Therefore the respondent had notified the vacancies to the Employment Exchange.
The Corporation did not violate the rules.
Of course, if it had chosen not to make any reference, its action could not have been challenged on the ground that the vacancies were not notified to the Employment Exchange.
However, the mere fact that the Corporation obtained the names of all the eligible persons from the Employment Exchange cannot be said to have resulted in vitiating the selection.
6.
Mr. Sharma has referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in the Municipal Committee, Amritsar's case (supra).
In this case, it was inter alia held that notification of vacancies for appointment of Peons to Employment Exchange was not necessary.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, we cannot read this to mean that if the vacancies are notified to the Employment Exchange, the employer commits an illegality and that the selection would be vitiated.
7.
It was then contended that the order of termination is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The order has been passed after proper consideration of the matter.
The petitioner has not been found suitable for regular appointment.
Persons who were found to be more meritorious have been appointed.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the respondent has acted illegally or arbitrarily.
8.
Mr. Sharma has referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Shri DK Yadav's case (supra) in support of his submission.
This was a case where the services had been terminated in violation of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was held that striking off the name of the workman for absence from duty amounted to retrenchment.
When it is done without the grant of reasonable opportunity to the employee to put forth his case, the order would be arbitrary and would, thus, affect his right to livelihood.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
The action was not arbitrary or unfair.
9.
Mr. Sharma then submitted that the action is violative of the provision of the Industrial Disputes Act.
This contention is wholly baseless.
There is no averment in the petition that the respondent-Corporation is an industry or that the provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act had not been complied with.
Still further, it has not been shown that the appointment having been made for a fixed term of 89 days, the action was really violative of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It is the case pleaded which has to be found.
Since no such plea has been raised in the petition, the contention cannot be accepted.
10.
Lastly, it has been submitted that the petitioner's term of appointment as given to him vide order, dated October 9, 1996 a copy of which is Annexure P.11-A with the writ petition, had not expired when the impugned order of termination was passed on December 9, 1996.
Even this contention is wholly untenable.
A perusal of the order, dated October 9, 1996 shows that the respondent had specifically provided that ``appointments shall be valid upto 60 days or the date on which the new incumbent joins his duties, whichever is earlier''.
It is, thus, clear that the employees had no right to continue for 60 days.
Their services could have been terminated on the date when the new incumbent had joined.
This is precisely what was done.
It has been averred in para 1 of the preliminary objections, that ``on joining (of) candidates recommended by the Selection Committee the services of the ad hoc employees including the petitioner were terminated to make room for regular candidates''.
Consequently, the contention is wholly untenable.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
No costs.