NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner joined service in the Police Department as an Executive Clerk in the year 1947.
Thereafter he was appointed an Accountant on 1661956 in the Health Department on selection/recommendation by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
On 2761956 the clerical staff and the Accountants were merged in the Health Department.
A tentative seniority list of the clerical staff was circulated on 16.12.1958 in which the name of the petitioner appeared at serial No. 87 and he was shown as a clerk.
He represented that his seniority be shown amongst the Accountants and not as a clerk.
The representation was allowed and his seniority fixed amongst the Accountants.
Petitioner was placed at the bottom of the list of Accountants and above the clerks and he was satisfied with his placement.
It appears that the department while preparing the seniority list had shown 3 or 4 persons as senior to the petitioner but according to him they were junior.
Petitioner made another representation and by an order dated 961963 the State Government directed that the mistake be rectified and the petitioner given his seniority above them.
The officials thus affected were given an opportunity to represent and their representations were rejected.
As a result of the corrections made the petitioner was placed at serial No. 19 in the joint seniority list.
Again on receipt of representations from four clerks (three from erstwhile State of Punjab and one from erstwhile State of Pepsu) the Government of India altered the joint seniority list by placing the petitioner's name at serial number 87 instead of 19 and the Director Health Services, Punjab, communicated this order dated 931966 to the petitioner.
This alteration was made under Section 115(5) of the State Re-organisation Act, 1956 after taking into consideration the recommendations of the State Advisory Committee appointed by the Government of India.
The petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of hearing nor was any notice issued to him before the seniority list was altered.
Feeling aggrieved by this alteration, he filed CWP 562 of 1966 in this Court challenging the order dated 931966.
Two contentions were advanced on behalf of the petitioner.
Firstly, it was urged that the petitioner had been appointed an Accountant in the parent State before its merger with the erstwhile State of Pepsu on 1111956 and, therefore, his seniority in the parent State as it obtained before merger could not be disturbed by the Central Government under Rule 16 of the Punjab Services Integration Rules, 1957.
According to the petitioner, inter se seniority could be altered by the Central Government only where the same was fixed as a result of merger and not otherwise.
The second contention advanced before this Court was that he had not been afforded any opportunity of hearing before his seniority was altered.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice AN Grover who heard the writ petition allowed the same on 11111966 on the second submission made on behalf of the petitioner and in view of that it was not considered necessary by the learned Judge to deal with the first contention.
While quashing the order impugned therein it was observed as under :-  ``The petitioner admittedly was not afforded any such opportunity and it is not possible to understand how his omission to ask for a hearing would affect the matter inasmuch as there is nothing to show that he was even informed of the existence of any such representations against him.
The orders which have been impugned in the matter of the fixation of his seniority in the joint seniority list would have to be quashed for the aforesaid reason.
It will be for the Central Government or the Advisory Committee to re-hear and re-decide the matter, if so advised, after affording the petitioner an opportunity of being heard in the light of the observations made above.''
2.
In compliance with the directions issued by this Court the seniority list was changed and the petitioner assigned the seniority at serial number 19 and the same was again circulated to all the concerned officials.
After the decision of the writ petition, the petitioner was promoted on 1111970 as Head Assistant in the grade of 150-300 and thereafter he was further promoted as Superintendent in the scale of 300-500 w.e.f.
13111975.
He was confirmed as a Superintendent on 751979.
3.
When almost 15 years had passed after the writ petition had been allowed by this Court and the petitioner meanwhile had been promoted as Head Assistant and thereafter as Superintendent, it suddenly occurred to the Government of India to issue a notice to the four representionists who had earlier filed the representations against the fixation of seniority of the petitioner as an Accountant.
The petitioner was also summoned and so was the State Government.
They were required to appear before the Central Government on 2481981 to explain why the representations made by the four officials be not accepted.
This show cause notice was issued supposedly with a view to implement the High Court directions issued 15 years back in CWP 562 of 1966.
It may be mentioned that the representationists were challenging the placement of the petitioner at serial number 19 in the joint seniority list and according to them the petitioner should have been placed at serial number 87.
The petitioner made a detailed representation.
The Central Government as per its letter dated July, 1982 communicated to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Punjab, Health Department that the seniority of the petitioner at serial number 87 as on 1111956, (i.e. as an Accountant) in the integrated seniority list had been rightly fixed.
Thereafter by an order dated 28.10.1983 the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab reverted the petitioner from the post of Superintendent to that of Assistant-cum-Accountant w.e.f.
26.5.1967 and posted him in the office of Civil Surgeon, Gurdaspur as an Assistant-cum-Accountant.
This reversion was a consequence of his seniority having been altered by the Central Government as an Accountant w.e.f.
1111956.
It was further ordered that his pay would be fixed under the rules and recovery, if any, made from him.
It was stated in this order that a show cause notice to deconfirm him from the post of Head Assistant and Superintendent was being served upon him separately.
Simultaneously, on the same day i.e. on 28.10.1983 the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab served on the petitioner a notice to show cause why he should not be deconfirmed from the post of Superintendent.
A copy of this notice is Annexure P9 with the writ petition.
It was at this stage that the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition challenging the order of the Central Government dated July, 1982 whereby his seniority as an Accountant was changed and he was shown at serial number 87 on the integrated seniority list w.e.f.
1111956.
The order dated 28.10.1983 reverting him to the post of Assistant-cum-Accountant has also been impugned and so also the show cause notice seeking to deconfirm him as Superintendent.
4.
The Union of India has not filed any reply to the writ petition.
Respondents 3 and 4 (State of Punjab and the Director, Health and Family Welfare Punjab) in their written statement have not disputed the material facts as alleged by the petitioner.
It is pleaded that the Central Government is the competent authority to consider and decide the seniority of the officials under Section 115(5) of the State Reorganisation Act and that the petitioner was reverted from the post of Superintendent to that of Accountant in view of his revised seniority.
It is also pleaded that the order altering seniority of the petitioner was passed after he was given full opportunity of hearing.
5.
Mr. Pardeep Bhandari, Advocate, who appeared on behalf of the petitioner has raised a number of contentions in challenging the impugned action of the respondents.
His first argument is that seniority of the petitioner having been fixed by the parent State of Punjab before its merger with Pepsu on 1111956, the Central Government had no jurisdiction to decide/determine the inter-se seniority of the petitioner vis-a- vis the representationists.
It was argued that the Central Government could go into the matter if seniority had been fixed on the merger of two States but that according to the petitioner was not so.
The other argument of the learned counsel is that the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of hearing before the order of reversion (Annexure P.8) was passed.
It was also submitted on behalf of the petitioner that after the decision of this Court in the earlier writ petition 562 of 1966, the Central Government could not alter the seniority after more than 15 years had passed during which period the petitioner had further been promoted as Head Assistant and Superintendent.
Another argument raised by Mr. Bhandari is that the petitioner being a confirmed Superintendent had a right to hold the post and, therefore, his reversion to the post of Accountant could not be effected without complying with the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel that the petitioner was not only reverted but the competent authority also directed that his pay be refixed and the amount already paid to the petitioner be recovered from him.
This, according to the learned counsel, made the order of reversion penal in nature and for this reason as well the provisions of Article 311 were attracted.
6.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioner was not afforded any opportunity of hearing before the order of reversion was passed.
The stand of the respondents is that his reversion was ordered because his seniority as an Accountant had been revised by the Central Government under Section 115(5) of the State Reorganisation Act.
Even if it be so, the rules of natural justice required that the petitioner should have been afforded an opportunity of hearing.
This not having been done, the impugned order of reversion cannot be sustained.
Moreover, when the seniority was changed earlier to his detriment in March, 1966, he filed CWP 562 of 1966 in this Court which was allowed and the order impugned therein was quashed.
Of course, it was left open to the respondents to re-decide the matter after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
If the Central Government was really keen to re-decide the matter it should have taken steps in this regard at the earliest.
It kept waiting for 15 years and in the meantime the petitioner had been promoted from the post of Accountant to that of Head Assistant and again to the post of Superintendent on which post he was later confirmed.
In these circumstances, it was most unfair and unjust on the part of the Government to wake up after an inordinate delay of 15 years and alter the seniority of the petitioner to his prejudice when in the meantime he stood promoted to the higher posts.
For this reason as well the action of the respondents and the order of the Central Government in altering the seniority cannot be upheld.
7.
Since I am of the view that the order of reversion was passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and that the Central Government could not after 15 years alter his seniority it is not necessary for me to decide the other contentions raised by Mr. Bhandari.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders Annexures P.7 and P9 quashed.
The petitioner will have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-