NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution for quashing the order dated 2991995 whereby the Principal Secretary, Food and Supplies, Punjab stayed his earlier order dated 24111994 regarding the change in the date of birth of the petitioner, Capt.
Gurnam Singh.
2.
The petitioner is posted as Joint Director (Admn.)
in the Department of Food and Supplies, Government of Punjab.
His date of birth was recorded as 441939.
The petitioner moved an application dated 26.3.1993 seeking change in the date of birth.
He filed, alongwith the application, the birth certificate issued by the Additional District Registrar (Births and Deaths), Hoshiarpur.
On petitioner's application, his date of birth was changed from 441939 to 27.10.1939 under the order dated 24111994 of the Principal Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Food and Supplies Department.
However, the said order, permitting change in the date of birth, was "stayed for the time being" by the Principal Secretary, vide his order dated 2991995.
3.
The petitioner's challenge to the subsequent order dated 2991995 is based on a Government notification dated 2161994 and subsequent circular letters issued thereafter on the subject of change in the date of birth of the Government employees.
The Government issued the notification dated 2161994 amending the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, making certain changes in the provisions relating to the date of birth of the employees.
It was laid down, by way of amendment of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, that every newly-appointed employee shall produce his birth certificate or Matriculation certificate or an affidavit in proof of his date of birth, which could not be altered subsequently except in case of a clerical error.
It was also specified that the date of birth declared by an employee in his application sent to the recruiting agency shall be treated as final and no change shall be allowed.
It was further provided that an employee, already in service, may apply for change in the date of birth within two years from the date of coming into force of the notification on the basis of confirmatory documentary evidence, such as Matriculation or Municipal birth certificate.
The petitioner's case is that, following the amendment made in the Civil Services Rules by the Government notification dated 2161994, he filed another application dated 2761994 before the Principal Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Food and Supplies, requesting for change in the date of birth in the light of the Government notification.
Thereupon, order dated 24111994, permitting the change in the date of birth, was issued.
4.
The respondent has defended the order of the Secretary dated 2991995 whereby the order, permitting the change in the date of birth of the petitioner, was stayed, on the ground that the prescribed procedure of holding an enquiry had not been followed before permitting the change in the date of birth.
The Government had issued certain instructions in pursuance of the notification dated 2161994.
It was necessary to comply with the procedure laid down in those instructions.
Since the instructions, contained in the Government circulars had not been followed, it became necessary for the Principal Secretary to Government to stay the earlier order permitting the change in the date of birth.
The Government of Punjab issued a circular letter dated 1811995 clarifying that the date of birth of an employee shall not be changed without a special enquiry by the Commissioner of Enquiries and without getting approval from the Department of Finance and the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
It was further made clear that if any order had been passed, permitting change in the date of birth without such approval, the same may be reviewed and referred for approval to the aforesaid two Departments.
5.
The Government issued another circular letter dated 1051995 in supersession of the earlier circular letter dated 1811995, whereby it was clarified that the date of birth of an employee shall not be changed without a special enquiry by the Deputy Commissioner of the district in which the place of birth of the concerned employee falls.
Other directions, as contained in the earlier circular letter dated 1811995, were reiterated.
This circular letter dated 1051995 was, however, first suspended by circular letter dated 5101995 and thereafter withdrawn in toto by circular letter dated 13121995.
The Government issued another circular letter dated 7101996 directing that all the applications, received during the period when notification dated 2161994 remained in force, may be disposed of on merits with prior approval of the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
6.
Dr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the notification dated 2161994 was never withdrawn and thus the Government employees were within their rights to seek change in the date of birth.
Subsequent circular letters laid down the procedure but finally all clarificatory letters stood withdrawn.
It necessitated the issuance of another circular letter dated 7101996 ordering that the applications, already filed by the employees following the issuance of notification dated 2161994, might be suitable dealt with.
Since the petitioner had sought change in the date of his birth in pursuance of the Government notification dated 2161994, his application was protected by the Government circular letter dated 7101996 and the order already passed on 24111994 could not be withdrawn.
7.
The respondent has, in his reply, pointed out that the order dated 24111994 had been passed without making proper enquiry into the matter and, therefore, the said order was stayed.
It was necessary to get the matter enquired into by the Deputy Commissioner of the district and, since the report was awaited, the order, permitting change in the date of birth of the petitioner, was rightly stayed.
8.
It may be noticed that the matter has now been enquired into by the Deputy Commissioner and an enquiry report, received on 241997 in the Department of Food and Supplies, Government of Punjab, is said to be under process.
A perusal of the Government letter dated 441997 reveals that the enquiry was conducted by the SDO (Civil), Dasuya, and thereafter the Deputy Commissioner, Hoshiarpur, sent the enquiry report to the Food and Supplies Department.
It is pointed out that action on the enquiry report shall be taken soon after obtaining orders from the Finance Department and the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
9.
The petitioner's plea is primarily based on two documents, first, the birth certificate issued by the Additional District Registrar (Births and Deaths), Hoshiarpur, and, second, the enquiry report of the Deputy Commissioner, Hoshiarpur.
The birth certificate does not, however, give the date of its issuance.
It appears to relate to one Tarsem whose father's name has been mentioned as "Kartar Singh s/o Dalip singh".
The mother's name has not been mentioned.
This certificate was issued on an application (No. 165 dated 611993) filed by one Pawan Kumar.
The absence of mother's name and the name of the newly-born boy being declared as `Tarsem' casts serious doubts on the credibility of this certificate.
This certificate was issued on an application filed by one Pawan Kumar and it has not been explained as to whether the said Pawan Kumar had filed application for issuance of a certificate on behalf of the petitioner.
The absence of the date of its issuance further casts a shadow of doubt.
As regards the enquiry report, it has not been submitted by the Deputy Commissioner himself.
It appears from the letter dated 441997, addressed to the Advocate General, Punjab, by the Superintendent (Establishment-I), Department of Food and Supplies, Punjab, that the enquiry had been got conducted from the SDO (Civil), Dasuya.
It does not appear to be the intention of the Government circular, whereby enquiry was required to be held by the Deputy Commissioner, that the Deputy Commissioner could have passed on the responsibility to SDO.
Such a procedure adopted by the Deputy Commissioner does not appear to be in consonance with the Government circular issued after the coming into force of the notification dated 2161994.
10.
The Government circular letters dated 1051995, 5101995 and 13121995 do not, however, make out a case that the effect of the Government notification, introducing amendments in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, stood deleted.
This Court had an occasion to examine the effect of the said notification in Civil Writ Petition No. 1476 of 1996 and, by order dated 1521996, it was held that the subsequent orders of the Government did not bring about any amendment of the notification dated 2161994.
The circular letters issued in the year 1995 only sought to clarify the amendments brought into force through the notification and did not alter or nullify the effect of the amendments to the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Though the procedure laid down through the Government circulars is no more in force, the Government notification dated 2161994 remains in operation and has to be examined so as to see if the petitioner's date of birth could be rightly changed in the light of the amended Rules.
As has already been seen, notification dated 2161994 does not confer upon the petitioner any unqualified or unconditional right to claim change in the date of birth unless there were sufficient and valid reasons.
Simply because the Government employees were permitted to seek change in the date of birth, that would not permit the employees to seek such change without sufficient proof.
Even if the Government circular letters stood withdrawn, the State Government cannot be required to effect a change in the date of birth simply because an application for such a change has been made by an employee.
11.
A matter relating to the change in the date of birth came to be examined by the supreme Court in Union of India v. Ram Sua Sharma, 1996(2) Recent Services Judgment 147 and it was held that a claim made by an employee regarding change in the date of birth cannot be entertained after 25 years' service.
It was observed as under :-  "The controversy raised in this appeal is no longer res integra.
In a series of judgments, this Court has held that a court or tribunal at the belated stage cannot entertain a claim for the correction of the date of birth duly entered in the service records.
Admittedly, the respondent had joined the service on December 16, 1962.
After 25 years, he woke up and claimed that his correct date of birth is January 2, 1939 and not December 16, 1934.
That claim was accepted by the Tribunal and it directed the Government to consider the correction.
The direction is per se illegal."
12.
A matter regarding correction in the date of birth had also been examined earlier by the Supreme Court in Burn Standard Company Ltd and others v. Dinabandhu Majumdar and another, 1995(3) Recent Services Judgments 512 : 1995(3) SCT 126.
It was held that ordinarily the High Court should not, in exercise of its discretionary writ jurisdiction, entertain a writ application/petition filed by an employee of the Government or its instrumentality, towards the fag end of his service, seeking correction of his date of birth entered in his service record.
13.
A matter concerning change in the date of birth was earlier examined by this Court in Jiwan Dass v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(1) Recent Services Judgments 250, and it was held that application for correction of date of birth should be given within two years of joining service and that the Government servant had a remedy to approach civil Court for necessary relief.
The birth certificate (copy Annexure P1) obtained by the petitioner from Additional District Registrar (Births and Deaths), Hoshiarpur, does not appear to be a document which could be wholly relied upon and treated to be sufficiently credible document for the reasons already discussed.
The enquiry done by the SDO (Civil) cannot be treated as an enquiry by the Deputy Commissioner and thus the said enquiry cannot be said to be in accordance with the instructions of the Government.
Approval from the Department of Finance and the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms has also not been obtained as would appear from the letter dated 441997 addressed to the Advocate General, Punjab (referred to above).
The petitioner has sought change in the date of his birth when his service career is coming to a close and, in the light of the judgments of the Supreme Court, referred to above, such a request should not be allowed.
The petitioner is reaching his age of superannuation in this year.
Thus, the petitioner has sought change in the date of his birth when his service career is coming to an end as a Government employee.
In the result, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.