N K Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 3101972 is illegal, ultra vires, against the rules of service, inoperative and not binding upon him and so the plaintiff is entitled to salary, allowance and all benefits available to him as Technicians.
It is the case of the plaintiff that while he was working as a Technician under the Department of Industries Punjab at Rural Industrial Development Centre, ' Ramgarh Sardaran, District Ludhiana, was illegally placed under suspension.
Subsequently, he was reinstated.
But while reinstating him, his two annual grade increments with cumulative affect were stopped.
It was further ordered that the plaintiff will not be entitled to receive any pay etc. for the period during which he remained under suspension except the subsistence allowance already received by him and that the period of suspension shall not be considered as duty except for the purpose of pension.
This is challenged by the plaintiff before the civil Court.
3.
The claim of the plaintiff was resisted by the defendants.
4.
The suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court.
5.
The appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial Court was partly accepted and it was declared that plaintiff is entitled to entire salary and allowances etc. for the period of suspension till reinstatement minus whatever was received by the plaintiff earlier by way of subsistence allowance.
Interest at the rate of 8% per annum on this amount w.e.f.
3101972 till realisation was also awarded.
6.
Still dissatisfied, plaintiff has filed the present regular second appeal on the ground that stoppage of increment with cumulative effect is, in fact, a major penalty and as procedure prescribed for inflicting major penalty has not been followed, the order imposing the punishment deserves to be set aside on this ground alone.
7.
At the motion hearing, counsel for the appellant placed reliance upon the decision of the apex Court in case reported as Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30(SC) : 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 413.
Today again the counsel for the appellant has primarily placed reliance upon the aforesaid judgment of the apex Court and argued that since admittedly no enquiry has been conducted as per Rules 8 and 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short `the Rules'), the order imposing punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is legally unsustainable.
Elaborating the counsel argued that imposition of penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is a major punishment requiring conducting of a regular enquiry.
Since in the instant case no such enquiry had been conducted, the impugned order deserves to be set aside on this ground alone.
8.
The precise point came up for consideration in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra) wherein also the plaintiff filed a suit challenging the stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect on the ground that the same amounts to major penalty and that imposition thereof without conducting enquiry as enjoined under Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules is illegal.
In that case the trial Court held the impugned order amounting to a major penalty and so granted decree invalidating the order.
On appeal, this order was affirmed.
However, in the Regular Second Appeal before the High Court, it was held to be a minor penalty within the meaning of Rule 5(iv) of the Rules thus obviating the need to make regular enquiry.
It is in this context that the matter came up before the apex Court and the Court on considering the matter held as under:-  ``......
The impugned order of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect whether would fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v).
If it so falls, Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules required conducting of regular enquiry.
The contention of Shri Nayar, learned counsel for the State, is that withholding two increments with cumulative effect is only a minor penalty as it does not amount to reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay.
We find it extremely difficult to countenance the contention.
Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter without any hedge over it certainly comes within the meaning of Rules 5(iv) of the Rules.
But when penalty was imposed withholding two increments i.e. for two years with cumulative effect, it would indisputably mean that the two increments earned by the employee were cut off as a measure of penalty for ever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock starts working from that stage afresh.
The insidious affect of the impugned order by necessary implication, is that the appellant employee is reduced in his time- scale by two places and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that two years' increments would not be counted in his time-scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
The words are the skin to the language which if peeled off its true colour or its resultant effects would become apparent.
When we broach the problem from this perspective the effect is as envisaged under Rule 5(v) of the Rules.
......
This preposterous consequence cannot be permitted to be permeated.
Rule 5(v) does not empower the disciplinary authority to impose penalty of withholding increments of pay with cumulative effect except after holding inquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
Then the order would be without jurisdiction or authority of law, and it would be per se void.
Considering from this angle, we have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules; it is a major penalty and imposition of the impugned penalty without enquiry is per se illegal.''
The matter in issue is squarely covered by the decision in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra).
Accordingly, I accept the appeal and decree the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for.
Appeal accepted.