Surya Kumar Tiwari, J - This appeal arises out of an order passed by one of the learned Judges of this Court in CR No. 876 (W) of 1979, dated 21st January, 1988.
2.
The petitioner/respondent No. 1 was working as an Officer in the Export Inspecting Agency under the Government of India.
A charge-sheet was served on the ground that on 16.7.1979 he travelled in 2nd Class from Kishangunge to Sealdah and claimed Ist Class fare by mentioning Ist Class Ticket No. 00371 in his bill.
Hence he failed to maintain absolute integrity.
The petitioner was placed under suspension.
During the course of enquiry, the petitioner wanted that the xerox copies of the programmes and TA Bills of his 26 colleagues be furnished to him in order to enable him to submit his reply to the charge-sheet.
The said copies were not made available.
The xerox copies of documents listed at series Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 10 were not made available to him.
The copy of preliminary enquiry was also not supplied to him.
3.
The learned Judge of the Trial Court came to a finding that since all the copies demanded by the petitioner were not supplied to him, the enquiry was vitiated and, therefore, punishment of dismissal imposed on the petitioner was quashed and the respondent was allowed to proceed with the enquiry from the stage of charge-sheet, after giving the petitioners reasonable opportunity and after giving copies of document relied upon by him.
4.
Annexure 'M', at page 59 of the paper book, goes to show that on 7.12.1978 all the documents listed in Annexure III to the statement allegations were inspected by the petitioner before the presenting officer.
The petitioner wanted the xerox copies of documents mentioned at serial Nos 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 10.
But the presenting officer told him that without the permission of the enquiry officer it was not possible for him to supply these copies.
It does not appear from the record that the petitioner ever approached the enquiry officer with a prayer for the copies of these documents.
The documents were all along in the record of the enquiry proceedings and if the petitioner wanted to rely upon them to cross-examine the witnesses on the basis of those documents, he could have easily done so.
Therefore, the non- supply of xerox copies of the documents can hardly be a ground for quashing the departmental enquiry.
Similarly non-supply of preliminary enquiry report was also of no consequence for the reasons stated hereunder.
5.
The Supreme Court in case Chandrama Tiwari v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 117 has laid down that charged Government Officer is entitled to supply of copies of relevant and material documents including statement of witnesses recorded in the preliminary enquiry or during investigation.
Whether a document is relevant or material will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
In the instant case non-supply of report of Special Police Establishment in the Criminal Case relating to alleged theft by the charged official was held to be not to vitiate the enquiry.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not shown that in the absence of the xerox copies of these documents, the petitioner was not able to effectively cross-examine the witnesses produced from the side of the department.
The fact remains that the Ist Class Ticket No. 00371 was sold on 1691975 and not on 1671974.
Therefore, the petitioner could not perform his journey on that Ticket in Ist Class, when the Ticket had not been issued at all.
The petitioner by demanding copies of the TA Bills of his colleagues probably wanted to show that his colleagues had also indulged in similar activities of claiming false travelling allowances.
But that can hardly be a mitigating circumstance.
It, therefore, cannot be said that the petitioner was not afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
He had ample opportunities to prove by positive evidence that the Ticket No. 00371 was in fact issued to him.
Since he failed to meet the charge, he is taking shelter under the plea that all the xerox copies demanded by him were not supplied to him.
The cases relied on by the petitioner in his written arguments filed in this Court subsequent to the conclusion of hearing, therefore, do not help him.
7.
The petitioner has also challenged the enquiry on the ground that the charges were framed with a bias and closed mind and the disciplinary authority had already made up his mind.
This contention is not correct.
The wordings of the charges cannot be said to be prejudicial as suggested by petitioner.
8.
As regards non-examination of other witnesses, if the presenting officer did not think it necessary to examine them, he was perfectly within his rights to give them up.
The petitioner could have called them in defence.
If he thought their examination was necessary.
9.
The conclusion arrived at by the enquiry officer cannot be agitated in the writ proceeding.
Hence the petitioner's contention in this regard in his written submission merits no consideration.
10.
The next contention is that an outsider was appointed enquiry officer in violation of the statutory rules.
Hence the enquiry is vitiated as per law laid down in KK Mitra's case, 1987(2) CLJ 344.
The ratio of the case cited does not support the petitioner's contention.
11.
The last contention is that disciplinary authority (respondent No. 2 in the petition) did not apply his mind while awarding punishment.
Hence the order of dismissal is vitiated.
This contention has no sound basis and it does not merit any consideration.
12.
As regards punishment, it has been laid down by the Supreme Court in case of State Bank of India v. Samarendra, 1994(2) SCT 250 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 537 that the High Court has no powers to interfere in the matter of punishment and the punishment awarded by the disciplinary authority is not justiciable not even when the decision of the authority may not be correct.
Hence, this Court cannot interfere in the matter of punishment unless the enquiry is vitiated on the ground that the statutory rules were either not followed or that the principles of natural justice have not been observed.
13.
The appeal, therefore, deserves to be allowed and the order passed by the Trial Court is set aside and the writ petition filed by the petitioner is hereby dismissed without any order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.