RP Sethi, J - Claiming themselves to be belonging to the Scheduled Caste category, the petitioners, who were earlier appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers, have approached this Court for issuance of direction to the respondents to allocate them to the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers against the vacancies caused by Sarvashri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash Ranga, who despite being offered the posts did not accept the same.
2.
It is submitted that the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter to be referred as "the Commission") advertised the posts of Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services, vide advertisement notice.
Annexure P/1.
Out of 29 candidates allocated for appointment as Excise and Taxation Officer, 8 belonged to scheduled castes.
It is contended that two candidates belonging to the scheduled castes category namely Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash did not join the posts despite offer being made.
The petitioners claim to have represented to the Chief Secretary for their appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers.
Despite various representations, made by petitioner, no relief was granted to them who have thereafter chosen to file the present writ petition.
3.
Case of the petitioners is grounded upon the alleged instructions, according to which when offer is made to a candidate and the does not accept the offer, the next candidate in order of merit in that category has a right to appointment to the said post.
It is submitted that as the case of the petitioners was under consideration of the Law Department, they did not file the petition earlier and now being left with no option, they have approached this Court for the appropriate relief.
It is contended that under similar circumstances, this Court in Rohtas Singh Kharab v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) SLR 45 issued direction to reallocate/appoint the next candidate in order of merit.
The petitioners have also relied upon the judgment of this Court in Zile Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(1) SCT 11 (P&H) : 1993(1) SLR 166.
It is contended that as both the aforesaid posts of Excise and Taxation Officers are still lying vacant, the petitioners have a right to be appointed to the said posts.
Action of the respondents is alleged to be discriminatory and violative of provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 and 2, it is submitted that on the recommendation of the Commission, names of 29 candidates were allocated in order of merit for appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers vide their letter dated 691988.
Before offering appointment to these candidates, the position regarding the cadre strength of the Excise and Taxation Officers, distribution of vacancies between the direct recruits and promotees according to service rules was examined and it was found that 20 posts of Excise and Taxation Officers meant for direct recruits were available.
20 candidates were offered appointment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers against the quota posts available on 22111988 and 2131989.
It is conceded that two candidates, namely Sarvshri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash did not join as Excise and Taxation Officers.
The remaining seven candidates could not be appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers because no quota posts of direct recruits were available.
The names of these candidates were sent back of the Chief Secretary, Haryana, who was also informed that the aforesaid candidates could be appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers instead of Excise and Taxation Officers.
The remaining seven candidates, namely Sarvshri Jagdeep Singh, Inder Singh Bagri, Amarjit Singh, Subhash Chander, Kamboj, Vijay Kumar Singh, Narinder Kumar Ranga and Uma Shankar Gaur were offered the appointment of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers on 351989.
Out of the aforesaid seven candidates, five candidates joined duty as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers and two did not join.
Sarvashri Jagdeep Singh and others, who were not appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers as per the recommendation of the Commission, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13621 of 1989 in this Court.
Thereafter Civil Miscellaneous No. 321/1994 was filed by the petitioners in the aforesaid writ petition, stating therein that from 881988, new rules had come into force and 50 posts of Excise and Taxation Officers were created till 671993.
Out of these 16 posts, 4 posts have been adjusted, which were in excess of the quota meant for direct recruits.
Four posts have been filled in ex-gratia policy and 8 posts are still lying vacant in the quota meant for direct recruits.
The petitioners in the aforesaid Civil Miscellaneous prayed that the Government be directed to consider their case for appointment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers.
The aforesaid writ petition and the Civil Miscellaneous were disposed of by this Court on 23.2.1994 with the directions to consider the case of the petitioners for appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers.
In compliance to the direction of the Court, the remaining candidates, namely Sarvshri Jagdeep Jain, Amarjit, Singh Subhash Chander Kamboj, Inder Singh Bagri, Vijay Kumar Singh, Narinder Kumar Ranga and Uma Shankar Gaur were appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers on 171994.
It is claimed that 29 candidates recommended by the Commission and sponsored by the Chief Secretary have been offered appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers against the quota of direct recruits.
Out of these, 2 candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes category, namely Sarvshri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash did not join and one general category candidate namely Shri Vinay Singh was reallocated to Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) on 2381993.
It is submitted that the presentation of the petitioners regarding re-allocation was duly considered by respondent No. 2 and rejected vide letter dated 19.4.1995.
Respondent No. 1 further communicated the rejection of the representations to the petitioners vide his letter dated 2641995.
The representation made by the petitioner for their reallocation to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers is claimed to have been rightly rejected in terms of the instructions contained in the circular dated 1111962.
The vacancies caused on account of non-joining of Sarvshri Sat Parkash and Dalbir Singh are stated to have been carried forward as additional vacancies for the next year.
It is submitted that out of various instructions relied upon by the petitioners, only the instructions dated 1111962 (Annexure P-9) were applicable in the case of the petitioners, who appeared in the Combined Competitive Examination for Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services.
Other instructions are stated to be not applicable in the present case.
The instructions dated 2231957 (Annexure P-8) are stated to have been revised by the instructions dated 26.5.1972 (Annexure P- 10).
It is further submitted that the instructions dead 1111962 (Annexure P-9) are also district and not applicable.
It is contended that the action of the respondents was legal, just, fair and constitutionally valid.
It is stated that no fundamental or legal right of the petitioners has been violated.
5.
In their reply filed on behalf of respondent-Commission, it is submitted that the Commission had recommended the names of 29 candidates including the names of 8 scheduled castes candidates, four Backward Class candidates and two Ex-servicemen, for appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers.
It is contended that the names of the petitioners were never recommended for the post of Excise and Taxation Officers.
It is admitted that the two candidates of the Scheduled Castes category recommended for the post of Excise and Taxation Officer did not join and the petitioners, who belonged to Scheduled Castes category were toppers in their category, in the list of candidates recommended for the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
It is further contended that the petitioners, who were recommended for the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers, could not be appointed to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
7.
It is admitted that after the result of the Combined Competitive Examination, 1987 for Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services conducted by the Commission, the petitioners were appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers in the Department of Excise and Taxation by the Government vide letter No. 1315-ET-V-89/5836 dated 21st March, 1989.
It is also not denied that the petitioners were not included in the list of 29 candidates recommended for the then available 20 posts.
It is also not denied that the petitioners were at serial Nos. 1 and 2 in the SC category in the list of candidates recommended for appointment as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers in the Department of Excise and Taxation, Haryana.
The respondents have also admitted that Sarvshri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash Ranga who were offered appointment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers and belonged to the Scheduled Castes Category, did not join the post.
The only point for consideration is as to whether the petitioners had the right to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers, lying vacant on account of non-joining of Sarvshri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash Ranga ?
8.
A perusal of Annexure P-1 shows that a combined competitive examination for recruitment to the services mentioned therein, was directed to be held by the Commission in accordance with the rules contained in the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, as amended from time to time, Annexure P-8 dealing with the subject of procedure to be observed by the Administrative Departments of the Punjab Government in their dealing with the Public Service Commission, prescribes that where a candidates declines to accept the post offered to him against a vacancy, which was intimated to the Public Service Commission, such a vacancy can be filled up even after the expiry of six months out of the approved list of candidates initially received from the Commission.
The period prescribed for the recommended list to be alive is mentioned as six months.
The position was reiterated in the letter Annexure P-10 dated 26.5.1972, dealing with the subject of appointment of candidates out of the waiting list prepared by the Commission, after re-examining the instructions issued in the composite Punjab and with a view to bring them upto date, it was decided to revise the instructions as under :-  "(a) At the time of making their recommendations to the concerned department for the posts to be filled in through direct recruitment, the Haryana Public Service Commission/Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board will recommend five names in addition to the number of vacancies intimated by the department.
The Commission/Board will also intimate to the department whether a waiting list for filling the additional vacancies occurring thereafter is available with them or not.
If the number of the additional qualified candidates be less than five, then the recommendations only to the extent of the number of qualified candidates will be made by the Commission/Board.
(b) If the Commission/Board make recommendations regarding a post to the department and additional vacancies occur in that department within a period of 6 months of the receipt of these recommendtions then the vacancies which occur later on can be filled in from amongst the five additional candidates recommended by the Commission/Board.
In case the number of the vacancies which occur subsequently exceeds five, then it will be necessary to obtain more names from the waiting list maintained by the Commission/Board.
If the department had made a reference to the Commission/Board within a period of six months of the receipt of the original recommendations of the Commission/Board, but the information regarding additional names is received after the expiry of a period of six months, even then the regular appointments can be made out of the additional names recommended by the Commission/Board.
If the Commission/Board have not made any recommendations regarding filling up of any post by direct recruitment during the past period or if they had made any recommendations but these were made earlier than the period of last six months, then it will not be necessary for the department to ask for additional names out of the waiting list prepared by the Commission/Board.
(c) In those cases where the Commission/Board have been asked to send additional names out of the waiting list but the Commission/Board fail to make their recommendations regarding additional names within a period of 15 days then the department will be competent, in such a situation, to make appointments against such vacancies on ad hoc basis.
(d) Additional vacancies which have been referred to above will be those vacancies which have occurred within period of six months of the receipt of the original recommendations of the Commission/Board and these vacancies will not include such vacancies which have actually not occurred within a period of six months but there is a possibility of their occurrence in future.
(2) It may also be clarified in this connection that if a letter of appointment is issued to a candidate on the basis of the recommendations made by the Commission/Board against a vacancy which was intimated by the department to the Commission/Board and the candidate refuses to join the department, then in such a case the time limit of six months will not be applicable and in such a contingency, vacancy be filled up even after the expiry of a period of six months from the five additional names referred to above or from the waiting list prepared by the Commission/Board."
9.
Vide Annexure P-11 dated 2411995 issued for and on behalf of Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Excise and Taxation Department, Chandigarh, it was conceded that out of 29 candidates recommended for appointment as Excise and Taxation Officers, two Scheduled Castes category candidates did not join and one general-category candidate was re- allocated from Excise and Taxation Officer to H.C.S.
(Elective Branch) on 2381993.
It was specifically brought to the notice of the Chief Secretary:-  "Keeping in view the Govt. instructions issued vide letter No. 5024-1 GS-72/26877 dated 891972 and Punjab and Haryana High Court ruling in CWP No. 8300 of 1987 filed by Shri Rohtas Singh Kharab, decided on 1891989 in CWP No. 3432 of 1991, filed by Shri Vinay Singh, decided on 22.10.1992, it was proposed to fill up 3 vacancies by offering appointments/re- allocation turn waiting list candidates with lower merit.
Before proceeding in the matter opinion of the Law Department was obtained.
The Law Department tendered his opinion vide his UO.
No. 4734-G (18) Excise and Taxation officer and OP Br.
94/1436 dated 21121994 as under :- "In the opinion of this department, the proposed filling up of the resultant vacancies of ETOs from amongst the AETOs in order of their merit in the respective categories as prepared by the Commission will be proper and in order."
(4) Keeping in view the above advice of LR it has been decided with the approval of the Chief Minister of Haryana Govt., Chandigarh, to fill up 3 resultant vacancies of ETOs from the AETOs recommended by H.P.SC in order of their merits conveyed by the Chief Secretary, Haryana, vide their UO No. 66/28/87-7 GSI dated 691988.
(5) Accordingly, it is requested to re-allocate the names of candidates (two from SC category and one from General Category) for appointment to the post of ETOs from amongst the AETOs in the order of their merit in the respective category as prepared by the Commission conveyed by the Chief Secretary vide their UO No. 66/28/87-7 GSI dated 691988.
It is also mentioned here that out of 12 candidates recommended for appointment as AETOs one candidate Shri Narotam Kaushal who was appointed as AETO on 2131989 tendered his resignation which was accepted w.e.f.
31.10.1989 (AN)" 10.
Despite the letter written for and on behalf of the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Govt. Haryana, the representation (Annexure P-12) of the petitioners was rejected without assigning any valid reasons.
Learned counsel for the respondents have conceded that the petitioners, in fact, had appeared in the combined competitive examination for recruitment to the posts mentioned in Annexure P-1, including the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers.
As the vacancies were specified, the petitioners could not be appointed to the posts on the basis of their performance in the said competitive examination.
However, on the basis of their merit, they were recommended to be appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
It has been conceded by the respondents that the petitioners were definitely at serial Nos. 1 and 2 in the waiting list of candidates, belonging to the Scheduled Castes category, who were recommended for appointment as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
After Balbir Singh and Sat Parkash had declined to accept the offer to be appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers, it was obligatory on the part of the respondent/State to offer such posts to the next candidates in order of the merit determined on the basis of the combined competitive examination.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioners did not possess the requisite qualifications for the post of Excise and Taxation Officers or that they had not appeared in the said examination.
It was obligatory on the part of the respondent-State to offer the aforesaid two vacant posts of Scheduled Castes category to the petitioners in view of the Government's own policies, referred hereinabove (as Annexurer P-8, P-9 and P-10).
The opinion of the Law Department and the recommendations made by and on behalf of the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Government were rejected without assigning any valid reasons.
The existence of the aforesaid two vacancies has not been disputed before us.
Despite mentioning in their reply, "Recommendation letter of H.C.S.
(Ex.B.)
and other allied service examination, 1987 sent to the respondent No. 1 will be produced at the time of arguments."
No such recommendation was shown to us.
As the vacancies had occurred within the time specified by the Government instructions and the same were required to be filled up from the waiting list, we are of the opinion that the petitioners' grievance was genuine, bona fide, legal and based upon the provisions of law and instructions issued in that behalf.
There was no justification for the respondents to carry forward the vacancies of the Excise and Taxation Officers in the Scheduled Castes category when candidtaes in order of merit determined on the basis of the combined competitive examination were available.
11.
The facts of the present case are similar to those, adjudicated by this Court in Rohtas Singh Kharab v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) SLR 45 and Vinay Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) SCT 730 (P&H) : 1993(1) SLR 167.
12.
The petitioners have also referred to the cases of Sarvshri DP Naggal, Lal Singh, CP Singh, Lajvir Singh, KK Sharma, MS Malik, Rohtas Kharab, Umed Singh, GS Verma and Vinay Singh, It is submitted that they were also allocated to the next higher post when the candidates higher in merit declined to accept the offer.
The petitioners have rightly claimed to have been discriminated despite the fact that they were similarly situated.
13.
Under the circumstances, the Writ Petition is allowed, by quashing the impugned order (Annexure P-12) and with a command to the respondents to appoint the petitioners as Excise and Taxation Officers against the posts meant for Scheduled Castes category quota, which admittedly are lying vacant on account of non-joining/non-acceptance of the offer of appointment by Sarvshri Dalbir Singh and Sat Parkash Ranga.
No costs.
Petition allowed.