NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's regular second appeal against judgment and decree of the District Judge whereby appeal was accepted thereby dismissing the suit filed by the plaintiff.
2.
Smt. Narinder Kaur, widow of Kulwant Singh, filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 13.2.1980 passed by defendant No. 2 terminating her husband's services is illegal, unconstitutional and so liable to be set aside and that the plaintiff is entitled to get pay and allowances, damages and pensionary benefits which otherwise would have accrued to the deceased.
3.
Briefly put, suit was filed seeking a declaration that the order dated 13.2.1980 passed by Senior Superintendent of Police and this order having been affirmed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and Inspector General of Police in appeal and revision terminating the plaintiff's husband's services were unconstitutional, illegal and ineffective.
It was further stated that Kulwant Singh has put in more than 11 years of service and that false charges have been levelled against him.
The departmental enquiry conducted ignored the evidence which was favourable to Kulwant Singh and that the enquiry was not conducted according to Rules and that the report was made by the Enquiry Officer on extraneous considerations.
4.
This suit was resisted by the defendants who stated that Kulwant Singh's services were terminated after holding regular departmental enquiry during his life time.
No arrears of any kind were due to Kulwant Singh and so the plaintiff was debarred from filing the present suit.
Enquiry conducted by the department was also defended.
According to the defendants, Kulwant Singh rendered only 8 years, 3 months and 24 days of service.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the plaintiff is debarred from filing this suit ?
OPD (2) Whether the impugned order is illegal, wrong, unconstitutional etc. as alleged ?
OPP.
(3) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any allowances, pension benefit etc., as alleged ?
OPP.
(4) Relief.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the defendants.
Under issue No. 2, it was held that since sanction had not been sought from the District Magistrate in terms of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, entire proceedings and the resultant impugned orders were illegal and void.
Under issue No. 3, it was held that since the impugned order has been held to be bad, plaintiff being heir to Kulwant Singh is entitled to all the benefits to which Kulwant Singh himself was entitled till the date of his death.
As regards the plaintiff's claim for pension or gratuity, it was held that the same shall be decided by the department according to Rules applicable to the deceased police official.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed to that extent.
6.
Before the appellate Court finding of the trial Court in respect of issue No. 2 was challenged.
It was argued that even if be taken that enquiry proceedings were vitiated on account of some legal defect yet the same will not wash off the charges against the employee and that the State can proceed with a fresh enquiry.
According to the counsel the illegality of the departmental enquiry will not automatically amount to reinstatement of an employee giving him a right to wages etc. and so on account of the death of the employee, no cause of action accrues to the plaintiff to claim such a relief.
Reliance was placed upon the decision of the Madras High Court in U. Vridhachalam and others v. State of Madras, AIR 1966 Madras 260 which in turn relied upon the decision of the apex Court in Calcutta Gas Company v. State of West Bengal and others, AIR 1962 SC 1044.
Accordingly, the lower appellate Court came to the conclusion that the plaintiff is not entitled to pay and allowances to which her husband would have been entitled but for the termination order.
However, it was clarified that the plaintiff can receive pension and other allowances on account of death of her husband.
7.
The grievance of the appellant is that the lower appellate Court erred in law in not granting the allowances as well as damages to the plaintiff despite the fact that order of termination has been held to be illegal.
Once the Court comes to the conclusion that order is illegal necessarily it is to be inferred that the same is non-existent and so for all intents and purposes the plaintiff's husband would be deemed to be in service till his death.
So for the intervening period i.e. from the date of the order of termination till his death the plaintiff is legally entitled to the relief of pay and other allowances which her husband could be awarded.
I find no merit in his plea of the learned counsel for the appellant on the ground that even if an order passed by the departmental authority is held to be violative of the Rules or on account of principles of natural justice yet the same does not debar the authority from proceeding afresh on the same charges nor declaration of such an order to be illegal ipso facto entitles an employee to his reinstatement.
In the present case after the completion of the enquiry unfortunately Kulwant Singh expired.
So, the right to the post which was personal right to him became non-existent on his death.
Accordingly, no such right survives to a dependant.
As held by the Court below, plaintiff being a dependent/legal representative of course is entitled to the pensionary benefits according to Rules.
That right has already been upheld by both the courts.
Thus, finding no merit in this appeal the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.