GS Singhvi and SS Sudhalkar, JJ.
- Aggrieved by the order dated 27.12.1995 passed by the Director, Education Department (Schools), Punjab rejecting the prayer of the petitioner for his promotion as Arts and Crafts Teacher, the petitioner has moved this Court and has prayed for quashing of the order Annexure P6 with a further direction to the respondents to promote him as Arts and Crafts Teacher in accordance with the circular dated 25.4.1972 (Annexure P4) issued by the Government of Punjab.
2.
The averments made in the writ petition show that the petitioner was appointed as a Workshop Attendant in Govt. Senior Secondary School (Boys), Malout on 411982.
While holding the post of Workshop Attendant, the petitioner seems to have been asked to do the job of Arts and Crafts Teacher by the Principal of the School.
Having felt encouraged by some of the decisions of this Court, the petitioner also submitted an application for promotion to the post of Art and Crafts Teacher.
His application was forwarded to the Director Education Department (Schools), Punjab, by the District Education Officer, Faridkot, with favourable comments.
However, respondent No. 2 did not accept the claim of the petitioner.
As a result, the petitioner filed CWP No. 295 of 1994 before this Court, which was decided on 29111994 by passing the following order :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, this writ petition is disposed of at this stage with direction to respondent No. 2 to consider and decide the case of the petitioner, recommended through the District Education Officer, Faridkot vide annexure P6 strictly in accordance with the circular (annexure P5) and the relevant rules and if found eligible be promoted as Arts and Crafts teacher on ad hoc basis.
Let the needful be done within two months."
3.
In compliance of the direction given by High Court, the Director, Education Department (Schools), Punjab, examined the case of the petitioner and observed that in the absence of any provision in the rules governing the recruitment to the post of Arts and Crafts Teacher, the petitioner cannot be promoted on that post.
The Director also observed that in the instructions issued vide circular dated 25.4.1972 also there is no provision for promotion from the post of Workshop Attendant to the post of Arts and Crafts Teacher on ad hoc/regular basis and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to be promoted on that post.
4.
Shri Vinod Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, invited our attention to the order dated 16.5.1990 passed in CWP No. 4025 of 1988 (Dharam Chand v. State of Punjab) and another order passed in CWP No. 8189 of 1993 (Roop Chand v. State of Punjab) and submitted that in view of the directions given by this Court in the cases of Dharam Chand and Roop Chand, the petitioner deserves to the promoted as Arts and Crafts teacher.
Learned counsel argued that the instructions contained circular dated 25.4.1972 have been interpreted by a learned Single Judges in Dharam Chand's case as entitling even a Class-IV employee to be promoted to the post of a teacher and, therefore, Director, Education Department (Schools), Punjab, was not justified in taking a contrary view.
In substance, the learned counsel argued that the Director was bound by the interpretation of the circular as made by the Court and in any case, in view of the two judgments of this Court, the petitioner cannot be discriminated in regard to his claim for promotion to the post of Arts and Crafts Teacher.
5.
During the course of arguments, we enquired from the learned counsel whether there exists any provision in the rules regulating the recruitment to the post of teachers for promotion from amongst Class-IV employees.
Learned counsel submitted that though there does not exist any such provision in the rules but the instructions issued by the Government vide circular dated 25.4.1972 can appropriately be treated as supplemental to the statutory rules and the Government in exercise of its executive power under Article 162 of the Constitution of India can supplement the statutory rules and can make available posts of teachers for being filled up from amongst Class-IV employees.
6.
Perusal of circular dated 25.4.1972 shows that while realising the fact that Class-IV employees were stagnating on their posts for sufficiently long time, the Government decided to open an avenue of promotion for them on experimental basis with a clear understanding that the suitable amendment in the statutory rules providing for promotional avenues of Class-IV employees, would be made later on.
Para 21 of these instructions provides for ad hoc and temporary appointments of Class-IV employees against Class-III clerical posts.
Para 22 confers discretion on the competent authority to prefer Class-IV employees subject to their suitability in the matter of appointment to Class -III posts as against the candidates recommended by the Employment Exchange.
For the purpose of this order we may quote paras 2(i), 2(ii) and 2(iii) of the circular dated 25.4.1972.
These are as under :-  "(i) For temporary recruitment on ad hoc basis which is made in anticipation of regular selection against Class-III clerical posts i.e. Clerks etc., (through the Departmental Committee in SSS Board) Class-IV employees shall be eligible for consideration after getting no objection certificate from their appointing authorities concerned.
The eligibility from age point of view would be determined after deducting the period of service rendered by them in Class IV service.
(ii) The appointing authorities shall have the discretion to prefer their Class IV employees subject to their suitability, to the other candidates, recommended by employment exchanges as a measure of temporary arrangement of the nature referred to above.
(iii) The SSS Board or in its absence that recruiting agency as may be prescribed by the Government for filling common categories of posts viz. Clerks etc, shall pool 10 per cent of the requirement of vacancies occurring in a particular year in various offices in the State for holding an Examination specifically confined to such Class-IV employees, who fulfil the requirements of minimum qualifications prescribed for various services and who are borne on regular establishment in the offices concerned.
The selection list prepared after conducting this examination will be utilised for the promotion of Class-IV employees in such offices in which they appropriately fit in (for example in Secretariat only First Class Matriculates or Graduates from the Select List shall be recommended because the Secretariat Rules prescribed these minimum qualifications).
Unfilled vacancies would not be carried over to the next year."
A careful analysis of the above extract of the circular shows that the Government clearly intended to create one avenue of promotion for Class IV employees for doing office work.
The use of expression 'Class III clerical posts' followed by the use of 'i.e.'
and then 'clerks etc.' clearly indicates that the new avenue of promotion to Class IV employees was restricted to Ministerial posts and not all types of Class III posts.
Provision for pooling of the 10 per cent of vacancies occurring in a particular year in various offices in the State and utilisation of select list for appointment in various offices fortifies the conclusion that Class IV employees are entitled to be promoted only against clerical posts.
7.
The decision of the learned Single Judge in Dharam Chand's case (supra) is based on the interpretation of the expression 'clerks etc.' without reference to other expressions and without appreciation of the other parts of the circular dated 25.4.1972.
If the Government intended that promotional avenue should be made open against all the posts there was no reason for it to use the words 'clerical posts' after the words 'Class III' and then further use 'i.e., clerks etc.'.
The use of 'etc.'
after the word 'clerks' shows that posts similar to those of clerks are also to be filled by promoting Class IV servants.
In our opinion, the rule of ejusdem generis must be applied for interpreting the expression 'clerks etc.' Accordingly that expression should take its colour from the preceding words and, it cannot but be restricted to the posts which are akin or similar to the posts of clerks and other posts falling in the broad category of Class III posts are not intended to be filled by promotion from amongst Class IV employees.
We, therefore, hold that the decision of the learned Single Judge does not lay down correct law.
8.
The sole basis of the decision of Roop Chand's case (supra) is the previous decision in Dharam Chand's case and as we have expressed our inability to agree with the interpretation of para 2(i) of the circular dated 25.4.1972 as made by the learned Single Judge in Dharam Chand's case, the petitioner cannot derive any benefit from the decision in Roop Chand's case.
9.
There is another reason why the petitioner is not entitled to be promoted as teacher.
Once the Government has decided to frame rules in exercise of its power under the Constitution of India or an Act of the Legislature for recruitment to the posts of teachers, that field must be deemed to have been occupied by those rules and when the rules do not provide for promotion to the post of teacher from Class IV post, it is not open to the Government to issue administrative instruction in exercise of its executive powers to create a new source of recruitment.
We find ourselves unable to agree with Shri Sharma that the instructions issued on 25.4.1972 should be treated as supplemental to the Rules.
If the instructions are read as laying down a new source of promotion to the posts of teachers the same is liable to be ignored being contrary to the statutory rules.
10.
We are also of the opinion that simply because Dharam Chand and Roop Chand have been given promotion by the Government on the basis of the orders passed by this Court, the petitioner cannot be given promotion as a matter of course.
The judgments rendered by this Court in Dharam Chand's case (supra) and Roop Chand's case (supra) are, no doubt, binding on the Government qua those petitioners, but, simply on the basis of those judgments, it is not possible for us to issue a direction which would result in infraction of the statutory rules.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.