GS Singhvi, J - These two petitions involve determination of identical questions of law and therefore the same are being decided by a common order.
2.
Civil Writ Petition 14973 of 1994 has been filed by Jasmer Singh and Sultan Singh both of whom are presently serving as Constables in the police department of the Government of Haryana.
Petitioner No. 1 was enrolled in Haryana Police on 3.12.1988 and petitioner No. 2 was enrolled on 2181988.
In the year 1994, B-1 test was held for the police personnel to District Karnal.
About 500 candidates appeared in the test.
According to the petitioners, 112 candidates passed the Law Paper.
Over 90 candidates passed the Parade test and thereafter the Departmental Promotion Committee prepared a merit list.
Out of which a list of 25 candidates was given to District Karnal for being sent to the Lower School Course.
5 candidates were kept in the waiting list.
Names of the petitioners appeared at serial Nos. 1 and 3 in the waiting list whereas name of the respondent No. 5 appeared at serial No. 4 This list was approved by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak, vide his letter dated 131994.
Petitions have further pleaded that out of list of 25 candidates, 13 were sent for the Lower School Course which commenced w.e.f.
141994.
12 other candidates have been detailed for the Lower School Course which commenced on 1101994.
They have further stated that the Superintendent of Police, Karnal, had written a letter, Annexure P-4 dated 871994, to the Director General of Police, Haryana, for allotment of 5 more seats to this District.
A further request to this effect was made by the Superintendent of Police, Karnal, which was turned down by respondent No. 2 vide his Savingram dated 16.8.1994.
Notwithstanding this the same authority, i.e., respondent No. 2 issued a direction for admission of respondent No. 5 to the Lower School Course vide Annexure P-6.
This action of respondent No. 2 has been challenged by the petitioners on the ground that respondent No. 2 does not have any legal authority to pick out a candidate having lower merit for being sent to the Lower School Course.
Petitioners have pleaded that on the basis of their placement at serial Nos. 1 and 3 in the waiting list, they have a preferential right as against respondent No. 5 to be sent for Lower School Course.
Another ground of challenge to the impugned order passed by respondent No. 2 is that if at all respondent No. 2 had created an additional seat, the policy of reservation could not have been applied against one seat.
Yet another ground of challenge is that even though the Superintendent of Police, Karnal, had requested for creation of 5 additional seats, the respondent No. 2 rejected that request in August, 1994 and in less than two months, he issued a direct order for sending respondent No. 5 to the Lower School Course.
3.
The writ petition has been opposed by respondents 1 to 4 who have pleaded that the respondent No. 5 has been sent to the Lower School Course as a special case.
It has been pleaded that the respondent No. 5 belongs to the Scheduled Caste and as per policy of the Government circulated vide Memo dated 1891992, Annexure R-1, the Government is bound to give effect to roster system.
Respondents have pleaded that the additional seat was allocated to respondent No. 5 in order to make good backlog of the vacancies meant for reserved categories.
Respondents have further stated that only one vacancy meant for the Scheduled Caste was allotted to respondent No. 5 and the petitioners who belong to the general category have no right to compete with the respondent No. 5.
4.
Civil Writ Petition No. 15302 of 1994 has been filed by Umed Singh and the only difference in this case and Civil Writ Petition 14973 of 1994 is that the name of Umed Singh appears at serial No. 2 in the waiting list.
5.
First contention of Shri Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that on the basis of their placement at serial Nos. 1 to 3 in the waiting list, the petitioners have a preferential right to be sent for the Lower School Course as against respondent No. 5 who was at No. 4 in the waiting list.
Shri Balhara argued that the respondent No. 5 could not have been given any favoured treatment merely because she belongs to the Scheduled Caste.
Learned counsel submitted that against one additional seat, there could not have been any reservation in favour of the Schedule Caste particularly when the Scheduled Caste candidates had already been sent for the Lower School Course as per their roster points.
Learned counsel pointed out that the candidates at serial Nos. 4, 8, 10, 14 and 24 belong to the Scheduled Castes and those at serial Nos. 16 and 22 belong to the Backward Classes and therefore in fact, there was no backlog of vacancies for the Scheduled Caste.
Learned counsel relied on the decision of the Supreme Court Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and others, 1989(2) S.L.R.
119 and also on State of Punjab v. GS Gill, 1990(6) S.L.R.
706, Baljit Singh v. State of Haryana, 1991 (2) S.L.R.
453 and Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SCT 493(SC) : 1991(6) S.L.R.
645, in support of his argument that there could not be reservation against one vacancy in a cadre.
He lastly argued that when the Director General of Police had declined to give 5 additional seats vide his letter dated 16.8.1994, there was no justification for creation of one additional seat simply in order to accommodate respondent No. 5.
Learned Assistant Advocate General and Shri Surjewala argued that the candidates who have been selected in main list, have been so selected on the basis of the marks secured by them in the over all merit list and none of them has been given the benefit of the reservation and for that reasons respondents 1 to 4 were fully justified in giving the benefit of reservation to respondent No. 5 Learned consel further argued that Government is under a Constitutional obligation to give effect to the policy of reservation and what has been done by giving admission to the respondent No. 5 to the Lower School Course is nothing but an attempt to undo injustice done to the members of the Scheduled Castes.
They argued that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Chakradhar Paswan's case and the other cases decided by this Court does not apply to a situation like one obtaining in the present case.
6.
Learned Assistant Advocate General produced before the Court the merit list prepared by the Departmental Selection Committee as a result of B-1 test.
7.
A look at the merit list prepared by the Departmental Selection Committee shows that for District Karnal in all 24 candidates were included in the merit list and 5 others including the petitioners and the respondent No. 5 were included in the waiting list.
A look at this list further shows that Sarvshri Chander Pal, Jangir Singh and Bhag Singh secured marks more than the General Category candidates.
Ram Pal secured marks equal to the last candidate belonging to the General Category.
Only Jagdish secured less marks than the last candidate admitted to the Lower School Course from the General Category.
Thus, in facts and in substance, only one candidate belongs to the Scheduled Caste who was given the benefit of reservation.
Others who had secured more marks than the General Category candidates cannot be treated as candidates who were given the benefit of reservation.
Therefore, it will have to be held that the Government had committed a serious error in not giving the benefit of reservation to other members of the Scheduled Castes so as to fulfil the quota of reservation in accordance with the roster points.
In a way, the failure of the respondents 1 to 4 to give benefit of reservation to the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, though they may be less meritorious than the General Category candidates, resulted in violation of constitutional rights for the members of the Scheduled Caste.
If the policy of reservation had been correctly applied, the respondent No. 5 would have been admitted to the Lower School Course in the first batch of the candidates.
By passing the order, Annexure P-6, respondent No. 2 has done nothing more than to remove injustice done to the respondent No. 5.
8.
In Indra Sawhney and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(1) SCT 448(SC) : 1993(1) R.S.J.
1, the Supreme Court has considered the scope of Article 16(4) and observed in paragraph 831 of the judgment, as under :-  "In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a communal reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say, Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition held on the basis of their own merit; they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste; they will be treated as open competition candidate."
9.
A learned Single Judge of Gujarat High Court had considered a similar issue in Sida Nitin Kumar Laxman Kumar Laxmanbhai and another v. Gujarat University and others, A.I.R. 1991 Gujarat 48 and observed as under :-  "From the aforesaid settled legal position it is evident that the posts or seats are reserved for individuals belonging to particular caste, community or class.
But reverse is not true.
Members belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Socially and Educationally Backward Class for whom reservation of posts is made are not reserved for these seats or posts.
They cannot be asked to occupy only reserved seats/posts.
They would be and should be free to occupy any seat or post including unreserved posts.
However, while claiming unreserved posts, they should prove their merit like any other citizen who is not entitled to benefits of reservation.
To deny them the right to occupy any seat other than the seat reserved would amount to denying them the right of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution."
10.
A similar view has been expressed by a Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 10053 of 1994, Jaskaran Singh etc. v Secretary, Health & Family Welfare Department, Punjab and others, 1995(2) S.C.T.
65, decided on 24101994.
The Division Bench of which I was a member observed :  "A. perusal of the afore-quoted instructions would make it clear that prior to their issuance the method adopted for admitting students against open category seats and the reserved seats was that from the merit list of all the students including the reserved and unreserved categories admission was given to them on merit and after filling up the open category seats, the remaining candidates belonging to different reserved categories were offered admission against the reserved seats.
This system was given a go-bye by the instructions and the State Medical Colleges were directed to do otherwise.
In our opinion, the instructions as they now stand are unreasonable and frustrate the very purpose for which reservations are intended to be made.
The object of any reservation is to give some benefit by reserving a few seats for that class for whom reservation is made.
The underlying assumption is that such a class of persons is not capable of competing on merits with others because of economic, social, geographical, political or any other reason.
It does not, however, imply that if a person from a reserved class does well on merit and secures a higher position than the general candidates, he should not be allowed to take advantage of his merit and compete for the seats meant for the general candidates.
The reservation inheres in itself the grant of some concession to a class of persons who are not otherwise likely to get admissions and if any one from that class can get admission on merit, it cannot be said that such a person has been given the benefit of that concession and that he should be given a seat meant only for the unreserved category.
The implementation of the present policy of the State Government would mean that a candidate belonging to the reserved category is not allowed to seek admission against the seats meant for general categories and the reservation instead of working to the benefit of the reserved categories would work to their detriment.
The effect of such instructions would be that students falling in the reserved categories can only claim the reserved seats and even if they fare better than others in the open competition they will not be allowed to occupy any unreserved seat.
In other words, it means that only such number of candidates from the reserved category would be allowed admission as are equal to the number of reserve seats even though larger number from that class may have secured more marks than the candidates in the general category.
This, in our opinion, is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
11.
In view of the above-quoted principles of law it must be held that the action of the respondent No. 2 in sending respondent No. 5 for Lower School Course does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
12.
In my considered opinion where the action has been taken by respondent 1 to 4 to remove injustice done to a member of Scheduled Caste, the principle of law laid down in Dr. Chakradhar Pawan's case and other cases has no application.
13.
Likewise, argument of the learned counsel on the question of creation of the posts also does not cut an ice and the order, Annexure P-6, cannot be nullified merely because at an earlier point of time respondent No. 2 had declined the request of the respondent No. 4 to create additional seats for District Karnal.
14.
Last argument of Shri Balhara is that Shri Surinder Singh whose name appeared at No. 25 in B-1 list is less meritorious than the petitioners and yet he has been selected for the Lower School Course.
Shri Balhara wanted this Court to record a finding that Surinder Singh has secured less marks than petitioner Jasmer Singh and therefore, he could not have been placed above that petitioner in List B-I In my opinion this argument of Shri Balhara cannot be accepted for the simple reason that Surinder Singh is not party to the writ petition.
Any finding which may adversely affect the position of Surinder Singh cannot be recorded by the Court in his absence.
15.
No other point has been argued.
16.
For the reasons recorded above, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
However, liberty is given to the petitioners or any one of them to challenge the placement of Shri Surinder Singh by way of filing separate writ petition.
Petition dismissed.