NC Jain, J. (Oral).
- The petitioners were Assistant Sub Inspectors in the Punjab Police when their Services were terminated while invoking Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, vide order date 29.10.1987, The order reads as under :-  ``Whereas it has been found that ASI Ajit Singh No.93/R, ASI Harbans Singh No354/KPT and ASI Naringder Singh No1106/Jull.
have close links with the extremists.
They also indulge in leaking out very vital intelligence to the extremists causing embarrassment to the police on many occasions.
They are also reported to be having sympathetic attitude towards the militants, and anti-social elements.
On occasion, they exhibited cowardice and lack of devotion to their lawful duty.
Their such actions have been impediment in fighting with the extremists in Punjab and have also eroded the public confidence in police administration about the capacity to fight against the menace of terrorism.
In view of the above facts, I am of the opinion that the retention of these police officials in the Police Department is a high security risk and detrimental to the public interest and impediment in fighting the grim battle against the extremists.
Retention of these officials in the police force is counter-productive.
I therefore, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with PPR 16(i), dismiss ASI Ajit Singh No.93./HPR, ASI Harbans Singh, No354/KPT and ASI Narinder Singh No. 1106/Jull.
from police service today afternoon.
It was not reasonably practicable to hold a departmental enquiry against these police officials, therefore, it is dispensed with and the reasons for that have been recorded separately.
The copy of the order be issued to the above named police officials free of costs.''
2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we are of the considered view that without going into the detailed grounds taken up in the writ petition, the aforesaid order deserves to be set aside on a very short ground.
It has been so held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) SCT 125(SC) : A.I.R. 1991 Supreme Court, 385, that it is incumbent upon the authorities to disclose to the Court the material in existence at the time of passing the order of dismissal in support of the subjective satisfaction recorded in the order of dismissal when Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitutional of India is invoked.
This Court at the very outset asked the learned counsel for the State to show to the Court the original file containing the material.
The original file was not produced before us despite grant of several opportunities and in view thereof, we are unable to peruse the material in support of the impugned order.
In view thereof, this Court while following the dictum of law laid down by the Apex Court hereby sets aside the order of dismissal of the petitioners without going into other grounds taken in the petition.
In view of the aforementioned observations, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure-P19 is set aside.
The petitioners are ordered to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
It is needless to say that it would be open to the department if so advised to proceed into the matter in accordance with law.