TS Doabia, J - The petitioner wants this Court to tear the veil for finding out the real nature of the order of discharge whereas, as per the respondents, the order of discharge Annexure P/3 is a simple order of discharge calling for no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
This petition arises out of the following facts.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as a Reader in the Department of Physics, in the Jiwaji University Gwalior.
It is stated by the petitioner that he holds post-graduate qualifications of M.Sc.
and PhD According to him, he had seventeen years of teaching experience in post-graduate classes.
He was selected after an interview held by the University.
The order of appointment has been placed on record as Annexure P/3.
This is dated 27th of March, 1985.
According to the petitioner, his work and conduct were satisfactory and there was absolutely no justification for putting an end to his service tenure.
He accordingly challenges order Annexure P/1 passed by the University on 29th of March, 1986.
4.
The factual position with regard to the appointment and later on removal are not disputed.
According to the University, the petitioner had no right to continue in service and his service tenure was rightly put an end to.
It is admitted that order Annexure P/1 does refer to a decision taken by the Executive Council of the University.
This decision has been placed on record as Annexure R/6.
It is contended that even in the resolution Annexure R/4, there is nothing from which it can be spelled out some stigma has been imposed on the petitioner.
5.
It is the case of the University that the petitioner was appointed as a Reader.
In this capacity, be is associated with research work.
According to the university, the petitioner suppressed a material fact at the time of his appointment.
This fact is that the previous employer had debarred the petitioner from carrying on research work because he had resorted to plagiarism inasmuch as, he had copied research work done by Canadian Scholars and gave an impression that the research work was his own effort.
There was a complaint made by the Canadian Professors.
The petitioner's previous employer held an enquiry into this regard and debarred him from being associated with research work.
According to the university, the petitioner was bound to disclose this fact to the respondent-university at the time of submitting his application.
He having wilfully suppressed it and having obtained appointment by fraud, he is not entitled to any relief from this Court.
The university has placed reliance on Annexure R/4.
This contains a reference to the letter written by the petitioner, to his previous employer.
This letter is dated 8th of August, 1984.
For facility of reference, this is reproduced below :-  "Sir, with reference to your letter No. 358/II/Staff/84-85 dated 26th July, 1984, regarding the complaint of Professor Kiefte and Clouter wherein it has been reported that I had copied some of the extracts from the paper namely "Determination of the Elastic Constant of Single Crystals of FCC and hop argon alloys by Brillouin Scattering".
I admit that the mistake was committed by me unintentionally without knowing the consequences of the same.
I admit the mistake and the gravity of the charge involved therein.
I tender my unconditional apology for the same and assure that it will not be repeated in future.
I shall be personally writing to Prof. Kiefte and Clouter and personally apologising from them.
I am prepared for accepting punishment that may be accorded to me by the Management Committee of the college and I shall accept the same without any demur."
It is accordingly, suggested that the petitioner who was himself guilty of not bringing proper facts to the notice of the university and who was not fair enough to place all facts before the university, cannot complain that the principles of fair play have been ignored or not complied with in this case.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has further asserted that the order Annex.
P/3 is not a simple order of termination.
Action has been taken against the petitioner because of certain complaints made against him.
As a matter of fact, it is not dispute that complaint was taken note of and it is because of the complaint, the executive council passed the resolution No. 396.
The petitioner submits that resolution No. 396 should be read along with the proposal and if both are read together then the conclusion is irresistible that a stigma is really imposed on the petitioner.
7.
I have considered the matter and I am of the view that there is no merit in this petition.
The principle of tearing of veil for finding out the real nature of the order has been examined in number of cases.
However, reference may be made to a recent decision in the case of Governing Council, KM Institute of Oncology v. Pandurang, 1993(1) SCT 267 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 392.
A simple order of termination was passed.
This was passed during the period of probation.
A preliminary enquiry was, however, held.
It was held that if decision is taken to terminate the services of the employee during the period of probation after taking into consideration over-all performance, and some actions or inactions on the part of such employee then, it cannot be said that it amounts to his removal from service as punishment.
As a matter of fact, there are series of earlier decisions of the Supreme Court laying down that when there are no express words in the impugned order itself, which cast a stigma on an employee, the Court should not delve into the files of the employer to discover whether some stigma could be inferred on such research.
Thus, in State of UP v. Ram Chandra, AIR 1976 SC 2547, the employee whose tenure was temporary was held to have no right to the post, as under the contract of service, the employer had a right to terminate his services by giving him one month's notice, was held to be termination simpliciter.
It was held that the order has not visited the employee with any evil consequences.
In para 23, it was observed as under :-  "Keeping in view the principles extracted above, the respondent's suit could not be decreed in his favour.
He was a temporary hand and had no right to the post.
It is also not denied that both under the contract of service and the service rules governing the respondent, the State had a right to terminate his services by giving him one month's notice.
The order to which exception is taken is ex-facie an order of termination of service simpliciter.
It does not cast any stigma on the respondent nor does it visit him with evil consequences, nor is it founded on misconduct.
In the circumstances, the respondent could not invite the Court to go into the motive behind the order and claim the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution."
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court reported as Anoop v. Govt. of India, AIR 1984 636.
This decision was considered in the recent decision of Governing Council, KM Institute of Oncology (supra) and was distinguished.
9.
In the present case, as noticed above, the order Annexure P/1 is a simple order of termination.
By this order, the service tenure of the petitioner has been brought to an end without casting any stigma.
As such, this order cannot be faulted on this ground.
Apart from this, it may be seen that the petitioner is complaining infringement of the rules of fair play.
A person who is himself guilty of not following the rules of fair play, cannot make such a complaint.
Again the rules of natural justice must depend upon the circumstances of the case, the nature of enquiry and the rules under which the authority is acting.
Tucker L.J.
drove home this point when he observed in the Duke of Norfolk case (1949)1 AD ER 109;  "There are no words which are of universal application to every kind of inquiry........
The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject-matter that is being dealt with, and so" forth."
10.
Again the observations made by Lord Reid in Wiseman v. Borneman, (1971) AC 297 are pertinent.
He said, he would be sorry to see this fundamental general principle degenerate into a series of hard-and-fast rules.
11.
Again Lord Denning, sets out the same principle in Salvarajan (1976) 1 All ER 12 at p. 19 :  "The fundamental rule is that, if a person may be subjected to pains or penalties, or be exposed to prosecution or proceedings, or deprived of remedies or redress or, in some such way adversely affected by the investigation and report, when he should be told the case made against him and be afforded a fair opportunity of answering it.
The investigation body is, however, the master of its own procedure.
It need not hold a hearing.
It can do everything in writing.
It need not allow lawyers.
It need not put every detail of the case against a man.
Suffice it if the broad grounds are given.
It need not name its informants.
It can give the substance only.
Moreover, it need not do everything itself.
It can employ secretaries and assistants to do all the preliminary work and leave much to them.
But, in the end, the investigating body itself must come to its own decision and make its own report."
12.
In Bihar School Examination Board v. Subhash Chander Sinha, AIR 1970 SC 1269, Hidayatulla, C.J.
speaking for the Courts repelled the plea of natural justice when a whole examination was cancelled by the concerned university authorities.
It was observed :  "the mention of fair play does not come very well from the respondents who were grossly guilty of breach of fairplay themselves at the examinations."
Somewhat similar situation would be found in the case of UP Junior Doctors' Action Committee v. Dr. B Sheetal Nandwani, 1992(2) SCT 99 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 909.
Admission was procured to Medical College, Post-Graduate course on the basis of fake order.
Fake order in non-existent writ petition was produced before the High Court.
Such admissions were cancelled.
It was observed :  "The circumstances in which such benefit has been taken by the candidates concerned would not justify attraction of the application of rules of natural justice of being provided an opportunity to be heard."
The present case is no different.
He had copied research work of a foreign research scholar.
He passed on the same as his own.
The enquiry was held by the previous employer.
The petitioner tendered an apology.
Proceedings were taken by the previous employer.
The proceedings which were taken by the Meerut University are contained in Annexure R/6.
These read as under :-  "The University had received a complaint regarding the involvement of Dr. RB Yadav, Lecturer in Physics, SD College Muzaffarnagar in a case of plagiarism, from Professors of the Memorial University of New Found Land, Canada, through University Grants Commission.
The Vice-Chancellor took a very serious view in the matter.
The Managing Committee of SD College, Muzaffarnagar was asked vide University letter dated 3894 to take some appropriate action against Dr. RB Yadav.
The Managing Committee of the College considered the whole case in its meeting dt. 981984 and debarred Dr. Yadav from all remunerative reputed posts of the college and also requested the Vice-Chancellor to debar Dr. Yadav from all such posts of the University.
The Vice-Chancellor has, therefore, debarred Dr. RB Yadav from :-  (1) Being a PhD thesis supervisor of Meerut University.
(2) All confidential and examination work of Meerut University.
(3) Receiving any financial assistance for attending any conference symposium for presenting his research papers as it may again be a case of plagiarism."
Thus, the petitioner who came to be appointed as a Reader in the above- mentioned circumstances cannot complain of the breach of rules of fairplay when he was himself not fair enough to disclose all relevant material to the present university.
As a matter of fact, in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1994 LIC 792.
The Supreme Court of India observed that an order is not to be upset in a mechanical manner merely because there is breach of principles of natural justice.
The fact that the Meerut University had passed an order which has been reproduced above, has not been denied.
Had an enquiry been held into the matter, the position would have been the same.
As such, even on the basis of the decision aforesaid, the petitioner cannot seek any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
I am accordingly of the view :  (i) that the order Annex.
P/1 is a simple order of discharge passed within the period of probation; (ii) that no stigma is imposed on the petitioner; (iii) that the petitioner had concealed material facts, the order passed by previous employer debarring the petitioner from taking part in the research work was not brought to the notice of the Jiwaji University; (iv) that the rules of fairplay are not static to be applied without taking into consideration the circumstances of each case.
The petitioner being himself guilty of seeking appointment by not disclosing full facts, cannot complain merely because the technical rules of fairplay have not been observed; (v) that the petitioner having not disputed the factum of the order passed by the previous employer cannot complain of the breach of the rules of natural justice because the position would not have been different had the opportunity been given to him.
13.
Taking all the facts and circumstances of the case, in view, this petition is held to be without merit and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.