TS Doabia, J - The claim of the petitioners is that the institution which is being managed by them is an educational and charitable institution.
On both counts, the decision of the authority making the assessment has gone against the petitioners.
The museum which is being run by the Trust has been taken as an institution purpose whereof is entertainment.
The authorities were unable to discern any charity in it.
Perhaps giving of "alms" is the only concept of charity which found favour with the authorities below.
In one of his essays Goldsmith tells the story of a French priest at Rheims, so miserly in his habits, that he went by the name of "The Griper."
Working incessantly in his Vineyard, steadily refusing to relieve distress, he managed to save a large sum of money.
Then the writer adds : "This good man had "long perceived the wants of the poor in the city, particularly in having no water but what they were obliged to buy at an advanced price : wherefore, that whole fortune which he had been amassing he laid out in an aqueduct, by which he did the poor more useful and lasting service than if he had distributed his whole income in charity every day at his door."
Thus charity may have different shades.
2.
The concept of charitable purpose was taken note of in The King v. The Commissioners for Special Purposes of the Income Tax, Reports of Tax Cases, Volume V, 1903-1911, p.408.
The Master of the Rolls, in the above judgment found a trust constituted for the promotion of education, literature, science or the fine arts as a trust which would also be for a charitable purpose.
It was observed :  "It is now established by the decision in the House of Lords that in the Income-Tax Acts the words "for charitable purposes" have a technical meaning, a long-established, well-understood meaning, attached to those words in English law.
Now what is that meaning ?
On that again I cannot bring myself to feel any doubt.
Let me quote one passage from what Lord Herschell said in Scott's case, 3 TC.
134.
"It cannot be doubted that property held by a 'body corporate or unincorporate, for the promotion of education, literature, science, or the fine arts,' is technically held upon a charitable trust."
Lord Machaghten in the leading case, Pemsel's case, 3 SC 53, in a passage which is always referred to in cases of this kind divides charities into four classes, one of which is trusts for the relief of poverty; another is trusts for the advancement of education; the third is trusts for the advancement of religion; and the fourth is trusts for other purposes beneficial to the community not falling under any of the proceeding heads.
3.
These decisions were noticed by the Supreme Court of India in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Children Book Trust, AIR 1992 SC 1456 : 1992(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 81 : 1992(2) R.R.R.
313 and it was held that providing educational facilities is a charitable purpose.
The dictum laid down in the above cases and in the case of Abbey v. Malvem Wells, Ltd. v. Minister of Town and Country Planning, (1951)2 All ER 154 was held to squarely cover the proposition and the society was held to be a society engaged in a charitable purpose.
4.
Coming to the facts of this case, in this petition there is an institution by the name of Chinku Raje Trust.
This has property which consists of a Jai Vilas Palace, Gwalior.
The entire portion of the Jai Vilas Palace Trust is owned by the Trust and owned by His Highness Jiwaji Rao Scindia Museum.
There are two other trusts by name of Jai Vilas Trust and Mannu Mahal Trust.
So far as Jai Vilas Trust is concerned, it is subject matter of Writ Petition No. 259 of 1984.
The Trust has its immovable property in a portion, of Jai Vilas Palace known as Jai Vilas Trust Property.
In a portion of the Building there is the office of Chief Secretary to Shreemant Madhavrao Scindia.
The other portion is occupied by a Research Library.
The rest of the portion that is the Darbar Hall and the Verandah as well as the ground floor Dining Hall houses a museum.
The third trust namely Mannu Mahal Trust is the subject matter of Writ petition No. 310 of 1984.
The immovable property of this trust again is a portion of Jai Vilas Palace known as Mannu Mahal Building.
There are smaller buildings also owned by this trust.
On the first floor of this building there are six rooms, Verandah which are housed for coaching classes students are coached without charging any fees.
The building has garages and some rooms.
Some are vacant.
The garages are housed for parking the cars.
5.
It is the case of the petitioner that there is no profit derived from the activities of these institutions and the income is spent on the upkeep of the premises.
All the three trusts have trust deeds which are similarly worded.
As such, without burdening this judgment with the details of all the trusts reference is being made to the documents which deal with Mannu Mahal Trust.
Clause (2) of the Trust Deed reads as under :  "The trustees shall hold and stand possessed of the trust premises upon trust to collect and get in the income of the trust premises and pay therefrom, in the first instance, all the proper costs, charges and expenses of realising the same and the management of the trust and Trust Premises or otherwise payable thereout and there upon the trust for charitable purposes to the public irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion or language : "Charitable Purpose" shall mean relief of the poor, education and medical relief PROVIDED, HOWEVER, if at any time hereafter it is held that any of the aforesaid purposes is/are not charitable according to law relating to income tax, then in force, the Trustees shall apply the corpus and/or income and/or accumulation of income and/or proper of the Trust to such of the purposes aforesaid as may be held to be charitable according to such law provided further the Trustees shall apply the corpus and/or income/or property and/or accumulation of income for charitable purposes in India without contravening Section 13 and in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force."
6.
As noticed above, the assessing authority as well as the appellate authority under the MP Nagariya Sthawar Sampatti Kar Adhiniyam, 1964 and the Rules framed under it was of the view that the purpose for which the trust is being run is neither educational nor charitable and therefore, made the assessment under the Act.
The provisions which deal with the levy of tax on immovable property and the cause which deals with exemption and the Rule dealing with public charitable institutions maybe noticed at this stage.
These are Sections 4 and 6.
These read as under :  "4.
Levy of tax on immovable property.
-  (1) there shall be charged, levied and paid for each year, a tax on lands or buildings or both situate in an urban area at the rate specified in the table below :-  "6.
Exemptions.
- The tax shall not be leviable in respect of the following properties, namely :  (a) buildings and lands owned by or vesting in (i) the Union Government,  (ii) the State Government;  (iii) a local authority;  (b) omitted.
(c) buildings and lands the annual letting value of which does not exceed five hundred rupees :  Provided that if any such building or land is in the ownership of a person who owns any other building or land in the same urban area, the annual letting value of such building or land shall, for the purposes of this clause, be deemed to be the aggregate annual letting value of all buildings or lands owned by him in that area;  (d) buildings and lands or portions thereof used exclusively for educational purposes including schools, boarding houses, hostels and libraries if such buildings and lands or portions thereof are either owned by the educational institutions concerned or have been placed at the disposal of such educational institutions without payment of any rent;  (e) public parks and playgrounds which are open to the public and building and land attached thereto if the rent derived therefrom is exclusively spent for the administration of parks and playgrounds to which they are attached;  (f) buildings and land or portions thereof used exclusively for public worship or public charity such as mosques, temples, churches, dharmashalas, gurdwaras, hospitals, dispensaries, orphanages, alms houses, drinking water fountains, infirmaries for the treatment and care of animals and public burials or burning grounds, or other places for the disposal of the dead :  Provided that the following buildings and lands or portions thereof shall not be deemed to be used exclusively for public worship or for public charity with the meaning of this section, namely :  (i) buildings in or lands on which any trade or business is carried on unless the rent derived from such buildings or lands is applied exclusively to religious purposes or to public charitable institutions aforesaid,  (ii) buildings or lands in respect of which rent is derived and such rent is not applied exclusively to religious purposes or public charitable institutions aforesaid;  (g) buildings and lands owned by widows or minors or persons subject to physical disability or mental infirmity owing to which they are incapable of earning their livelihood, where the main source of maintenance of such widows or minors or persons is the rent derived from such buildings and lands :  Provided that such exemption shall relate only to the first twenty four hundred rupees of the annual letting value of such buildings and lands;  (h) buildings and lands part thereof in actual occupation of the owners thereof when the annual letting value of such buildings and lands or part thereof does not exceed eighteen hundred rupees."
The relevant Rule is 33.
This reads as under :  "33.
Public Charitable Institutions.
-  (1) for the purposes of clause (i) and of the proviso to clause (f) of section 6, the public charitable institutions shall be as follows :  (a) as orphanage;  (b) a hospital or dispensary other than belonging to Government;  (c) an alms house;  (d) an institution for supplying free drinking water to the public;  (e) an infirmary for the treatment of animals;  (f) an institution for the purpose of burial or burning grounds or other places for the disposal of the dead,  (g) an educational institution not belonging to the Government;  (h) an institution established for widows;  (i) Goshala :  Provided that all such public charitable institutions shall be certified by the Assistant Property Tax Commissioner of the area concerned;  Provided further that the regular accounts of income and expenditure of such institutions are maintained are open to inspection by the Assistant Property Tax Commissioner or such other person as he may appoint in this behalf to satisfy himself that the rent derived from such land or building sought to be exempted is exclusively being spent for on one or more of these institutions.
(2) A certificate under sub-rule (1) shall be in Form XIX and shall unless cancelled, continue in force for the assessment year for which it is issued but shall be renewable by the Assistant Property Tax Commissioner.
(3) If at any time the Assistant Property Tax Commissioner is satisfied that he has wrongly issued any certificate or that the institution concerned has ceased to be charitable institution, it shall be open to him to cancel the certificate and inform the Assessing Authority."
7.
As to whether the Trust is an educational institution or not, may be examined.
The object of the trust is to promote education, fine arts, and to provide facilities for research on ancient Indian heritage and culture.
This object is sought to be achieved by arranging lectures of experts, seminars, music conferences.
Arranging Kavi Sammelans are also within the contemplation of the Trust.
As noticed above, there is a museum which houses rare books and manuscripts, letters written in the hand of Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi who fought the first war of independence in 1857 and laid down her life in the city of Gwalior is part of the rare manuscript lying in the museum.
Indian coins belonging to Mughal period and even period earlier to the Mughals are also housed in the museum.
The swords which once adorned the Mughal emperors Akbar, Aurangajeb and Bahadur Shah Jafar, are also displayed in this museum.
Rare carpets and furniture reminding one of Victorian Era are said to be art of the museum.
The museum also displays the armours used by the warriors of the times gone by.
According to the petitioners, this museum is a museum of repute and preserves the ancient culture and glory of this Nation.
8.
The question as to whether the museum is a source of entertainment or is a medium through which education is imparted was gone into and the Division Bench of this court in the case of Maharaji Scindia Smarak Samiti, Gwalior v. State of MP, 1980 JLJ 900, concluded that there is hardly any entertainment, amusement or gratification when a person visits the institution and, therefore, entertainment tax or duty cannot be levied under the Entertainment Duty and Advertisement Act, 1936.
This is how the matter was dealt with in para 6, which reads as under :  "So, we have to decide now what is the meaning of a 'museum' and the idea in keeping the museum.
Before proceeding further, when we visit a theatre to witness a cinema, we have got some idea regarding the story.
Then, while witnessing the picture, we hear also songs and the main purpose of seeing a picture is to entertain one's own mind.
Nobody goes to a cinema with an idea that it will not be an entertainment, but it will be something to add to his knowledge.
Throughout the picture, there is a thread of the story.
It is not as if we see pictures one after another which are not connected by any thread.
Same thing can be said regarding performances, or museum, game or sport.
But when we visit a museum and go from one block to another, there is no continuity.
There is no link to connect the items kept in one block with another.
There is no story also.
In one block, we may come across the armoury.
In the third one, we may come across lithographs.
In the fourth, we may come across furniture.
In some block, we may come across musical instruments and paintings, but certainly, there is no connection in the exhibits we see in one block with the exhibits we see in another block.
Therefore, to say that by seeing these different articles, we get entertainment, will be a bit difficult.
Whether we get knowledge by seeing these articles, we will consider presently."
The learned Judges referred to Encyclopedia Britannica Vol. 15 page 1033 and it was noticed that imparting education is the foremost purpose of a museum.
The above Encyclopedia describes various types of museums.
This may deal with history, science or industry.
It is, however, discernible from the above Encyclopedia that the prominent purpose of a museum is to educate the people and this is clearly discernible from the facts of this case.
9.
It may be seen that this matter was considered also in another judgment reported in the same volume namely, Shri Deo Radha Madhva Lalji, Sagar v. Property Tax Officer, Sagar and others, 1980 JLJ 272.
The question in the above case was with regard to the determination of religious nature of the institution and it was observed that the term 'religious purpose' or 'charitable purpose' are not to be rigidly and narrowly construed so as to exclude all other incidental expenses which are directly connected with the upkeep.
10.
In the light of the aforementioned decisions and position of law, the conclusion is inescapable that the institution which is being run by the Trust is an educational institution.
The judgment of the Division Bench in Shri Maharaji Scindia Smarak Samiti, Gwalior v. State of MP and others (supra) squarely covers the position.
This is again squarely covered by the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Children's Book Trust (supra).
It is, according held,  (i) That, the institution in question is an educational institution; and  (ii) Educational institution would also fall within the term 'charitable".
11.
It may be seen that the Act under which the assessment is made is no longer in force and the assessment is being made now under the MP Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 and the institutions are said to be exempt under the above Act.
12.
Another aspect of the matter which requires to be dealt with is that Shri NK Mody, Advocate has filed an application in which he has made a prayer that the name of the respondent No. 3 be transposed as petitioner, According to him, the person by whom the writ petition was filed is no longer there as he has since died.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has opposed this prayer and has submitted that this procedure of transposition is not permissible and the proposition raised is outside the purview of the question which is required to be settled in this writ petition.
Shri NK Mody, learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 has placed reliance on a decision given by this Court in Miscellaneous Appeal No. 43 of 1984.
He has further contended that the decision so given in the miscellaneous appeal referred to above was affirmed by the Letters Patent Bench in Letters Patent Appeal No. 5 of 1987, decided on 29th October, 1987.
According to the learned counsel, the judgment passed by this Court has attained finality as no further appeal has been preferred by any of the parties in the Supreme Court of India.
13.
So far as the question that the Secretary through whom this petition has been filed is dead, be examined.
The death of the Secretary through whom this petition was filed is totally immaterial.
The institution is a corporate institution and the death of the Secretary does not in any way put an end to the institution.
In England there is a concept - King is dead Long Live the King - The institution does not die with the death of the person who may have been managing its affairs.
So far as the second argument with regard to the dispute having been settled by this Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 5 of 1987 is concerned, all that can be said is that the decision given by this Court be taken note of by the concerned authorities and reflected in the property assessment register if any application is filed in this regard before the concerned authorities.
14.
In view of the above, the present petition is allowed.
The orders passed by the assessing authority as also by the appellate authority are set aside.
The authorities to take notice of the decision given by this Court in L.P.A. No. 5 of 1987.
Security, if deposited, shall be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.