GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner retired from service on 31.10.1992 while holding the post of Principal, Government Higher Secondary School, Gharota, District Gurdaspur, after he had rendered 35 years of service.
He claimed pension, gratuity and other retirement dues but the same were not paid to him despite his representation.
After he had served a notice of demand for justice (Annexure P-3), the respondents called upon the petitioner to file an affidavit for the purpose of releasing 100 per cent provisional pension and gratuity.
Even then the respondents did not release post retirement dues of the petitioner and this has compelled him to file a writ petition in the High Court.
Petitioner's plea is that withholding of his full pension, gratuity and other retirement dues amounts to deprivation of property right, which is protected by Article 300-A of the Constitution Respondents have stated that 90 per cent of the General Provident Fund and 1 per cent of the provisional pension has been released to the petitioner.
According to them, delay in payment of retirement dues has been occasioned on account of late submission of affidavit by the petitioner regarding recovery of house-rent.
Another reason assigned for the delay is late issuance of 'No Objection Certificate' by the Punjab Vigilance Department.
Further, assertion of the respondents is that the petitioner's service-book was misplaced in transit and, therefore, a duplicate service-book had to be prepared.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that for delayed payment of pension, gratuity and other retirement dues, the petitioner is entitled to interest.
He further argued that the petitioner is entitled to issue a writ of mandamus for commutation of his pension.
Mrs. Charu Tuli argued that payment of pension, gratuity etc. was delayed on account of petitioner's fault in not submitting full documents.
She, however, conceded that the petitioner had filed all the requisite documents on 11.3.1993.
3.
From the admitted facts, which have been brought on record by the parties, it is clear that the petitioner retired from the service on 31.10.1992 and payment of pension, gratuity etc. has been delayed even after the petitioner had filed his affidavit, and requisite documents by 11.3.1993.
It can, thus, be said that on his part the petitioner had completed all formalities which could entitle him to claim pension, gratuity etc. Delay in the receipt of the 'No Dues Certificate' by the Punjab Vigilance Department cannot be attributed to the petitioner.
He had no role to pay in the issue of 'No Dues Certificate' by the Punjab, Vigilance Department.
It was the duty of the departmental authorities to get such a certificate from the Punjab Vigilance Department.
It is, thus, clear that for no fault of his, the petitioner has been deprived of post retirement benefits.
4.
In Devaki Nandan Prashad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1409, the Supreme Court virtually affirmed the views expressed by this Court in Bhagwant Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1962 Punjab 503 and KR Erry v. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 Punjab 279, that pension payable to an employee constitutes his property and withholding of the pension amounts to infringement of property right.
At the relevant time, property right was a part of Fundamental Rights.
Even though after 42nd Constitution Amendment Act, 1977, the property right is no more a Fundamental Right, Article 300-A of the Constitution protects it against arbitrary infringement.
In State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 356, it has been held that if there is undue delay in payment of pension, the employee has a right to get interest.
5.
I am of the opinion that once their Lordships of the Supreme Court have recognised pension to be a part of the property right, gratuity, which is a form of the pension also constitutes a property of the retired employee and non-payment of gratuity amounts to infringement of property right of the retired employee.
6.
Respondents have not explained as to why payment of full pension and gratuity was delayed even after 11.3.1993.
It must, therefore, he held that the petitioner is entitled to get interest on the amount of arrears of pension as well as gratuity.
Claim of the petitioner for commutation of his pension also deserves to be accepted because no reason has been advanced by the respondents for not giving benefit of commutation of pension to the petitioner.
7.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to pay interest at the rate 12% to the petitioner on the arrears of the pension as well as the gratuity.
On the amount of gratuity, interest shall be paid with effect from 1.11.1992 and on the amount of pension, it shall be paid with effect from 11.3.1993.
Respondents are also directed to pay the remaining amount of pension, gratuity and other retirement dues to the petitioner within two months from today.
Petitioner's claim for commutation of pension should also be decided within this two months' period.
If amount payable to the petitioner in terms of this direction is not paid to him within two months, the respondents shall have to pay a further interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date of this order.
Petition allowed.