GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner has questioned the legality of annexure P/9 by which he has been reverted from the post of Senior Accounts Officer to that of Assistant Accounts Officer.
He has prayed that the said order as well as advertisement annexure P/13 be declared illegal and be quashed and the respondents be directed to pay him salary in the pay scale of the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner had joined service of Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (for short the respondent-Federation) on his appointment as Assistant Accounts Officer with effect from 2921980.
On the basis of his selection by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
The petitioner was promoted as Senior Accounts Officer in the pay scale of 1000-1700 vide order annexure P/2 dated 23121980.
On successful completion of period of probation, the petitioner was allowed annual grade increment in the pay scale of Rs, 1000-1700 with effect from 27.11.1981 vide annexure P/3 dated 321982.
Some more annual grade increments were sanctioned to the petitioner vide orders Annexures P/4 and P/4-A and then he was allowed to cross efficiency bar vide order Annexure P/5 dated 1121985.
After the petitioner had served the respondent-Federation as Senior Accounts Officer for a period of over four years, order dated 1521985 was passed by the Managing Director of the respondent- Federation reverting him to the post of Assistant Accounts Officer.
This the Managing Director did in the purported compliance of resolution No. 16 dated 2261983 passed by the Board of Directors of the Federation.
After about 13 days, order dated 2821985 annexure P/10 was issued by the Managing Director of the respondent-Federation directing the petitioner and some other officers to continue to work against the posts of Senior Accounts Officer without any extra remuneration.
The petitioner protested against his reversion and he filed a petition before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab under rule 19 of the Punjab State Cooperative Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1967.
His petition has been dismissed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies vide order dated 641988.
3.
The petitioner has pleaded that in terms of Rule 26 of the Common Cadre Rules, he will be deemed to be a confirmed Senior Accounts Officer after completion of period of probation of one year and six months and, therefore, it was not open to the Board of Directors of the respondent-Federation as well as the Managing Director to pass order of reversion.
Another contention of the petitioner is that resolution dated 2261983 on the basis of which order of reversion was passed has been declared to be null and void by this court in Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited v. Additional Registrar, 1984(2) S.L.R.
217 and in view of the judgment of this court, reversion brought about on account of said resolution cannot be sustained.
Yet another contention of the petitioner is that after having asked the petitioner to work as Senior Accounts Officer, the respondent-Federation cannot deny him salary in the pay scale prescribed for the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
4.
In reply the respondent No. 1 has admitted that the petitioner was appointed as Senior Accounts Officer after passing the competitive test and that he had served as Senior Accounts Officer till being reverted to the lower post on the basis of resolution passed by the Board of Directors on 2261983.
Further it is pleaded that the test as a result of which the petitioner had been promoted as Senior Accounts Officer was scrapped by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies because on the basis of that test a large number of Senior persons had been superseded.
According to the respondent, there was no provision in the Common Cadre Rules for holding a test and, therefore, the action of the Federation to conduct a written test for the purpose of making promotion to the post of Senior Accounts Officer was itself illegal.
5.
First and the foremost argument advanced by Shri Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner is that once the petitioner had completed the maximum period of probation prescribed in the Common Cadre Rules, he became entitled to be treated as confirmed on the post of Senior Accounts Officer and after confirmation, the petitioner could not have been reverted except on the basis of a departmental inquiry held in according with the rules and the principles of natural justice.
Second argument of Shri Sharma is that once the resolution dated 2261983 passed by the Board of Directors has been declared to be void, all orders passed on the basis of the said resolution will have to be treated as nullity.
Lastly he submitted that even after 1521985, the petitioner has been made to work as Sr. Accounts Officer and, therefore, there is no justification for the respondents to deny him salary in the pay scale prescribed for the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
Rule 26 of 1967 Rules deals with probation.
This rule reads as under :  "PROBATION  2.6(1) Every person appointed to any post in the service by promotion or direct recruitment shall be required to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
(2) The Administrative Committee may at their discretion extend the period of probation by further period not exceeding six months.
(3) During the period of probation, an employee directly recruited shall be liable to be discharged from service under the provision of Shops and Commercials Act and an employee promoted from a lower post to a higher post shall be reverted to the lower post."
It is clear from the perusal of the aforesaid rule that every person appointed by promotion or direct recruitment is required to be placed on probation for a period of one year.
The period of probation can be extended by the Administrative Committee but the outer limit for extending the period of probation is six months.
This rule does not empower the Administrative Committee or any other competent authority to extend the period of probation of a direct recruit or a promotee beyond one year and six months.
Absence of a provision empowering the competent authority to extend the period of probation beyond a particular point of time shows that after expiry of that maximum period, the employee stands automatically confirmed.
This view has been expressed by Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 1210 and Paramjit Singh v. Ram Rakha, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 1073.
In the latter decision the Supreme Court has observed :-  "Where the rules provide for a fixed period of probation with a power in the Government to extend it up to a specific period and not any unlimited period, either by express provision or by necessary implication, at the end of such specified period beyond which the Government had no power to extend the probation, the probationer if he continues beyond that period, should be deemed to have been confirmed in the post."
In view of these two judgments of the Supreme Court I hold that the petitioner stood confirmed as Senior Accounts Officer in the service of the respondent-Federation on and with effect from 26th of May, 1982, i.e. a date on which he completed one year and six months of probation.
Documents annexures P/3, P/4 and P/4-A and P/5 show that the performance of the petitioner during probation was found to be satisfactory.
Thus there was nothing adverse against the petitioner which could act as an obstacle in his confirmation on the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
Moreover, in view of the judgments of the Supreme Court, once the period of probation came to an end, the petitioner will have to be treated as confirmed by operation of rules.
6.
Since the petitioner has to be treated as confirmed Senior Accounts Officer on or after 27.5.1982, it must be held as a logical corollary that it was not open to the respondent-Federation to revert him on a lower post of Assistant Accounts Officer only on the basis of resolution dated 2261983 of the Board of Directors of the respondent-Federation.
Admittedly no inquiry was held by the federation before bringing about reversion of the petitioner and, therefore, order dated 1521985 passed by the Managing Director of the respondent-Federation will have to be treated as void.
7.
That apart, in Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited's case (supra) a Division Bench of this court held that the meeting of Board of Directors held on 2261983 was not valid.
Once this court has declared the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 2261983 as invalid, action taken by the officers of the respondent-Federation on the basis of the resolution passed at such meeting, is also liable to be quashed.
8.
In view of the above conclusion, I do not think necessary to deal with the third argument of Mr. Sharma regarding entitlement of the petitioner to be paid salary in the pay scale for the post of Senior Accounts Officer because with the quashing of the order of reversion, the petitioner shall automatically stand relegated to the position in which he was working prior to the passing of order of reversion.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition, is allowed, order Annexure P/9 dated 1521985 is declared illegal and quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be continuing on the post of Senior Accounts Officer and shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Petition allowed.