AL Bahri, J - Ram Niwas, who is working as Junior Engineer in the Marketing Board, Faridabad, claims mandamus in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, directing respondent No. 1 - the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board, (hereinafter called "the Board") to consider case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer from the date Anil Garg-respondent No. 2 was so promoted.
He also claims consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Junior Engineer in 1981.
He is possessing AMIE degree, obtained in July, 1990.
In the seniority list of Junior Engineers, his name appears at serial No. 101 whereas name of Anil Garg respondent No. 2 appears at serial No. 118.
Copy of the seniority list as on January 1, 1989, depicting as above, is Annexure P/1.
Respondent No. 2 passed AMIE in 1983 and on October 12, 1990, he was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer, although on that day the petitioner, who was senior to him and was duly eligible in all respects, was available for promotion and was ignored.
Respondent No. 2 was reverted in December, 1991, but was repromoted on January 21, 1992.
Again at that stage, name of the petitioner was not considered for promotion.
He submitted representations, copies Annexures P/2 to P/5.
The petitioner came to know that his re-presentations were filed on the ground that respondent No. 2, Anil Garg had passed AMIE before the petitioner passed AMIE and thus respondent No. 2 was promoted and the petitioner was ignored.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued the writ petition has been contested by the Board as well as by respondent No. 2.
The Board took up the plea that alternative remedy of revision under the Punjab Agriculture Produce Marketing Act was available and the petitioner has not availed the same.
Ad hoc appointment of Anil Garg was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 14976 of 1990 (Sham Sunder Arora v. HSAM Board and another).
The same was dismissed on November 21, 1990, by the Division Bench.
On merits in substance it was asserted that Anil Garg-respondent No. 2 was eligible for promotion as the post became available much prior to the passing of AMIE by the petitioner.
Thus, name of the petitioner could not be considered for promotion.
The petitioner passed AMIE in July 1990.
Reference was made to Civil Writ Petition No. 18888/1991, filed by Anil Garg challenging his reversion, which was allowed on January 20, 1992 and thus in compliance thereto Anil Garg was again promoted.
On the same lines, stand was taken up by Anil Garg respondent in his written statement.
4.
Service is governed by Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974.
Rule 10 of these rules provides for recruitment to the service in the manner, as specified in column 4 of Appendix B to the rules.
All promotion are to be made on the basis of 'Seniority-cum-Merit' and recourse to direct appointment or appointment by transfer or deputation is to be made only if suitable candidates are not available within the service.
Upto June 15, 1983, the qualifications for the post of Sub Divisional Officers, as given in Appendix B, were as under :-  1 2 3 4 5 6 SDO B.Sc.
Engg.
Civil or equivalent Diploma in Civil Engg.
or equivalent with 6 years experience.
(a) By promotion from S.O.
or  (b) By direct recruitment or (c) By transfer or deputation.
The vacancy occurred prior to June 15, 1983.
This fact is not disputed.
The question, thus, for consideration is as to what is the relevant date for consideration of eligibility of the persons for the purposes of promotion, i.e. is it the date when the vacancy occurred, or is it the date when the authorities decided to fill the vacancy ?
If the first stand is accepted obviously the petitioner could not be considered for promotion as on that day he had not passed the AMIE If the second stand is to be accepted, the petitioner being senior was available for promotion, as having passed AMIE and was to be preferred as against respondent No. 2, Anil Garg, who was junior.
A government employee cannot claim promotion as a matter of right.
The only right which vests in him is for consideration of his name for promotion when the question of promotion is being considered by the competent authority.
Merely because a vacancy of a promotional post occurred on a particular date will not clothe any rights on a government servant to claim the promotional post.
The relevant date for consideration of eligible candidates available for promotion is when the State Government decides to fill the Promotional post.
It is prerogative of the State as to when a vacancy occurring on the promotional post is to be filled.
No doubt, respondent No. 2 had passed AM.I.E.
in 1983 and vacancy was also available for promotion, however, it was on October 12, 1990 when question of promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer was considered and respondent No. 2 was so promoted.
At that time, it was to be seen as to who was seniormost person available for promotion possessing all the necessary qualifications and experience.
The petitioner who had acquired AMIE Degree in July, 1990 and was senior to Anil Garg, respondent No. 2 was also to be considered for promotion.
If nothing against him existed on the service record and he was fulfilling all the academic qualifications and experience, he could be promoted.
However, as per stand of the respondents, his name was not considered for promotion on the ground that when promotional post became vacant, the petitioner had not passed AMIE whereas the respondent No. 2, who had passed AMIE was available.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been contended that the relevant law applicable at the time when vacancy occurred has to be taken into consideration for filling such vacancy.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of Supreme Court in YV Rangajah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others and State of Andhra Pradesh and another v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852 and Narender Chadha and others v. Union of India and others, 1986(1) SLR (SC) 437 and Mehar Chand and others v. The State of Haryana and another, 1989(2) SLR 357 (Punjab & Haryana High Court), The ratio of the decisions aforesaid cannot be applied to the case in hand.
There is no amendment of the Rules which is for consideration.
The only question is as to who was eligible for promotion at the time when case of promotion was taken up.
The eligibility criterion is not changed which was to apply at the time the vacancy occurred.
5.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been argued that promotion of respondent No. 2 was challenged earlier unsuccessfully by another person or that respondent No. 2 was reverted and he had challenged his reversion successfully in the High Court and, thereafter, he was reinstated.
Such decisions as mentioned in the written statement are not helpful in deciding the dispute between the existing parties.
The present petitioner was not party to those cases.
Further more, the question as setforth was not at all considered or adjudicated.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition in allowed.
Promotion of respondent No. 2 Anil Garg is quashed and the respondents are directed to reconsider the question of promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer, as on October 12, 1990 and pass appropriate order of promotion, considering the case of the petitioner as well.
Let, these directions be complied within a period of three months, from the communication of this order.
Petition allowed.