RS Mongia, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 12700 and 15923 of 1993.
The facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 12700 of 1993.
2.
In January, 1992, the Haryana Public Service Commission (in short the Commission, advertised 18 temporary posts of Principals of the Government Senior Secondary Schools in H.E.S.
Class II, the break-up of which was as under :-  Number of Posts (i) Men's Branch Gen. SC B.C.
ESM Total  7 4 2 1 14 (ii) Women's Branch 2 2 - - 4 3.
The petitioner who fulfilled the necessary qualifications for the post, applied for the same.
After the interview by the Commission, the result was declared, which was published in the daily Tribune, dated 1st October, 1993.
The Commission recommended 21 men candidates and 9 women candidates for appointment as Principals in H.E.S.
Class II.
The only roll numbers were mentioned in the result published in the daily Tribune.
The break-up of the recommended candidates is as under :-  Gen. SC BC Ex. Servicemen Men Branch 12 4 4 1.
Women's Branch 8 1 - - 4.
The petitioner, who was a candidate in the general category, was not amongst the candidates recommended by the Commission.
She filed the present writ petition challenging the entire selection, primarily on three grounds :-  "(i) The selection and recommendation of the candidates by the Commission beyond the number of advertised posts in the respective categories, is wholly had in law and liable to be quashed.
(ii) 50% marks were allocated for the interview, which is beyond the limit laid down by the various Courts.
This has resulted in the arbitrary selection of the candidates, and  (iii) There was no rational criteria laid down by the Commission for selection and as such the selection itself was arbitrary, inasmuch as a III Divisioner had been selected, whereas the petitioner who is highly qualified and a scholarship holder, was rejected."
5.
It may be observed here that in the writ petition, the petitioner had averred that she does not have the particulars of the selected candidates, and, therefore, was unable to implead them as parties.
It was further mentioned that if the Commission gives the particulars of the selected candidates, the petitioner would implead the selected candidates as respondents.
The Commission in its reply has raised an objection that necessary parties, i.e. the selected candidates are not before the Court.
It may be noticed here that four candidates, by moving applications, got themselves impleaded as respondents.
6.
In support of the first contention that the Commission had no authority or jurisdiction to recommend candidates in the respective categories beyond the number of posts advertised, the learned counsel relied upon the following judgments :-  (1) Parkash Vir and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SCT 700 (P&H)(DB) : 1992(1) S.L.R.
157 (D.B.
);  (2) Hoshiar Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1993(5) S.L.R.
37 : 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC);  (3) Prem Chand v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) S.L.R.
556; and  (4) Suresh Kumar Taneja v. The State of Haryana and another, 1991(1) RSJ 757 : 1991(2) SCT 377 (P&H) (DB)."
7.
According to the learned counsel, all these judgments squarely cover the point raised by him.
The judgment in Parkash Vir's case (supra) was upheld in appeal by the Apex Court in the judgment reported in Hoshiar Singh's case (supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitionr.
The Division Bench in Parkash Vir's case (supra), observed as under :-  "We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on this aspect as well and find that the appointments beyond the 8 posts that were initially sought to be filled in is not legally sustainable.
Although the advertisement does say that the number of posts could be increased to any extent yet we are of the view that the number of advertised posts could be deviated from only marginally.
The original requisition was for 6 posts which was subsequently revised to 8.
To take the advertisement liberally and permit the appointment of any incumbent beyond the advertised posts would be to give a carte blanche to the authorities to perpetuate injustice and to Act arbitrarily.
The right to be considered for selection for appointment to a public service irrespective of its nature of tenure is guaranteed to all citizens under Article 16 of the Constitution of India and its denial would be a violation of that right.
Public employment is not a largesse which is to be led out to a favoured few and it is for this purpose that it is incumbent that before any public appointments are made all persons who are eligible for appointment must be given a chance to apply and to be considered.
In Prem Chand's case (supra) the matter under discussion before us was pointedly raised and it was held that the selecting agency could not recommend for appointment candidates beyond the number of advertised posts and the entire selection beyond the advertised number of vacancies was liable to be quashed.
It was, however, directed in the facts and circumstances of that case as the striking down of the entire selection would cause very great hardship to the selected candidates, the selection was maintained, a direction was issued to the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, which was the selecting agency in that case, as also in the present one, that in future it would not make more recommendations than the number of vacancies advertised.
The judgment in Prem Chand's case was specifically followed in Suresh Kumar Taneja's case (supra)."
The Apex Court in Hoshiar Singh's case (supra) while upholding the above-said judgment, observed as under :-  "The learned counsel for these appellants have not been able to show that after the revised requisition dated January 24, 1991 whereby the Board was requested to send its recommendation for 8 posts, any further requisition was sent by the Director General of Police for a large number of posts.
Since the requisition was for eight posts of Inspector of Police, the Board was required to send its recommendations for eight posts only.
The Board, on its own, could not recommend names of 19 persons for appointment even though the requisition was for eight posts only because the selection and recommendation of large number of persons than the posts for which requisition is sent.
The appointment on the additional posts on the basis of such selection and recommendation would deprive candidates who were not eligible for appointment to the posts on the last date for submission of applications mentioned in the advertisement and who became eligible for appointment thereafter, of the opportunity of being considered for appointment on the additional posts because if the said additional posts are advertised subsequently those who come eligible for appointment would be entitled to apply for the same.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the selection of 19 persons by the Board even though the requisition was for 8 posts only, was not legally sustainable."
Exactly similar view was expressed by another Division Bench of this Court in Suresh Kumar Teneja's case (supra).
8.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that the Commission was within its right and had the jurisdiction to recommend more candidates than the number of posts which were advertised, inasmuch as in the advertisement it was mentioned that the number of posts are subject to variation to any extent.
Further, it was submitted that by more recommending candidates more than the posts advertised, no right came to vest in any person as it was upto the State Government to make appointments out of the recommendations made.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on the first point, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The point, in fact, is squarely covered by the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, to which reference has already been made above.
The argument been by the learned counsel for the respondents that according to the advertisement the number of posts was liable to vary to any extent, was precisely dealt with in the above-said authorities and the said argument was rejected.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement referred to above, it is held that the Commission had no authority or jurisdiction to recommend candidates more than the number of posts advertised in the respective categories.
The recommendation beyond the number of advertised posts in the respective categories is liable to be set aside.
10.
So far as the second point of the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned that 50% marks were allocated for the interview, that need not detain me any more in view of the pronouncement of the Apex Court in Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar and others, A.I.R. 1994 Supreme Court 141 : 1994(1) SCT.
483.
The Apex Court drew a distinction between the selection which is based on written test and interview and the selection based on interview alone.
In the latter case, it was held that it is upto the Commission to lay down the criteria for allocating marks to the qualification, etc. and interview.
In the said case, where the selection was wholly based on interview, as in the case in hand, 50% marks were kept for the qualifications and other achievements and 50% for the interview.
The selection was upheld.
The Apex Court observed.
"The question of weight to be attached to viva voce would not arise where the selection is to be made on the basis of interview only."
Consequently, there was nothing wrong in allocating 50% marks for the interview.
Even if this percentage is varied, no fault can be found in the same.
11.
As far as the third point of the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned, I find no merit in the same.
Simply because a III Divisioner has been selected and a person with higher qualifications or higher academic qualifications is ignored, is no ground to hold that the selection is arbitrary, If the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is to prevail, then in the presence of a person with higher academic merit, no person with lower academic merit can ever be selected.
Ought we know, the person with lower academic merit may perform very well in the interview as compared to the person with higher academic merit.
Therefore, it cannot be hold that the slection was arbitrary.
12.
Before parting with the judgment, I may deal with an argument raised by the learned counsel for the private respondents.
According to the learned counsel the petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the selection, inasmuch as her case was duly considered as she was interviewed by the Commission.
In spite of the recommendation made by the Commission, which was beyond the number of posts advertised, the petitioner could not make the grade, and, therefore, it does not lie in her mouth to say that the recommendation beyond the number of posts advertised, was had in law.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with this argument.
If the posts are advertised again for which the recommendations have been sent now by the Commission, which are beyond the number of posts advertised, the petitioner would have again a right to apply for consideration afresh.
Consequently, she is entitled to challenge the selection.
For the foregoing reasons, these, writ petitioners are partly allowed to the extent that the recommendations of the commission beyond the number of posts in question, is held to be bad in law and beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission and the recommendation to that extent is hereby quashed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.