Kamlesh Sharma, J - The respondents (hereinafter called the plaintiffs) are dental surgeon and medical officer respectively.
They were posted at Beas Satluj Link Canal Hospital, Sundernagar which was under the management and control of Beas Construction Board upto 3091984 and thereafter under Section 80 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 it was transferred to appellant- defendant (hereinafter called Bhakra Beas Management Board, in short : BBMB.)
On their transfer, the BBMB stopped paying them special allowance of Rs. 150/- per month w.e.f.
1101984.
2.
Feeling aggrieved, the plaintiffs filed civil suit No. 9/87 which was decreed in their favour on 4111988 by Sub Judge Ist Class, Sundernagar.
Mandatory injunction directing the BBMB to pay Rs. 150/- per month w.e.f.
1101984 to the plaintiffs was issued.
The BBMB filed appeal against the decree and judgment of Sub Judge Ist Class, Sundernagar, which has been partly allowed by the District Judge, Mandi, Kullu and Lauhal Spiti Districts at Mandi by his decree and judgment dated 2281991.
The mandatory injunction granted in favour of plaintiff No. 1 Dr. RP Mittal has been set aside by the District Judge on the ground that he stood repatriated to his parent State of Punjab before the institution of the suit and he should have filed suit for recovery of arrears of special pay at the rate of Rs. 150/- per month from 1101984 to the date upto which he served the BBMB.
The mandatory injunction granted in favour of plaintiff No. 2 Dr. Dharam Paul Garg was affirmed as he was in the employment of the BBMB when the suit was instituted by him, though he also stood repatriate to his parent State of Haryana later on.
Now, the BBMB has filed the regular second appeal against the decree and judgment dated 2281991 of the District Judge.
Plaintiff No. 1 Doctor RP Mittal has not come forward to challenge the part of the impugned decree and judgment where by his suit has been dismissed, as such this Court need not examine that aspect of the matter.
3.
This Court has heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
Mr. NS Bawa, learned counsel for BBMB, has pointed out that the substantial question of law arising in the present appeal is that both the courts below have over looked the law laid down in Jaswant Singh and others v. Union of India and others, (AIR 1980 Supreme Court 115) in respect of interpretation of sub-section (4) of Section 79 and sub-section (5) of Section 80 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter called the Act).
According to Mr. Bawa, as per law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Jaswant Singh (supra), BBMB is a statutory body, separate and distinct from the Beas Construction Board (in short : BCB), having inherent right to frame its independent policies in the matter of grant of concessions, benefits and allowances to its employees.
He further states that the BBMB is not bound to follow the decisions of the BCB in respect of grant of special pay of Rs. 150/- in lieu of Rural Health Allowance to the doctors posted in Project Hospital, Sundernagar, which is situated within the municipal area.
Mr. Bawa has drawn attention of this Court to documents Ex. DA and DB whereby the Punjab Government, Department of Health and Family Welfare Memos.
(Ex. DA/1 and DA/2) were adopted by the BBMB in the matter of grant of Rural Health Allowance and Non-practising Allowance in the case of doctors drawn from the partner States and working in Irrigation Wing of BBMB.
According to these Memos, Rural Health Allowance is admissible to doctors who were working in rural area.
Since, Project Hospital, Sundernagar is within municipal area of Sundernagar, the doctors posted there were not entitled to special allowance of Rs. 150/- per month which was in lieu of Rural Health Allowance.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. Subhash Sharma, learned counsel for plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg, has supported the impugned judgment of the District Judge and has urged that on transfer to BBMB, his client continued to be governed by the same terms and conditions which were applicable to him before Project Hospital Sundernagar was transferred to BBMB, as provided under sub- section (4) of Section 79 read with sub-section (5) of Section 80 of the Act.
According to Mr. Sharma, besides these provisions of law the BBMB had taken specific decision to protect the pay of those employees who were employed by it on transfer from the BCB as contained in letter No. 25256-66/B-610/17/1- Irr.
dated 4111982, Ex. P.4 on the record.
He has also pointed out another document letter No. 14826-33/B-1108/Dr/28 dated 8121977, Ex. P-6 on record whereby it was conveyed on behalf of the BBMB to the Accountant General, Punjab that the decisions taken by the BCB were to be followed mutatis- mutandis by the BBMB.
As such the BBMB had no justification to stop the payment of special allowance to its doctors at Project Hospital, Sundernagar.
5.
It is not in dispute that when the control and management of Project Hospital, Sundernagar was transferred w.e.f.
1101984 from the BCB to the BBMB, plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg was working as dental surgeon in the said hospital.
As a consequence of transfer he became the employee of the BBMB as he continued working in the hospital.
It is also not in dispute that while plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg was employee of the BCB, he was given special pay of Rs. 150/- in lieu of Rural Health Allowance.
The BCB had taken specific decision in this regard vide its letter No. 3428/BI/142/BH dated 1761968 and letter No. 4246/BI-142 dated 2971983, Ex. P-2 and P-3 on record.
6.
Now the first question arises whether by operation of sub-section (5) of Section 80 read with sub-section (4) of Section 79 of the Act protection was available to plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg to continue to be employed under the BBMB on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him when he was employed under the BCB.
Under sub-section (1) of Section 79 of the Act, Bhakra Management Board was constituted for the operation of the works mentioned at serial No. (a) to (g) of that sub-section.
Sub-section (4) of Section 79 of the Act empowered the Bhakra Management Board to employ such staff as it may consider necessary for the discharge of its functions.
Its first proviso provides for protection, in respect of their terms and conditions of service, to those employees who were engaged in the construction, maintenance or operation of the works enumerated in clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (1).
Sub Section (4) of Section 79 of the Act is as under :-  79.
(1).......... (2).......... (3).......... (4) The Bhakra Management Board may employ such staff as it may consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act : Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said Board was engaged in the construction, maintenance or operation of the works in sub-section (1) shall continue to be so employed under the Board in connection with the said works on the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him before such constitution until the Central Government by order directs otherwise : Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with State Government or the Electricity Board concerned and with the previous approval of the Central Government return any such person for service under that Government or Board.
7.
Another body, the Beas Construction Board was constituted under sub- section (1) of Section 80 of the Act by Central Government.
Under sub-section (3) of Section 80 of the Act the notification constituting the Board had empowered the Board to appoint such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions.
It is further provided under sub-section (5) of Section 80 of the Act that any component of the Beas Project in relation to  which the construction has been completed after November, 1966 will be transferred by the Central Government to the Bhakra Management Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 79 of the Act and thereupon the provisions of Section 79 of the Act become applicable as if the work transferred to the Bhakra Management Board was included in sub-section (1) of section 79 of the Act.
On transfer of any of the components of the Beas Project under sub-section (5) of Section 80 of the Act, the Bhakra Management Board constituted under sub-section (1) of Section 79 is renamed as Bhakra Beas Management Board has been provided under sub-section (6) of Section 80 of the Act and after transfer of all the components of Beas Project, the Beas Construction Board ceases to exist.
Sub sections (5) and (6) of Section 80 of the Act are as under :-  80(1)....... (2)....... (3)....... (3)....... (4)....... 5) Any component of the Beas Project in relation to which the construction has been completed after the appointed day may be transferred by the Central Government to the Board constituted under section 79 whereupon the provisions of that section shall apply as if it were a work include in sub- section (1) of that section.
(6) The Bhakra Management Board constituted under Section 79 shall be re-named as the Bhakra Beas Management Board when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section (5), and the Beas Construction Board shall cease to exist when all the components of the Beas Project have been so transferred.
8.
The argument raised by Mr. Subhash Sharma that on transfer of Project Hospital, Sundernagar of the BBMB, Plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg on the same terms and conditions of his service as were applicable to him earlier when he was employee of the BCB as provided under sub-section (5) of Section 80 read with sub-section (4) of Section 79 of the Act, though attractive, deserves to be rejected in view of the interpretation of these Section given by the Supreme Court in case of Jaswant Singh (supra).
In para 31 of the judgment His Lordship Chief Justice Chandrachud speaking for the Bench, held that on the completion of one of components of Beas Project or the project itself, the services of the person employed for the Beas Project or any one of its components, come to an end and they have no right to claim their transfer to BBMB to which the Beas Project or any of its components stood transferred.
Para 31 of the judgment is as under :-  "A branch of the same argument is that under Section 80(5), components of the Beas Project the construction of which has been completed after November 1, 1966 have to be transferred to the Bhakra Management Board and thereupon the provisions of Section 79 come into operation as if the transferred works were included in clauses (a) to (g) of Section 79(1).
It is urged that if any complete component of the Beas Project is transferred to the Bhakra Management Board as required by Section 80(5), as has been done in the present case on May 15, 1976, the petitioners would become the employees of the Bhakra Management Board, since the work in connection with which they were employed is transferred to that Board.
There is no warrant for this submission because, though Section 80(5) requires a completed work of the Beas Project to be transferred to the Bhakra Management Board, it does not provide that persons who were employed in connection with such a work should also be transferred as employees of the Bhakra Management Board.
In the very nature of things there could be no such provision because if any persons were employed for the Beas Project only, their employment would normally cease on completion of that Project.
In fact, the petitioners were taken in employment on temporary posts for the purpose of completing the Beas Project.
On the completion of that Project or any other works for which they were employed, their employment would normally come to an end, especially since the statute from which their rights are said to flow does not protect that employment."
9.
Further in para 32 of the judgment while rejecting the argument that the words "Bhakra Beas Management Board" should be substituted for the words "Bhakra Management Board" occurring in sub-section (4) of section 79 of the Act and if they are so substituted, the expression "said Board" in the first proviso to sub-section (4) of Section 79 of the Act would necessarily have reference to the Bhakra Beas Management Board, His Lordship Chief Justice, Chandrachud held :-  "This argument contains a fallacy.
The first proviso to Section 79(4) speaks of persons who immediately before "the constitution" of the Bhakra Management Board were engaged in the works mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 79.
The scheme of Section 80 shows that the Bhakra Beas Management Board was never constituted as such.
The only effect which the statute brings about by sub-section (6) of section 80 is the renaming of Bhakra Management Board.
The words "constitution of the said Board" cannot therefore be substituted by the words "the renaming of the said Board".
The contemplation of Section 79(4) is that only a certain class of employees should receive protection in the matter of continued employment.
Unfortunately, the petitioners do not fall within that class since they were not employees of the Bhakra Management Board immediately before October 1, 1967 when that Board was constituted."
10.
As stated in the earlier para of the judgment in paragraph 30, the class of employees who fall under sub-section (4) of Section 79 of the Act are only those who were engaged under any of the works mentioned in clauses (a) to (g) to sub-section (1) of Section 79 immediately before the constitution of the Bhakra Management Board.
It is specifically held that, "The first proviso to Section 79(4) is designed to protect the services of persons who, prior to the establishment of the Bhakra Management Board, were engaged in the construction work connected with the Bhakra and Nangal Dams and the power houses linked therewith.
The petitioners were working on the Beas Project and are not therefore entitled to the benefit of that proviso".
11.
Though, plaintiff No. 2 Dr. Dharam Paul Garg is not similarly situated to the employees who were before the Supreme Court in the case of Jaswant Singh (supra), as admittedly, he continued to be employed by the BBMB on transfer of Project Hospital Sundernagar, yet in view of the interpretation of sub- sections (5) and (6) of Section 80 and sub-section (4) of Section 79, it is difficult to hold that the case of plaintiff No. 2 Dharam Paul Garg is covered under sub-section (4) of Section 79 and he continued to be employed by the BBMB on the same terms and conditions on which he was employed by the BCB.
Hence, the findings of the District Judge in this regard are set aside.
12.
The next question remains to be answered is whether by Ex. P-4 the BBMB had taken a decision to protect the pay drawn by the officers/officials while in BCB on their transfer to BBMB.
As stated in para 2 of this letter, it was issued in pursuance of the decision taken by the BBMB under Item No. 10311 of its 103rd meeting held on 18101982 at Chandigarh.
The minutes of 103rd meeting of BBMB held on 18101992 have not been placed on record by the BBMB.
Ex. DC on record is only a note of Item No. 10311 of the agenda of 103 rd meeting of the BBMB, para 6 of which contained recommendations that protection of pay should be available to the employees irrespective of the fact whether they were transferred to the same component/unit of Beas Project of which they were working or not.
However, from Ex. P-4 it is clear beyond any doubt that BBMB under Item No. 10311 of its 103rd meeting held on 18101982 did take a decision that pay of officers/officials transferred from BCB to BBMB will be protected irrespective of their posting to any component/unit of Beas Project or Bhakra Project.
13.
There is another document Ex. P-6 which is a letter dated 8121977 written by Secretary, BBMB to Accountant General, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Last para of this letter is relevant and it is :-  "The case of this Board on this issue is akin to that of the Beas Construction Board.
The staff working in this Board also is drawn from the Partner State Elecy.
Boards and on the same terms and conditions as are applicable to the staff drawn from the Partner States/Elecy.
Boards by the Beas Construction Board.
Moreover, the functions of the administrative, maintenance and operation of Beas Project on its completion are to be taken over by this Board under the provisions of Sub-section (5) of Section 80 of the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966.
Therefore, the decision taken by the Beas Construction Board has to be followed mutatis mutandis by this Board also.
As such no leave salary contributions and pension contributions are required to be made by this Board in respect of Doctors, who have already worked or are presently working or may work in future in this Board."
If decision taken by BCB applied mutatis mutandis to BBMB, the decision contained in Ex.P-2 and P-3 grant of special pay of Rs. 150/- per month in lieu of Rural Health Allowance also applied to BBMB.
Moreover, the decision of BBMB contained in Ex. DA and DB to adopt Memos of Punjab Government in respect of Rural Health Allowance and Non-Practising Allowance, had not been taken in supersession of earlier decision contained in Ex. P-2 and P-3.
Rural Health Allowance could not be granted to doctors posted in Project Hospital Sundernagar which is situated within municipal limit, but keeping in view non-lucrative living conditions at that place, they were given special allowance in lieu thereof.
There is nothing on record to show that by transfer of the Project Hospital to BBMB from BCB the living conditions at Sundernagar had improved and while taking decision contained in Ex. DA and DB the BBMB had impliedly discontinued the special allowance drawn by the doctors, posted in the Hospital.
In view of the above discussion, this Court holds that the plaintiff No. 2 Doctor Dharam Paul Garg was entitled to special allowance of Rs. 150/- per month w.e.f.
1101984 on transfer of his services to BBMB.
Therefore, District Judge has rightly confirmed decree of mandatory injunction granted in his favour.
14.
The judgment dated 651982 cited by Mr. Bawa passed by Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in CWP No. 430 of 1982 Mulakh Raj Bedi and another versus The Bhakra Beas Management Board and others is on its own facts, inasmuch as the petitioners in that case were first repatriated to their parent State from BCB and thereafter transferred to BBMB and in their case it was held that pay which they were drawing in BCB was not protected.
This judgment has no application in the present case where plaintiff No. 2 continued to be working in Project Hospital Sundernagar when it was transferred from BCB to BBMB, as such he became the employee of BBMB without his repatriation to his parent State first.
No other point is argued by Mr. Bawa on behalf of appellant BBMB.
15.
In the result, there is no merit in this appeal, it is dismissed and the decree and judgment dated 2281991 passed by the District Judge is affirmed.
Costs on parties.
Appeal dismissed.