NK Kapoor, J - This judgment will dispose of two civil writ petition Nos. 10307 of 1993 and 12647 of 1993 as identical question of law has been raised in both these petitions.
The facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 10397 of 1993 titled Dhan Raj Singh v. State of Haryana.
2.
The petitioner has sought issuance of writ of mandamus against respondent No. 2 - Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh - to consider his case for the post of Works Manager.
Haryana Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') issued an advertisement inviting applications for temporary Works Manager Class-II, Transport Department, Haryana, vide advertisement Annexure P-1, stipulating therein that persons should be in between age of 21 to 35 years as on October 12,1992 and possesses requisite qualification i.e. (1) Degree of Mechanical or Automobile Engineering from a recognised University, and (ii) Hindi upto Matric standard.
The petitioners in both these writ petitions applies in pursuance to this advertisement but their candidatures has been rejected on the ground that none of them possessed the decree in Mechanical or Automobile Engineering from a recognised university which has consequently impelled them to knock the door of this court.
The petitioner with a view to prove that he possess the exquisite qualification as envisaged by advertisement, Annexure P-1, made mention of the fact that he had successfully completed the certificate in Sections 4 and 8 of the Associate Membership Examination of Institution of Engineers (India) in Mechanical Engineering which institution is recognised by the Government of India and this qualification is equivalent to Bachelor of Engineering and so a request was made to reconsider his case afresh.
I support of his above assertion, reference was made to a letter issued by the Government of Haryana to all the Heads of Departments informing the various departments that decree and diplomas etc. which are recognised by the Government of India are deemed to have been recognised by the Haryana Government.
Even the subsequent representation did not find favour with respondent No. 2, hence the present petition.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, respondent No. 2 put in appearance and filed written statement.
By way of preliminary objection, respondent No. 2 has asserted that the present petition is not maintainable as there has been no infringement of any legal or fundamental right of the petitioner.
Even otherwise, advertisement specifically stipulated that the persons possessing degree in Mechanical or Automobiles Engineers from a recognized University are required to apply for the post advertised.
Since the petitioner did not possess the qualification as mentioned in the advertised, his candidature was rightly not considered by the Commission.
Replying on merit, respondent in addition to the preliminary objection further averred that in the advertisement equivalent qualification is not envisaged i..e even if the petitioner possesses an equivalent qualification than the one advertised, the same would not qualify him for consideration for recruitment to the post advertised.
4.
Since while issuing a notice of motion selection was ordered not to be finalised, the present petition is being taken up for final disposed at the motion hearing in view of the urgency of the matter and otherwise too with the concurrence of the counsels for the parties.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner in support of his case made reference to the qualification possessed by the petitioner i.e.
Certificate in Sections A and B of the Associate Membership Examination of Institutions of Engineers (India) in Mechanical Engineering which qualification has been recognized by the Government of India to be an equivalent to a decree course, Annexure P-7.
Haryana Government vide its letter dated 1831975, Annexure P-6, too brought to the notice of the various departments of the Government with regard to the decision taken in this regard, namely, "(1) the degrees and diplomas etc. which are recognised by the Government of India will deem to be recognised by Haryana Govt; (ii) the degree and diplomas etc. which are issued by the recognised universities and High /Higher Secondary Board established by the State with also be recognised ipso facto."
Thus, despite the Government of India having recognised the Certificate AMIE at par with the bachelor of Engineering degree and recognition of such a certificate of the Haryana Government too, there could be hardly any legitimate ground for respondent No. 2 not to consider the case of the petitioner and thus the rejection of his candidature at the threshold is palpably illegal and hence unsustainable in law.
6.
Counsel for the respondent in support of his contention mainly relied upon the advertisement and highlighted that the same specifically stipulated that the persons intending to apply for the post of Works Manager must possess degree in Mechanical or Automobiles Engineering from a recognised University besides other requisite qualification mentioned therein.
Since the petitioner admittedly did not possess the essential qualification stated in the advertisement Annexure P-1, his case was rightly declined by the Commission.
In support of his contention, reliance was placed upon the judgment in case reported as Som Dutt v. State of Haryana and another, 1983(3) S.L.R.
141 and specifically drew the attention of the Court to the observations of the Bench in para No. 9 of the judgment.
7.
We have heared learned counsel for the parties at a considerable length and perused the relevant matter referred to during the course of arguments.
In fact, the facts are not in dispute i..e the petitioner possesses Certificate in AMIC from a recognised institution which certificate has been recognized at par with the Bachelor of Engineering degree it the appropriate field of an Indian University by the Government of India vide Annexure P-7.
There is also no dispute between the parties that the Haryana Government too has recognised all such degrees and diplomas which have been recognised by the Government of India - Annexure P-6.
Thus the sole question which needs some close scrutiny is as to whether a person who possesses qualification which has been taken to be an equivalent by the Government employer - to the one mentioned in the advertisement entitle such a person for consideration by the Commission for the post advertised.
The word "Equivalent" as per Chambers English Dictionary, means "equal in value, power, meaning etc., interchangeable' of like combining value, a thing equivalent, an equivalent weight..." The advertisement is in the nature of an invitation calling upon persons possessing the requisite qualification to apply for the post if the year desirous.
To give a literal meaning to the stipulation as given in the advertisement that the degree in Mechanical or Automobile Engineering from a recognised university would almost amount to denial of an equal opportunity to persons who possessed an equivalent qualification to the one advertised.
This perhaps was not intended by the employer - State of Haryana - (respondent No. 1).
It is precisely for this reason that the Haryana Government has not come forward to contradict the assertion made by the petitioner.
It is the Commission who has come up to contest.
In view of the fact that the qualification possessed by the petitioner has not only been recognised by the Government of India to be an equivalent to any degree given by a University in India but has also been recognised by the State of Haryana and even on parity of reasoning, we are of the view that the petitioners possesses the requisite qualifications which is equivalent to the one mentioned in the advertisement Annexure P-1 and thus the petitioner has legitimate right to be considered on merit by the Commission.
Since much emphasis was made by the learned counsel for the petitioner to the decision of this Court referred to above, it would be appropriate to make brief reference to the same.
In the cited case,the prescribed qualification for the post was (i) Matric (Full) with English as one of the subjects; pass in 2 years JBT/Diploma in Education Training Course from the Haryana Education Department or equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
The petitioner who was interviewed by the Selection Committee was later on informed that his case could not be considered since he did to possess the minimum prescribed qualification of two years JBT Diploma from the Education Department.
The petitioner challenged this on the ground that though he did not possess this qualification but, in fact, possess higher qualification that the one prescribed and so his claim could not be ignored in the eye of law.
It is on these facts that the Court declared to interfere holding that it is not the function of the Govt. to determine as to whether a particular qualification is an exact equivalent or is higher or superior to the prescribe done.
The facts of the present case are entirely different.
As noticed above, Government of India has recognised the qualification possessed by the petitioner to be an equivalent to a degree course from any University of India and in turn Haryana Govt. decided to recognise all such certificates, diplomas and decree which have been recognised by the Government of India.
Thus, in the instant case, there was no ambiguity as to whether the qualification possessed by the petitioner is equivalent to the one advertised.
The court in the instant case has merely to read Annexures P-6 and P-7 to come to the conclusion that the qualification possessed by the petitioner is equal to the one advertised i.e. no enquiry is to be initiated by the Court on its own.
In view of what has been stated above, we allow both the petitions and direct respondent No. 2 to call the petitioners for interview, preferably within a short time.
Petition allowed.