V K Bali, J - Petitioners, who were appointed on various posts in Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research Chandigarh, initially sought quashing of the order, Annexure P-20 to the extent it denied six figures central registration numbers to them and further sought direction to the respondents to give practical shape to the continuous running of the Hospital Based Cancer Registry, treating them to be permanent employees of the ICMR under the said scheme and granting them consequential service & retiral benefits to which they are legally entitled.
During the pendency of the writ petition, they sought stay of termination of their services as consequent upon issuance of letter, Annexure P-25, which inter alia recited that the project on its final completion on 3131992, the work was to be wound up, thus, resulting into termination of their services on giving them one month's notice.
The basic plea being raised in the case is that the petitioners have acquired a legal right to be treated as permanent employees of ICMR and deserve consequential service benefits in view of the Rules and Regulations of the PGI The first relief on account of later development noticed above receded in the background and thus no arguments were advanced to claim the same.
2.
The matter has been contested and separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
3.
Before the stand projected in the written statement is noticed it requires to be mentioned that all the petitioners were appointed on temporary basis and as per terms and conditions of their appointment letters, their temporary employment could be terminated by notice of one month.
The petitioners were appointed in the Hospital based Cancer Registry Project which was started in November, 1981 as a Research Project and was totally funded by the Indian Council of Medical Research.
The project aforesaid was granted by the ICMR to collect the data to project the needs of diagnosis and treatment of cancer in this part of the country as no definite statistics and information were available.
The project was funded for a period of five years.
As the aims and objectives of the project could not be completed within the period of five years, the same was extended from year to year basis till 3131992 on the condition that part of the funding (25 per cent) of the project was to be borne by the Institute.
The employees working in the project were the employees of the project only and are not the employees of the Institute.
Their appointment was, it is stated, done by the Principal Investigator of the project and not by the Institute under the PGIMER rules and regulations.
They were merely the employees of the project under the Principal Investigator and disciplinary action, if any, against them was taken by the Principal Investigator and not by the Institute.
It is further pleaded that the baseline data on cancer in PGI and the surrounding region are not completed and are available in greater details and in sufficient quantity towards implementation of cancer control activities.
The specific purpose for which the research project was funded, is now over and the objectives originally envisaged have been fulfilled.
The project, it is stated, is now going to be wound up on 3131992 and as the date is finally complete, there is no room for further research efforts to be put in and as such the working in the project cannot continue after 3131992.
Thus, it is stated, that the Indian Council of Medical Research by its letter dated 27.2.1992 has also stated that the work of the Registry is complete and no member of the staff would be retained after that date.
4.
Mr. Walia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has raised a number of points challenging order of termination but in view of various judgments having been relied upon which were with regard to the employees, who were similarly appointed in the same very or similar projects, I am not going into the details of all the submissions made by Mr. Walia.
One Mrs. Parmod Kumari filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3812 of 1989, who was also appointed in the said project, challenging termination of her services ordered on 3131989.
At motion stage, the Division Bench vide its order dated 23.5.1989 dismissed the said petition with the following observations :-  "The primary contention is that the services of the petitioner should be regularised.
It is, however, the conceded position that the petitioner was employed in a temporary project funded by the Indian Council of Medical Research.
It is also not in dispute and is so evident from Annexure P/2 itself, that the said project titled "Advance Centre for delivery of MCH Care" had come to an end on 31st March, 1989 and it was in the light of that the petitioner was served with one month notice in February, 1989.
When the very project on which the petitioner was employed was temporary, her services are bound to be terminated on completion of the project.
We, therefore, find no merit in the contention of the petitioner and in continuing it."
5.
Ranjit Singh & others filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2986 of 1989 challenging notice dated 2521989 vide which their services were terminated.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing before a Division Bench and was dismissed on 181989.
Against the judgment, aforesaid a Special Leave Petition was filed in the Supreme Court but the same was dismissed on 441991 with the following orders :-  "Heard counsel for the parties.
Petitioners 14 in number claim themselves to be Field Assistants associated with research projects undertaken by the Post Graduate Institute at Chandigarh.
( Counsel for the Post Graduate Institute has taken the stand that Research Project Investigators were engaged by the research scientists).
They came before this Court alleging that they were entitled to be continued in employment on regular basis under the Institute and by an order dated 26th September, 1989 this Court while issuing notice on the special leave petition filed in this Court by them upon the High Court's rejecting their claim, ordered maintenance of status quo as obtaining that day.
Counsel for the petitioners fairly concedes that petitioners are not entitled to continue unless research projects are undertaken and are on-going.
It is the stand of the PGI that there is no research project in hand to which the petitioners can be fitted.
In fact in its affidavit filed before this Court the Institute has indicated that on completion of a research project retrenched staff may be adjusted in similar research projects depending upon availability of vacancies and fulfilment of requirements of experience, confidential reports from previous projects.
Counsel for the PGI accepts the petition disclosed in the affidavit.
6.
We, therefore, modify the order of status quo by leaving it to the PGI to review the claim of 14 petitioners to be adjusted against any on-going project subject to the conditions indicated in the affidavit.
Since, the continuance of employment is contingent upon the situation indicated above, there is no necessity to keep the special leave petition pending.
This is disposed of in terms of the said order.
It is said that 8 of the petitioners have been paid at the rate of Rs. 1,000/- upto now as against their regular dues of Rs. 1,400/- per month while the other six have not been paid any amount.
We direct that the PGI will work out their dues and take steps to make the payment and in the event of PGI finding it difficult to meet the liability out of its projects, the Union of India and the Health Ministry will have to meet the liability.
The order of termination already made with the variation of the status quo order becomes effective from today."
7.
Suresh Pal, working under the ICMR Research Project sought regularisation of his service and to appoint him against the existing and vacant seats as Social Worker.
A Division Bench of this Court on 1691991 passed the following orders :-  "Learned counsel for the respondents states that it was conceded in C.W.
No. 2986/1989 and Special Leave Petition No. 10705 of 1989 that the petitioner and others would not be entitled to continue unless research projects are undertaken and are on-going or there being no research project in hand in which petitioners can be fitted.
It was further stated that on completion of a research project, the petitioner would be adjusted in similar research projects depending upon availability of vacancies and fulfilment of requirements of experience, qualification, performance at interview and confidential reports from previous projects.
In view of this undertaking no further action is called for in this writ petition as it is not disputed that the petitioner was an employee under a scheme, which was permitted to continue till October, 1991 with a limited strength of the staff, which does not include the post of the petitioner.
Further it is also not disputed that the petitioner was clubbed with the employees of the PGI only for the purpose of pay scales, allowances and administrative control etc.
He was not an employee of the PGI but was employed under a scheme which was under the supervision of the Director, Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh.
In view of the observations made above, we hope that the respondents shall consider the case of the petitioner for his employment in a similar scheme sympathetically.
Writ petition is disposed of accordingly."
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the PGI in the present case as well states that there is no research project in which the petitioners can be fitted but the staff including the petitioners, who are to be retrenched, would be adjusted in similar research projects depending upon availability of vacancies and fulfilment of requirements of experience, qualification, performance at interview and confidential reports from previous projects.
In these circumstances, I would like to follow the decision of Supreme Court in S.L.P.
10795 of 1989 which was directed against the order of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2986 of 1989 and direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners to be adjusted against any on-going project subject to the conditions that have been enumerated by learned counsel appearing for the PGI A sincere effort would be made by the respondent authorities to accommodate the petitioners and but for the relief indicated above, the petitioners are not entitled to any other relief.
Ordered accordingly.