Monoranjan Mallick, J - This is an application under Article 226 of the Constitution filed by the petitioner Sri Sujit Dey praying for a writ of mandamus upon the respondents directing them to cancel, set aside, rescind and withdraw the impugned order of discharge annexed as Annexure 'D' and directing the respondents to reinstate the petitioner in his post of Chief Mining Officer with all monetary benefits both arrears and current and for other consequential reliefs.
The petitioner states as follows :  2.
The petitioner is a graduate in Mining Engineering from IIT Kharagpur and was selected by the Public Service Commission West Bengal to be appointed as a Chief Mining Officer and the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal memo dated 27785 informed that the petitioner was appointed temporarily until further orders in the post of Chief Mining Officer in the Mining Estate Branch at Assansol in the District of Burdwan under the Directorate of Mines and Minerals, Government of West Bengal, with effect from the date he assumes charge.
The copy of the appointment letter is annexed as Annexure 'A' to the petition.
The petitioner joined in the post of Chief Mining Officer on 3091985 and continued to work as such sincerely with the integrity and honesty and he passed the Departmental Examination completely in the half yearly Departmental Examination of the Officers of the Government of West Bengal which were held from 7111988 to 25111988 and he was granted to draw the increment in pay at the rate of Rs. 60/- per month from 11088 effective from 26.11.88.
The petitioner having passed the Departmental Examination and after the expiry of the probation period of 2 years from the date of joining of Chief Mining Officer he becomes permanent and the petitioner prayed for confirmation of his service against the permanent vacancy on 15689 when Government vide order dated 14889 extended the period of probation for one year from 3081989 pending confirmation of the petitioner of the said post and again on 23rd August, 1989 the petitioner prayed for early confirmation of his service but nothing yielded.
The petitioner always tried to stop the illegal mining operation and legal selling of coal by unscrupulous people of Assansol and there was no adverse report in the service record of the petitioner.
While the petitioner was working as Chief Mining Officer at Assansol he had to attend various courts including High Court in connection with the cases relating to illegal extraction of coal by designing persons and petitioner also used to take legal action against the unscrupulous extractor of coal and as such they tried through various levels to remove the petitioner from the service and in one such case, namely, Union of India v. NC Roy in which the said NC Roy's activities were not approved by the petitioner for the interest of the nation but on 28th September, 1989 when after attending the High Court the petitioner returned back to Assansol he was served with notice informing him that the Governor was pleased to discharge him from the service of the State of Government with immediate effect in terms of Rule 5 to Part 'A' in Chapter I of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal.
Copy of the said order marked with Annexure 'D' to the petitioner.
The petitioner states that without making any enquiry without initiating any proceeding, without showing any cause and without giving any opportunity of hearing the petitioner has been discharged from service and the provision of Article 311 of the Constitution and the principle of audi alteram partem has been violated and as such the order of discharge is liable to be quashed.
It is also contended that he having been appointed in July, 1985 and he having passed the departmental examination of the officers of the Government of West Bengal held from 7111988 to 25111988 and the increment being accorded to him the authority was satisfied with his work and after completion of 2 years probation from the date of his initial appointment he has thus become permanent and confirmed Government employee and the petitioner cannot be discharged in any arbitrary manner in view of the provisions of West Bengal Services (Appointment, Probation and Confirmation) Rules, 1979.
3.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondent Nos. 1 to 4 by filing an affidavit-in-opposition through Arup Ratan Bhattacharya, the Joint Secretary of Commerce and Industries Department, Mines Branch being the respondent No. 3.
It is contended that the petitioner joined on 30th September, 1985 and as such, he was to be on temporary service till September 29, 1987 and thereafter on probation for one year, i.e., upto September 29, 1988 but it will be evident from the Notification No. 49-PSC/CON(B) dated March 16, 1989 of the Public Service Commission, West Bengal, that the petitioner passed the departmental examination completely in the half yearly departmental examination that was held from Monday, the 7th November to Friday, the 25th November, 1988 and on Friday, the 15th December, 1988, that the result of the said departmental examination in which the petitioner passed completely was published on March 16, 1989 and it is clear that the petitioner could not pass the departmental examination during his initial probationary period and his period of probation was, therefore, extended for a further period of one year from September 30, 1988 under a Notification No. 4477-CI/Mines dated August 14, 1989 in terms of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal, Chapter-I Part-A, pending further action in this regard, that mere passing of departmental examination or expiry of initial period of probation do not automatically make a probationer eligible for confirmation and probationer has to complete the period of probation satisfactorily to prove his suitability for service along with fulfilment of other requisites that a probationer can be discharged if it is found that he is not suitable in the post which he is holding and the same can be done without resorting to provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution and that the petitioner has no legal right to file this writ petition challenging the order of discharge and the same is liable to be dismissed.
It is also denied that the order of discharge had been issued in a mala fide or arbitrary manner and it is further stated that as the order of discharge was an order of termination simpliciter during the period of probation, the question of giving the petitioner opportunity of hearing does not and cannot arise.
An affidavit in reply has been filed by the petitioner reiterating the case made out in the writ petition and denying all the allegations made in the affidavit-in-opposition.
4.
It is an undisputed fact that petitioner on recommendation of the Public Service Commission of West Bengal was appointed in the said Government Service as Chief Mining Officer at Assansol and he joined the post on 3091985.
The he question of his confirmation to the said service is guided by the provisions of the West Bengal Services (Appointment, Probation and Confirmation) Rules, 1979 as the petitioner is also liable to pass the departmental examination in terms of the provision of Part 'A' of Chapter I, of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal before he is to be confirmed in service.
He has to completely pass the departmental examination.
The relevant provisions being, rules 4 and 5 of the West Bengal Services (Appointment, Probation and Confirmation) Rules, 1979 is reproduced below :  4.
Mode of Appointment - All appointments on entry into Government Service shall initially, be made on temporary basis."
"5.
Appointment on probation and Appointment on permanent basis -  (1) A Government employee -  (a) shall be deemed to be on probation on completion of continuous temporary service for two years after his initial appointment in a post, service or cadre;  (b) shall be confirmed and made permanent on satisfactory completion of the period of probation.
When passing of any departmental examination is essential before confirmation, the provisions of Chapter I of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal shall have to be complied with.
(2) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in these rules, the period of probation shall be one year.
(3) No formal declaration shall be necessary in respect of appointment on probation.
(4) On completion of the period of probation the appointing authority shall either issue formal declaration making the probationer permanent or take such action as may be considered necessary in terms of the provisions of Part-A of Chapter-I of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal, within six months from the date of completion of the period of probation, or the extended period of probation, if any, and the appointing authority shall ensure that confirmation on satisfactory completion of the period of probation, is not delayed in any case."
5.
In terms of Notification No. 2810-F dated August 5, 1969 of the Finance Department, Audit Branch, Government of West Bengal, all Gazetted Officers of the Directorate of Mines West Bengal, shall be required to pass the departmental examination, as set out below within two years from the date of their appointment or during the period of probation, as the case way be :  The following shall be the subjects for the examination and the lists thereof :  (a) Common for all Officers  Subject, Full Marks, Pass Marks Time  (i) Bengali  (ii) Hindi  (iii) Accounts (Part-I)  (Theoretical)  (iv) Accounts (Part-II)  (Practice & Procedure)  (b) xxx xxx xxx  (c) For Chief Mining Officer and Mining Officer, Professor in-charge of Mining and Assistant Professor of Mining & Surveying.
Special Law paper (with books), 100, 60, 3 Hours."
6.
Therefore, under the Rule 5 of West Bengal Services (Appointment, Probation and Confirmation) Rules, 1979 the petitioner shall be deemed to be on probation with effect from 30th September, 1987.
Sub-rule (2) of the above Rule 5 states that except as otherwise provided elsewhere in these rules the period of probation shall be one year.
The learned Advocate for the petitioner urges before me that when Sub-rule (2) of Rule 5 provides for period of probation to be one year then under Sub-rule (4) of Rule 5 within 6 months from the date of expiry of the said period of probation he has to be either confirmed in service or to be discharged if not found suitable but the respondent not having discharged him within the above period of 6 months it must be held that the petitioner must be deemed to have been confirmed in service, even though no formal order of confirmation has been passed and that the respondent has no legal right under the above rules to extend the period of probation and the respondent having illegally extended the period of probation which power of the respondent does not have under the above rules and that too with retrospective effect, the said order extending the period of probation must be held to be illegal and consequently he having been deemed to have been confirmed in service after the expiry of period of 6 months from the date when his period of probation expired, the concerned authority has no power to discharge him from service still treating him as probationer and he being deemed to have been confirmed by the respondent, the respondent not having discharged him within the above period of 6 months the discharge simpliciter is illegal and violative of Article 311 of the Constitution  7.
On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that Sub-rule (4) of Rule 5 of the West Bengal Services (Appointment, Probation and Confirmation) Rules, 1979 by using the expression "within 6 months from the date of completion of the period of probation, or the extended period of probation, if any, clearly gives power to the appointing authority to extend the period of probation if the same is necessary in terms of the Provisions of the Services (Training and Examination) Rules, West Bengal.
It is contended that under the said rule and in terms of Notification No. 2810 dated August 5, 1969 the petitioner was to pass the departmental examination within 2 years from the date of his appointment or during the period of probation as the case may be before he could be confirmed.
It is an admitted fact that within the period of 2 years from the date of his appointment he could not pass the departmental examination which was held in the month of November and December, 1988 and the result of such examination was published in the official gazette on March 16, 1989.
As under the above training and examination rules the petitioner has to pass the departmental examination either within the period of 2 years from the date of entry into service or within the period of probation then if in the meantime his period of probation expired before he could completely pass that departmental examination the authority had to extend the period of probation.
8.
On considering the submissions made by both the parties I am of the view that it is not correct to say that the respondent authority did not have any power to extend the period of probation of the petitioner and they had the obligation within the period of 6 months from the date of expiry of one year period of probation of the petitioner to take steps either to confirm him or to discharge him.
I am of the view that on considering these relevant rules together the respondent authority did not commit any illegality in extending the period of probation.
When it was found that he completely passed in departmental examination which was published in the official gazette on 16th March, 1989, the respondent authority had to extend the period of probation.
Admittedly the period of probation was extended for a further period of one year from 30th September, 1988 by the Notification dated 14th August, 1989 and before the expiry of probationary period of 25th September, 1989 this order of discharge was passed.
It is well settled that when a probationer is discharged his service under Article 311 is not attracted.
Moreover, it is not correct to say that immediately-on completion of the period of probation a Government employee is entitled to be confirmed in service.
The confirmation of service under Rule 5 is on the basis of satisfactory completion of the period of probation.
Therefore, within the period of probation the respondent could have discharged him on being satisfied that it was not the fit case for confirmation and when such order of discharge is passed Article 311 of the Constitution is not attracted.
In Bina Tiwari v. State of MP, AIR 1989 SC 488 the Supreme Court has held that High Court has absolute power to terminate the services of a probationer judicial officer by not confirming his service.
The discharge of service by probationer is in terms of the relevant Government rules and the concerned officer is not entitled to any reasonable opportunity of hearing before such an order is passed.
The concerned authority has no obligation to comply with audi alteram partem rules.
9.
In the result, writ petition is dismissed and no order for costs is passed.
Petition dismissed.