VK Bali, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner, Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel, takes serious objection to the order dated October 9, 1991 (Annexure P-7), vide which his promotion to the post of Professor (Urology) ordered on 14, 1991, has been converted on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time Dr. RK Jindal, respondent No. 2, attains the prescribed period of teaching experience whichever is earlier.
The petitioner also complains about the cloistered manner in which Dr. RK Jindal is proposed to be brought on the post of Professor (Urology) by replacing him.
Before, however, the grounds on which order (Annexure P-7) has been challenged are noticed, it shall be useful to trace the relevant facts culminating into the present petition.
2.
After doing MBBS, the petitioner joined as Medical Officer on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
21.3.1975 and was subsequently selected and appointed on regular basis on the recommendation made by the Punjab Public Service Commission w.e.f.
31.10.1975.
The petitioner did his MS (Surgery) while he was posted at Patiala as Registrar in the Medical College.
He was promoted as Senior Lecturer in Punjab Medical Education Service, Class-II, w.e.f.
1191982.
The petitioner advanced in his academic career by yet another step when he acquired post-Graduate qualification of Megister Chirugise (M Ch.)
in Urology from the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, from 1111983 to 1111985.
He was thereafter promoted as Assistant Professor (Urology) on temporary basis vide order dated 2051985.
During the tenure of his temporary promotion to the post of Assistant Professor, he was selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission for the aforesaid post for appointment on regular basis and consequent upon such selection, he joined on regular basis on 2071990.
The Petitioner claims meritorious service career.
He was sent through the Government of India to United Kingdom for availing common wealth fellowship for a period of one year and he also stakes claim of being an author of number of international scientific publications besides attending six international conferences.
Besides the eligibility of the petitioner on the front of educational qualifications, it is the impressive service career that he had to his credit that was also considered as a relevant fact for giving him promotion to the post of Professor, claims the petitioner.
Respondent No. 2, on the other hand, for whom the petitioner has been asked to vacate the post of Professor, started working as a Senior Lecturer and was promoted to the post of Assistant Professor w.e.f.
2191981 against a short-term vacancy by way of stop-gap arrangement.
Thereafter, his promotion to the post of Assistant Professor was converted into ad hoc basis w.e.f.
1381985 and till date he has been working in the same capacity.
The case of the petitioner is that respondent No. 2 was never regularised as Assistant Professor by the State Government in consultation with the Punjab Public Service Commission nor the Commission ever selected him for regular appointment.
The service condition of the petitioner as well as respondent No. 2 are governed by the Rules known as the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class-I) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter to be referred at `the 1978 Rules').
According to Rule 7(2) of the 1978 Rules, no person can be recruited to the service by direct appointment, promotion or by transfer unless he possesses the qualification and teaching experience as specified in Appendix-C Under Rule 9 of the 1978 Rules, the method of the appointment to the aforesaid post has been detailed.
In so far as the post of Professor is concerned, 75% appointment of such posts has to be made by way of promotion from amongst the Associate Professors and where Associate Professors are not available from amongst the Assistant Professors or by transfer of an official already in the service of the Government of India or of the State Government.
As per Rule 9(3) all the appointments to the post in the service by promotion had to be made by selection on merits and no person is entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority.
Inasmuch as Rules 9(1)(d) and 9(3) as also Appendix-C are relevant for adjudicating the controversy involved in the present petition, it shall be useful to reproduce the same  "9.
Method of Appointment :-  (1) Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made in the following manner :-  xx xx xx xx xx xx  (d) In the case of Professors  (i) 70 per cent posts by promotion from amongst the Assistant Professors, or where Associate Professors are not available, from amongst the Assistant Professors, or by transfer of official already in the service of the Government of India or the State Government.
(ii) 25 per cent posts by direct recruitment;  9(3) : All appointments to the posts in the service by promotion shall be made by selection on merit and no person shall be entitled to claim as right of promotion to such posts on the basis of seniority.
APPENDIX `C' Name of post Qualification Teaching experience required (1) Professor of xxx xxx xxx (iii) Paediatric surgery, Urology, Cardiothorasic surgery, Neuro surgery, Plastic surgery M.Ch.
Should have teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned for a minimum period of five years in a Medical College after the requisite post-graduate qualifications."
3.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be noticed that 1978 Rules were amended in 1985 and the original Appendix `C' attached to the Rules requiring post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned, MD, MS, PhD, MSc, DSc, FRCS, MRCP and teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned for five years in a Medical College after requisite post-graduate qualifications as pre-requisite for appointment to the post of Professor or Additional Professor was changed to say that five years experience as Assistant Professor was required after doing M.Ch.
4.
The post of Professor (Urology) fell vacant on retirement of Dr. Kuldip Singh Khera, who was Professor in Urology, Medical College, Patiala, w.e.f.
30.9.1990 and the case of the petitioner is that on the date in question, i.e. 30.9.1990 none except him was eligible for consideration for promotion.
He alone answered the eligibility criteria provided in the Rules for appointment to the post of Professor.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as per settled law on the point as also instructions issued by the Punjab Government itself vide Circular No. 4/18/81-IPP/5594 dated 2741982, it is the date of occurrence of vacancy, which had to be taken as the relevant date for determining the edibility for promotion to a higher post and that being the position of law, none other than him could be considered for the post under contention.
He was possessing the requisite post-graduate qualifications and also had the five years teaching experience after the requisite post-graduate qualifications required under the 1978 Rules.
Respondent No. 2, on the other hand, who had passed his M.Ch.
(Urology) in 1976 from the Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh, was not possessing the requisite teaching experience of five years on the date when the vacancy occurred.
Further, respondent No. 2, while serving as Assistant Professor, was placed under suspension vide order dated 13.6.1986 and was reinstated on 791987.
He was placed under suspension for he had misconducted himself by remaining on leave without permission and he was ultimately punished when warning was given to him for his misconduct.
Further, the Government declined to treat the period of suspension as spent on duty and that being so, the said period had to be excluded in computing his teaching experience after doing M.Ch.
in Urology.
While respondent No. 7 was under suspension from 13.8.1986 to 791987, the said period was treated on leave of kind this and the period from 1921986 to 1261986 was treated as leave without pay vide order passed on that behalf on 22.6.1988.
The request of respondent No. 2 so as to treat the period as spent on duty was specifically rejected by the competent authority as conveyed to him vide order dated 2921987 (Annexure P-9).
In view of these facts, the petitioner, who had unblemished and meritorious service record as also the requisite qualifications and experience required under the Rules was, therefore, justifiably promoted on 1481991 to the post of Professor (Urology) by not even considering the case of respondent No. 2 for such promotion as he was not having the requisite teaching experience on the crucial date.
On the representation filed by him, i.e. respondent No. 2, without asking for comments of the petitioner and without affording him any opportunity of hearing, the order of his promotion was modified to convert it on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time respondent No. 2 attains the prescribed period of teaching experience whichever was earlier vide Annexure P7, which as mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, has been impugned in the present petition.
5.
At the time of motion hearing, operation of Annexure P-7 was stayed by a Division Bench of this Court and ultimately at the time of admission it was ordered that the matter would be finally heard with in three months.
6.
In response to the notices issued to the respondents two separate written statements have been filed.
The cause of the petition has been opposed on identical grounds.
However, whereas respondent No. 1 has admitted the promotion of the petitioner as Assistant Professor (Urology) earlier on temporary basis and later on regular basis, so pleaded in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the petition, the said fact has been denied by respondent No. 2.
Referring first to the written statement filed by respondent No1, it shall be seen that while dealing with the case of respondent No. 2, it has been pleaded that he was promoted as Assistant Professor against a short-term vacancy and he joined as such on 2191981.
He continued to work without break when vide order dated 271988 he was adjusted against the promotion-quota post of Assistant Professor (Urology) w.e.f.
1381985.
A reference was made to the Punjab Public Service Commission for according the approval to the regularisation of his promotion w.e.f.
1381985, which is still awaited.
From the averments made in the written statement it is, thus, apparent that respondent No. 2 till date is not a regular Assistant Professor (Urology).
At this stage, it requires to be mentioned that replication has been filed by the petitioner and the order of adjusting respondent No. 2 against the promotion-quota post as Assistant Professor has been placed on record as Annexure P-14.
The same makes it clear that on 271988 an order was passed that respondent No. 2 adjusted against the promotion-quota post as Assistant Professor of Urology w.e.f.
13.8.1989 on provisional basis for a period of six months or till his services are regularised in consultation with the Punjab Public Service Commission whichever is earlier.
Order (Annexure P-10) again placed on record by way of replication shows that extension was granted to ad hoc service of respondent No. 2 for a period of six months on 1971988.
Admittedly, respondent No. 2 came to be appointed initially on short-term vacancy as one Dr. Yashvir Sachdeva a regular incumbent to the post, was absent from duty and no decision had been taken with regard to his absence.
Reverting back to the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 it shall be further seen that the impugned orders have been sought to be defended by pleading that in accordance with the unamended 1978 Rules, it is only the post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned, i.e. MD, MS etc., and teaching experience of five years as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned after post-graduate qualifications that was the eligibility criteria for the post of Assistant Professor and the amendment brought in 1988 only changed the qualifications and instead of MD, MS etc. it was M.Ch.
Inasmuch as respondent No. 2 had five years teaching experience on the date when amendment in the Rules was brought about (having been appointed in a short-term vacancy on 2191981), the amendment brought about in the Rules could not work to his detriment and the experience gained by him was enough to consider him for the post of Professor (Urology).
In other words, the case of respondent No. 1 is that the experience gained by respondent No. 2 on the post of Assistant Professor (Urology) prior to the issuance of the amendment is required to be recognised/accepted and given due consideration for the purpose of promotion to the post of Professor (Urology) irrespective of the fact that whether the experience so gained was before or after possessing the M.Ch.
It is also pleaded that respondent No. 2 was always senior to the petitioner and was wrongly ignored from consideration for the post of Professor and, therefore, order (Annexure P-7) was passed with a view to do away the injustice that has been caused to him.
While dealing with the case of the petitioner insofar as it pertains to the absence of respondent No. 2 from duty without leave, it is pleaded that even though respondent No. 2 remained absent from duty from 2521986 to 1261986 and this period was treated as leave without pay and that he was placed under suspension on 13.6.1986 and remained so from 13.6.1986 to 871987, his suspension period was treated as leave of the kind due.
103 days of his suspension were treated as earned leave, 260 days as half pay leave and 90 days as leave without pay.
It is further pleaded that the moment the period of suspension is converted into leave, it has the effect of vacating the order of suspension and it was deemed not to have been passed.
It is further pleaded that respondent No. 2 did M.Ch.
in January, 1986 and, therefore, he was eligible for promotion to the post of Professor in Urology in January, 1991 and even if the period that he remained on leave with pay is excluded and totally ignored, he was fully eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Professor (Urology) on 191991.
The post of Professor (Urology) fell vacant on 1101991 and the case of respondent No. 1 is that the petitioner as well as respondent No. 2 were considered and since the petitioner was eligible to the post of Professor, he was promoted, but the order of promotion was substituted later.
Insofar as respondent No. 2 is concerned, besides taking the similar stand, as has been taken by respondent No. 1, he has also pleaded in the written statement that the petitioner, too, was promoted as Assistant Professor (Urology) as stop-gap arrangement against the vacancy meant for a direct recruit.
No continued working as Assistant Professor on ad hoc basis and was subsequently given a regular appointment as Assistant Professor on 2071990.
He, therefore, became a member of the service only on 2071990 and he still being on probation could not be considered for the post under contention.
It has further been pleaded that the teaching experience gained by him under the Rules before the amendment had vented a right in him for promotion, which could not be taken away and has necessarily to be counted as experience for the purpose of his promotion as Professor (Urology).
He made representation that the petitioner was wrongly promoted by ignoring his claim and order (Annexure P-7) was a remedial step taken by the Government and could not be reversed.
Respondent No. 2 has rather said that even the petitioner should have not been permitted to continue on ad hoc basis for six months, as has been mentioned in order (Annexure P-7), and it is only upto that extent the order is wrong.
7.
As mentioned above, the petitioner has filed replications to both the written statements and controverted the facts as pleaded by the respondents.
8.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that respondent No. 2 could not be considered for promotion to the post of Professor as he was not eligible on the date when the vacancy occurred.
His consideration after selection and appointment of the petitioner by modifying the order of his promotion is wholly illegal and without jurisdiction and in fact it is an outcome of deep interest of the authorities in respondent No. 2 and has come to be passed even without hearing the petitioner, contends the learned counsel.
Further, the learned counsel contends that acquisition of teaching experience by respondent No. 2 at subsequent stage cannot possibly result into reversion of the petitioner, who has been promoted on the basis of his meritorious service records as also that there cannot be review of the order (Annexure P-5) vide which request of respondent No. 2 for treating the period of suspension as spent on duty was rejected after so many years.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, have endeavoured to support the orders impugned in the present petition.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length, I am of the considered view that cause of the petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
10.
The post under contention admittedly fell vacant on the retirement of Dr. Kuldip Singh Khera w.e.f.
30.9.1990.
The crucial questions, thus, to be seen are as to whether respondent No. 2 under the 1985 Rules had requisite teaching experience after doing him M.Ch.
on the said date and also as to whether it is on the date when the post falls vacant that the eligibility criteria of respective persons has to be considered or that the crucial date is the actual date of appointment or promotion.
Further, it has to be seen as to whether the teaching experience of respondent No. 2 prior to amendment of the Rules can be taken into account.
Dealing with the point as to which is the crucial date, I am of the considered opinion that the law laid down by the apex Court and the Full Bench of this Court apart, the instructions issued by the Punjab Govt. vide letter dated 2741982 were binding upon the Government.
While dealing with the matter, in the instructions aforesaid (Annexure P-9) it has been clearly mentioned that promotion cases of certain employees are sometimes deliberately delayed with a view to allowing sufficient time to the concerned individual(s) to acquire necessary qualifications/experience prescribed for the relevant higher post(s).
Such a practice need to be discouraged, as it prompts the individual(s) to have the promotion case delayed to become entitled for consideration for promotion.
Resultantly, higher posts remain vacant and this fact necessitates a consideration whether at all there is a need to fill up the higher post(s).
Besides, this practice militates against the rights of individual(s) who are eligible for promotion on the date of occurrence of vacancy in higher posts.
After giving careful consideration, the Government decided as follows :  "That in future the date of occurrence of vacancy shall be taken as the relevant date of determining eligibility for promotion to higher post(s).
The other aspects of the subject will continue to be governed in terms of Punjab Government letter No. 8401-4QS-61/33117 dated 8/11.9.1961 and Punjab Government letter No. 6256-SII(3)-71/29750 dated 12.11.1971."
11.
A Full Bench of this Court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1990 Punjab and Haryana 117, while dealing with the similar situation, held as follows :-  "Different conditions of eligibility have been prescribed for diploma-holders and non-diploma-holders Lineman, the fulfilment of which alone qualifies them to be promoted as Line Superintendent on the basis of seniority, and to be reckoned on the date when the post in the promotional cadre falls vacant.
Suppose a Lineman, be he a diploma-holder or a non-diploma-holder, acquires eligibility for promotion when no promotional post is available, he inevitably has to wait for one becoming available.
He should normally get it the date it falls vacant.
But despite that he is not promoted, for one reason or the other.
And in the meantime another Lineman, be he a diploma-holder nor a non-diploma-holder, becomes eligible.
The question then inevitably will crop up who should get the promotional post.
Should it in these circumstances go to the senior out of the two, even though the senior acquired eligibility later than the junior, or should it go to the one who acquired eligibility first.
In this situation, seniority per se cannot be intended to be taken as the basis for promotion, as otherwise, it would lead to undesirable results.
If it is to be dealt otherwise, it would lead to breeding of manipulation, machinations, calculations and caprice.
Designedly the case of promotion of the first eligible can deliberately be kept delayed with oblique notices so as to let suitable rivals come in and in this manner his acquired eligibility can be frustrated by someone senior acquiring eligibility far late."
12.
In similar circumstances, a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Verghase v. State of Kerala, 1981(2) SLR 253, hold as follows :-  "It is the time of occurrence of vacancy that should be relevant for determining the question of promotion and not the time the order of promotion is passed.
The relevant date must be definite and not depending upon the violation of the authorities, as otherwise the determination would be arbitrary.
If it were to be the date of promotion that is to be relevant for determining the title to such promotion the rule is capable of arbitrary exercise.
Even if it is honest exercise that would be arbitrary because the fate of the service career will depend in each instance open the time taken by the concerned authority in passing the order of promotion.
On the other hand, there is definiteness in treating the date of occurrence of the vacancy of that which would determine the title of the person to be considered for promotion."
13.
There is no need to mention all the case law on the point as it is by now well settled that it is the date of occurrence of vacancy that is relevant and the persons, who do not have the requisite qualifications or experience on the said date cannot be considered even though the consideration may be done later in point of time.
No judgment taking a contrary view has been brought to my notice by the learned counsel for the respondents.
The petitioner having had already teaching experience of five years after doing M.Ch was rightly promoted to the post of Professor insofar as respondent No. 2 is concerned, admittedly, he had done his M.Ch.
on 28.1.1986 and on the relevant date i.e. 30.9.1990, he had teaching experience after doing his M.Ch.
of a period of 4 years 8 months and 4 days.
He was suspended from 13.6.1986 to 791987 and the said period was declared as not spent on duty vide letter dated 2921987.
Again the period from 15.2.1986 to 12.6.1988 was treated as leave without any pay vide order dated 22.6.1988.
In this manner, a period of one year six months had to be deducted from a period of 4 years 8 months and 4 days and, thus, reducing the same to 3 years 1 month and 26 days.
No review of the earlier order was permissible.
The request of respondent No. 2 to treat the said period as spent on duty was rejected vide Annexure P-5 on 2921987 and stand of respondent No. 2 that the moment the period of suspension is converted into leave, it has the effect of vacating the order of suspension and that it will be deemed not to have been passed at all, appears to be a clear attempt on his part to protect the order (Annexure P-7) and, therefore, cannot be given any credence.
There is vast lot of difference between earned leave and half pay leave which is sanctioned under Rules 8133 and 8133-A of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I Part-I, where period of leave is counted towards spent on duty and the leave of the kind due are sanctioned under Rule 8177(b) of the Rules aforesaid, which period cannot be counted towards spent on duty.
I do not want to go any further into the matter as it is clearly made out from Annexure P-5 that request of respondent No. 2 to treat the said period as spent on duty was specifically rejected and the said order has attained finality.
In view of the order (Annexure P-3), the respondents cannot successfully plead that the said period can be treated as spent on duty.
Be as it may, the fact remains that even by counting the period, mention of which has been made above, respondent No. 2 did not have teaching experience of five years after doing M.Ch.
when the post under contention fell vacant.
There is absolutely no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that teaching experience of respondent No. 2 prior to amendment of the Rules had also to be taken into consideration.
It is the Rules which are prevalent at the time when the post falls vacant that have to be considered.
If the post in question had fallen vacant prior to the amendment of the Rules and was filled after the amendment of the Rules, then some meaningful argument could be advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents, but in the present case 1978 Rules were amended in 1985, where teaching experience of five years after the post-graduate degree, like MD, MS etc., was replaced by five years teaching experience after doing M.Ch.
Respondent No. 2 did his M.Ch.
after amendment of the Rules, i.e. in the year 1986, and when the post fell vacant in 1990 by no logic whatsoever respondent No. 1 could count his teaching experience after doing the post-graduate qualification, i.e. MD, MS etc.
The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents on that behalf is totally devoid of any merit.
14.
The contention of Mr. Aggarwal that the petitioner had been regularised on the post of Assistant Professor, even though his initial appointment was on ad hoc/temporary basis, and, therefore, the entire period spent by him on the said post should be considered for calculating his seniority on the post of Assistant Professor, has considerable force and is supported by decisions of the Supreme Court in The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 SC 107, AND GP Doyal v. Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 1984(2) SLR 555, but I do not wish to give any positive finding in this case as the said point is not much relevant for deciding the controversy in hand.
Suffice it to say, that the petitioner was appointed on the post of Assistant Professor initially on 2051985 against the direct-quota post for a period of six months or till a candidate is appointed on the recommendation of the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, and vide Annexure P-2 he was regularised in the service, as is admitted by respondent No. 1 in paras 2 and 3 of the written statement.
Also, I do not want to go into the contention that has been canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner as to whether respondent No. 2 being still holding an ad hoc appointment or adjustment against the promotion-quota post as is the case of the respondents, is a member of the service or not, as for granting the requisite relief to the petitioner, it is not necessary to decide this point.
Before I part with this judgment, however, I would like to observe that the manner in which this case has been dealt with gives sufficient indication to the Court that respondent No. 2 carries influence in the corridor of power and the modification on vide order (Annexure P-7) in the promotion petitioner seems to have been bought about in a clandestine manner.
The meritorious career of the petitioner was attempted to be subjugated at the altar of sheer favouritism, and but for the protection extended to the petitioner by this Court by staying operation of the order (Anexure P-7) the promotion earned by the petitioner on the basis of his academic qualification, merit and excellent service record, would have been throttled.
15.
In view of the observations made above, this petition is allowed.
Order (Annexure P-7 is quashed.
A direction is issued to respondent No. 1 to allow the petitioner to continue to hold the post of Professor (Urology) as per order date 1481991 (Annexure P-6).
This petition is allowed with costs, which are quantified at Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees five thousand).
The Government must pay the costs forthwith to the petitioner, but this Court desires that responsibility of the person or persons, who dealt with this case, should be fixed and if that exercise is done, it is directed that the costs that would be paid by the Government be recovered from the person or persons, found responsible for creating such a mess by practically reverting the petitioner and trying to bring about their own person on the coveted post of professor by intrusion.