VK Bali, J - Petitioner Tanu who is minor through her father Shri Inder Raj Singh seeks a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash the result of the petitioner contained in Result-cum-Detail Marks Card dated 2341992 Annexure P-1 in so far as it pertains to the subject English against serial No. 6 of the Details of Marks as also for writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to place the petitioner under compartment in English Paper and allow her to reappear in the said subject and at the same time allow her to be admitted provisionally in IXth class so that her academic year is not lost.
2.
The brief facts as have been culled out from the pleadings of the parties as also documents annexed therewith reveal that the petitioner took her Middle Standard Examination in Session February, 1992.
She was issued roll No. 8756 by the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration for appearing in the said Middle Standard Examination in session of February 1992.
She appeared in all the subjects except that of English (written) which was held on 1921992.
The reason as has been stated in the petition for non- appearing in the aforesaid examination is sudden illness i.e. high temperature.
As referred to above, she did appear in all the other papers and from the result, it is manifest that she passed in all the subjects in which she appeared and obviously secured no marks in the paper in which she absented.
Inasmuch as the subject in which she did not appear was a compulsory subject, she was declared fail.
A copy of the result card dated 2341992 has been placed on the records of this case.
The case of the petitioner is that it was promptly brought to the notice of the Registrar, Department of Examination and Director Public Instruction Chandigarh Administration that the petitioner had all of a sudden fallen on 1921992.
The aforesaid matter was brought to the notice of respondent No. 2 vide representation dated 11.3.1902 which was filed by the father of the petitioner wherein a request was also made that the petitioner be re-examined in English paper as a special case or on the basis of her performance in other papers and be promoted to Class IX after taking test in English by the Principal, Central Model School, Chandigarh.
A medical certificate is also stated to have been annexed with the aforesaid representation.
In spite of the fact that representation was filed nothing was informed to the petitioner in respect of any orders that might have been passed.
The petitioner through her father, as referred to above, thereafter filed the present petition in this Court seeking the relief as has been fully detailed above.
3.
The main point that has been pleaded as also canvassed by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that there are no statutory Rules and Regulations framed by the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration for conducting Middle Standard Examination and as per the prevailing practice till date, the respondents had been holding the said examination twice in a year ie in February and June and also that the candidates had been placed in compartment in the subjects in which they have been failing.
For the aforestated contention, reliance has been placed upon the Result-cum-Detailed Marks Card Annexure P-1 in which it has been mentioned that the examination is held twice in the months of February and June.
However, it is also pleaded that on making enquiries by the father of the petitioner, it has now been revealed that after securing admission forms of the candidates and after depositing the admission fee and even appearing in the examination, the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration has done away with the long followed practice of holding the examination in June and in the manner aforesaid, the candidates have not been placed in compartment in the subject they failed.
4.
This petition has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 by Smt. Kuldeep Kaur, PESI Registrar, Department Examination-cum-Director Public Instruction Chandigarh Administration it has been pleaded that as per pass formula for the Middle Standard Examination issued by the Chandigarh Administration, it is compulsory for a candidate appearing in the Annual Middle Standard Examination to secure marks out of 100 marks in the compulsory subject of English as also there is no provision in the pass formula to assess a candidate's merit on the basis of the marks obtained by him/her in other papers if he/she had not appeared in the compulsory subject even if he/she had undergone medical treatment or otherwise.
In the absence of such a provision, the petitioner's merit could not be assessed on the basis of marks obtained by her in other papers.
It is also pleaded that the Education Department has devised a pass formula for the conduct of Annual Middle Standard Examination after discussing the issue at length in the meeting of the Education Advisory Committee and as per the formula in vogue since August 1984, no Supplementary Examinations of Middle Standard are conducted as no candidate is placed in compartment accordingly to the pass formula as was earlier done.
With a view to support the aforesaid stand, the respondents have annexed with the written statement copy of letter written by the Registrar, Departmental Examinations to the District Education Officer, Chandigarh Administration and all the Principals of Government Privately Recognised Middle, High , Higher Secondary Schools in Chandigarh in which it has been specifically mentioned that there will be no Supplementary Examination and the students would be declared as pass or fail, as the case may be.
5.
The petitioner has chosen to file a replication wherein it has been pleaded that the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration has not constituted any regular statutory Middle School Education Board as has been constituted in the States of Punjab and Haryana whereas almost all the privately managed schools and all the Government schools set up at Chandigarh are affiliated to Central Board of School Education Delhi, which itself does not hold any Middle Standard Examination and has rather left it to the schools to hold Middle Standard Examinations.
The Board has not issued any such direction to the schools to be so rigid as Education Department of Chandigarh Administration has become and in almost all the privately managed schools, children who are put in such unavoidable circumstances are liberally re- examined in one or the other paper and are promoted to the next IX Class unhesitatingly but the formula adopted by the Chandigarh Administration is pleaded to be rather stiff which has resulted in grave and manifest injustice to the candidates.
6.
Mr. RP Bali, learned counsel appearing to the petitioner besides placing reliance upon the earlier practice in vogue has also chosen to criticise the formula/policy of not holding Supplementary Examination by the respondents by styling the same to be arbitrary.
He has also canvassed that if the petitioner is not granted a chance to appear in the Supplementary Examination, her valuable year will be lost, thus, resulting in irreparable loss to the petitioner.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am convinced that the respondents had reviewed the pass formula for the Middle Standard Examination and after discussing the same, it was decided that pass percentage for ordinary school students will be 33% in all the subjects instead of 25% as at present.
All those students studying in ordinary schools will, however, get grace marks upto 15 to enable a student to get through the examination and the students taking up examination under Model school Scheme will get 1% grace marks.
It was also decided that there will be no Supplementary Examination and the students will be declared as pass or fail.
This decision was conveyed by the Registrar, to the District Education Officer, Chandigarh Administration and the Principals and Headmasters of all the Government and Privately Recognised Middle, High and Higher Secondary Schools in Chandigarh.
The aforesaid decision was arrived in the month of August 1984 and was made applicable from the examination to be held in February 1985.
It has also been proved on the records that since February 1985, there has been no supplementary examination for Middle Standard Examinations.
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner was aware of prevalent practice or the policy as the case may be that there shall be no supplementary examination.
No case is, thus, made out on the past practice or on the ground that such practice was discontinued only on the eve of examination that the petitioner took.
On the detail marks list as well, the word `June' has been scored off, The contention of Mr. RP Bali that non-holding of Supplementary Examination is a wrong policy and this shall cause injustice to the students has also no substance.
It is a universal policy applicable to all the students and it is for the experts in the Education Department to see as to which policy shall ensure more benefit to the students.
May be, it was in the mind of the experts that in the earlier years of education, the students should repeat the studies in the full year so as not to remain on weak foundation for the higher class.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the policy is applicable to all the students.
I do not find that the matter needs any interference from this Court under writ jurisdiction.
It is true that the petitioner has lost one year of her studies and may be it was on account of the fact that she fell ill, otherwise she might have passed in the English subject as well as she passed in other subjects but on that count alone, no exception can be made in her favour.
Also, any exception made in all probability would be taken as a precedent, thus nullifying the decision of the authorities not to hold Supplementary Examination.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon two judgments of this Court delivered by Justice RS Mongia in Harvinder Singh v. The Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, 1991(5) SLR 670 and Justice Jawahar Lal Gupta in Sandeep Kumar v. Kurukshetra University, 1991(6) SLR 312.
In so far as the first judgment is concerned, the facts of the case therein were that the petitioner in the said case had appeared in the First Professional Examination of MBBS held by Punjabi University in 1991 and failed to clear one subject, in which he got re-appear.
He appeared in the said paper and got reappear in First Professional in the Supplementary Examination held in July, 1991.
The result of the said examination was will awaited.
The prayer made in the writ petition was that till the result of the re-appear is declared, he may be allowed provisionally to join Second Professional Course and attend lectures so that he may not fall short of lectures.
The aforesaid prayer was allowed.
The facts of the case referred to above have no parity with the case in hand.
It is amply made out that the petitioner under the Rules was permitted to re-appear in the Supplementary Examination.
So far as the second judgment is concerned, the facts again show no parity with the facts of the case in hand.
The petitioner had joined B.Com.
course in the year 1985.
He had appeared in various annual as well as the supplementary examination at different times.
Ultimately he passed the B. Com.
Part-I examinations held in April, 1987.
The result was finally declared by the University in pursuance to the interim orders of this Court.
The formal order was however, made available by the University to the petitioner in January, 1988, when his paper in the subject of Business and Organization had been revalued.
In the meantime, the petitioner had joined B.Com.
Part-II in the session 1986-87, and while appearing Part-I in April 1987, the petitioner had also appeared in B.Com.
Part-II examination.
According to the result declared by the University, the petitioner was placed in compartment in the subject of Industrial and Commercial Law.
He appeared in this paper again in September 1987 Instead of declaring his result, the University informed him that he was not eligible for appearing in B.Com.
Part-I (Compartment) Examination held in September, 1987.
The result was ordered to be cancelled.
When the petitioner filed representation against this order, the University informed him that his request had been considered and the same cannot be acceded to under the University Rules and the petitioner was to revert back to the position in which he was in the year 1985.
After six years, it was held to be wholly unjust to put the petition back by six years.
9.
For the reasons stated above, I do not find any merit in this petition and dismiss the same.
The parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.