Jagannadha Raju, J. -This writ petition is filed for quashing GO 262 MA dated 1951989 which in its turn has set aside Resolution No. 928 dated 21121987 of the Standing Committee of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation.
The petitioner Habeeb Ahmed, who was working as a cashier in the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad was a delinquent alongwith some others for the missing of a cash box with Rs. 1,39,60770 from his custody.
After an elaborate enquiry, he and the two other delinquents were found to be guilty of utter negligence and carelessness regarding the custody of the cash box and their causing loss to the Municipal Corporation.
Accordingly, the petitioner and the other delinquents were dismissed as per proceedings, dated 1651987.
The present petitioner preferred an appeal to the Standing Committee.
The Standing Committee in a cryptic resolution set aside the dismissal order.
The resolution No. 928 dated 21121987 reads as follows :  "As per the police report, the employees are not at fault.
Hence the case may be closed and the employees be reinstated and the suspension period may be treated as on leave.
The Commissioner, MCH, is requested to send hereafter responsible officers to Bank, with sufficient protection to bring cash."
2.
On a report by the Commissioner, the Government acted under section 679-A of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporations Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') and passed GOMs.
No. 262 MA, dated 1951989 and cancelled the Resolution No. 928.
Accordingly they were removed from service and aggrieved by the said GO, the present writ petition is filed.
3.
The main contention of the petitioner's advocate is that GO 262 dated 1951989 was given without notice to the affected person and no notice was given to the Standing Committee of the Corporation.
It is also contended that the GO does not give reasons for cancelling the resolution and the GO is not passed in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 679-A of MCH Act.
It is further contended that the government has no right to cancel the resolution.
4.
On behalf of the contesting respondents Ms. A Malathi, the Assistant Government Pleader contended that as the petitioner is an employee of the Municipal Corporation, he is not entitled to file a writ petition and he can only approach the AP Administrative Tribunal by way of a Representation Petition.
The writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution does not lie.
She further needs that Section 679-A of the Act empowers the State Government to cancel any resolution and this power is one of the powers given to the State under Chapter XXI which deals with Government control over the Corporations.
The action has been taken by the State Government in strict accordance with the requirements of the provisions of Section 679-A of the Act.
5.
Sri M Rama Rao, the learned Standing Counsel for the corporation contends on behalf of R.2 that he does not support the resolution of the Standing Committee which is clearly beyond its powers.
The Government rightly acted upon the letter of !he Special Officer and took action under section 679-A of the Act and cancelled the resolution of the Standing Committee.
The action of the State Government is taken in public interest and in the interests of the better administration of the corporation.
The GO dated 1951989 is perfectly in conformity with law.
The Writ Petition has no merits and it is liable to be dismissed.
6.
The points for consideration are :  1) Whether the petitioner is entitled to approach the High Court by way of a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
2) Whether GO Ms. No. 262 (MA) dated 1951989 is liable to be struck down as arbitrary, illegal and ultra vires the powers of the State Government.
POINTS :  To appreciate the contention in this writ petition it is necessary to scan through some provisions of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955.
Under Section 130 Local Government Service is constituted with regard to the officers and servants of the Corporation who hold posts specified in Schedule C The Schedule C does not include the post of cashier and the other posts of attender and guard who were proceeded against in the disciplinary enquiry under Section 132-A, the Government after consultation with the Municipal Corporations, can constitute Municipal Corporation service for officers in the category of Upper Division Clerks and above in the Municipal Corporation Service of the State.
Under Section 137, various Municipal officers and servants, their strength, designations and grade etc., are fixed, under section 140, unless otherwise prescribed under section 139, the Hyderabad Civil Service Rules for the time being in force relating to the appointment and conditions of service and all rules for the time being in force relating to the conduct and enquiry into the conduct of Government Servants shall apply to the Municipal Officers and servants.
This section makes all the rules applicable to Government servants applicable to Municipal Officers and servants.
That means as far as disciplinary enquiries are concerned, the CCCA Rules applicable to the Government employees would be applicable to the Corporation employees.
The present writ petitioner is governed by the CCCA Rules.
Section 141 deals with power of suspension, punishment and dismissal.
In this particular writ petition, Section 141 of the Act has to be considered in detail.
Under Sub-Section (1), the authorities who are entitled to initiate action and who are entitled to keep Municipal Officer or servant under suspension and the punishments which the Commissioner may impose are indicated.
Sub-section (2) lays down the various punishments including the major punishments which may be imposed.
Sub-section (3) lays down that no penalty specified in Sub-section (2) shall be imposed on any Municipal Officer or servant by any authority unless proceedings are taken in accordance with the provisions of the Hyderabad Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
Sub-section (4) provides for the delinquent filing an appeal when a penalty is imposed.
Under the proviso to sub-section (4) the Standing Committee shall be deemed to be' the authority immediately superior to the Commissioner and the Corporation shall be deemed to be the authority immediately superior to the Standing Committee.
In the present case, when the Commissioner imposed the penalty of dismissal the petitioner filed the appeal under Section 141(4) of the Act to the Standing Committee.
The filing of the appeal is perfectly justified and proper.
But the more important question is how this appeal is to be dealt with by the appellate authority.
7.
A perusal of the record reveals that the petitioner, against the proceedings dated 1551987 imposing the punishment of dismissal from service, filed an elaborate appeal to the Chairman of the Standing Committee.
While Ex. P1 is the order of dismissal, Ex. P2 is the detailed appeal submitted to the delinquent-officer.
Without going into the various facts mentioned in Ex.P1, the order imposing the punishment and without considering the nature and the scope of the appeal, the Standing Committee simply passed the resolution 928 dated 21121987 with the following cryptic order : "as per the police report, the employees are not at fault.
Hence the case may be closed and the employees be reinstated and the suspension period may be treated as on leave."
The resolution never adverted to the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the reasons given by the punishing authority for imposing the punishment.
It should be remembered that in the disciplinary enquiry, the Enquiry Officer clearly found that Sri Habeeb Ahmed, cashier under suspension, acted irresponsibly and exhibited utter negligence in performing his duty and caused loss of Rs. 1,39,607-70 to MCH and that the charge framed against him is held proved.
The punishing authority held that due to his negligence and carelessness, the Corporation sustained the loss by reason of the theft of the cash-box from his custody.
Without following the CCCA Rules and examining the appeal in accordance with the CCCA Rules, the Standing Committee exonerated the delinquent with one single sentence that the police report does not hold the employees responsible.
It should be remembered that the employees may not be liable for the offence of theft as per the Penal Code, but at the same time, they are certainly liable to be proceeded against departmentally for their negligence and derelication of duty and gross indifference in handling the cash-box with a huge amount of cash.
It is the bounded duty of the Standing Committee to examine the appeal in the light of the record of the departmental enquiry and in accordance with the procedure and powers prescribed under the CCCA Rules.
None of these things were done.
The resolution No. 928 dated 21121987 reads more, as a favour conferred by the Standing Committee on the delinquent Officers who were punished by the disciplinary authority.
Considering the unsatisfactory and the illegal manner in which the Standing Committee dealt with the appeal and passed the resolution, the Commissioner, MCH, reported the matter to the Government and brought the illegal orders to the notice of the Government.
Then the State Government exercised its powers under Section 679-A of the Act and then issued GO 262 dated 1951989 it should be remembered that Section 679-A, Section 679B, Section 679-C, Section 679-D have been brought into the Statute book by Amendment Act 33 of 1986 to give greater powers to the Government to control the wrong and illegal acts of the corporation and its authorities.
They were introduced in Chapter XXI in addition to file pre-existing powers of the Government to call for the records, to cause inspections and giving directions to perform certain duties and the power to appoint a person to take action.
In cases of default.
The earlier powers of revision under Section 679 have been enlarged by introducing the new Sections 679-A, 679-B, 679-C and 679-D  8.
Under Section 679-A of the Act, the Government has power to cancel or suspend resolutions.
It can do so either suo motu or on representation of any Councillor, Mayor or the Commissioner.
Clauses (a) and (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 679-A of the Act are relevant as far as this writ petition is concerned.
Under the first proviso sub-section (1) of Section 679-A of the Act, the Government, before taking action under this Section of the grounds referred to in clauses (a) and (b), gives the authority or person concerned an opportunity for explanation in the present case on hand, a show cause notice was issued to the MCH to show cause within 15 days as to why Resolution No. 928 dated 21121987 passed by Standing Committee should not be cancelled.
No explanation was received and then the Government issued GO 262 after considering an aspect and after coming to the conclusion that the resolution passed by the Standing Committee directing the reinstatement without inflicting any other punishment is against the interests of the Corporation and that there is every possibility of occurrence of such incidents if such irresponsible employees are left unpunished, and came to the conclusion that it is desirable to cancel the resolution.
Accordingly it cancelled the resolution and restored the earlier punishment of dismissal imposed by the Commissioner.
The record reveals that the action was taken by the Government in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 679-A of the Act.
This section does not contemplate notice being given to the delinquent officer who stood benefited by the illegal and improper resolution of the Standing Committee.
Simply because Habeeb Ahmed was not given notice, it cannot be said that GO 262 dated 1951989 is passed in violation of the procedure contemplated under section 679-A of the Act.
As the Standing Committee and the Municipal Corporation did not submit any explanation and as the Government found that the resolution of the Standing Committee is against the interest of the Corporation and as it is not in conformity with appellate powers that are to be exercised by the Standing Committee in dealing with an appeal filed under Section 141(4) of the Act, the Government cancelled the resolution of the Standing Committee.
9.
The petitioner is a person who is employed in the Municipal Corporation and he is governed by the Hyderabad Civil Service Rules and the CCCA rules.
If he felt aggrieved by the punishment imposed on him, he is certainly entitled to file the appeal to the Standing Committee as provided under section 141(4) of the Act.
The Standing Committee, while exercising the appellate powers, is bound to act as per the powers and procedure contemplated by the CCCA Rules.
Simply because the police report does not hold these people responsible for the theft, it cannot exonerate the petitioner and the two other delinquent from the charges held proved against them, especially, gross negligence of duty and most irresponsible conduct while handling the cash-box with a huge amount of cash.
If the petitioner felt aggrieved by the cancellation of Standing Committee's resolution by issuance of GOMs.
No. 262 dated 1951989, he, is certainly entitled to seek relief by way of a representation to the AP Administrative Tribunal, but he cannot come forward with a writ petition to the High Court.
He is governed by all the rules applicable to the Government servants of the State.
A writ petition at his instance is not maintainable and this court has no jurisdiction to deal with it.
The record also reveals that under the powers of control in Chapter XXI of the Act, the Government is certainly entitled to take action in accordance with Section 679-A of the Act and cancel the resolution of the Standing Committee.
There is absolutely no material to indicate that the action of the Government is in violation of the provision of Section 679-A of the Act.
The GO 262 dated 1951989 is perfectly in accordance with law.
10.
In the result this writ petition is devoid of merits and the writ petition is not at all maintainable.
Accordingly, it is dismissed with costs.
Advocate fee is fixed at Rs. 250/-.
11.
It is hereby made clear that it is open to the petitioner to seek such reliefs as are open to him in other forums.
Orders accordingly.