Usha Mehra, J - M/s. Indian Hotel Company Ltd filed a suit for permanent injunction against Taj Mahal Karmchari Union & Ors.
The SHOs of Tuglak Road and Tilak Marg are impleaded as defendants 14 and 15 herein.
The plaintiffs case as set up is that it has been running prestigious hotels all over India and abroad known as Taj Group of Hotels.
Taj Mahal Hotel, 1, Man singh Road, New Delhi is one of the hotels owned by the plaintiff company.
It is visited by diplomats, dignitaries of firms and foreigners etc.
Defendant No. 2 is a dismissed employee of the plaintiff company and claims to be the General Secretary of defendant No. 1 while defendants 3 to 13 are the employees of the plaintiff.
According to the plaintiff, the overwhelming majority of the workers have entered into a settlement with the plaintiff which settlement was arrived on 21st October, 1991 with the Taj Mahal Hotel Workers Union.
Pursuance to the said settlement, the workers have already received their increased wages.
It is only handful of the workers like defendants 3 to 13 who are creating mischief by pressurising the order workers to join their union.
In order to pressurise they have resorted demonstrations within premises of the hotel raising derogatory and offensive abusive and filthy slogans against the officers and the Union office-bearers who signed this settlement.
They have openly threatened that any of the employee who signs the requisite settlement and accept the settlement shall be strongly dealt with and beaten up.
They even made highly inflammatory speeches and resorted to illegal activities and are obstructing the ingress and egress of the officers, employees, visitors and tourists in the hotel.
It is in this background that the suit was filed and with that an application seeking the interim injunction on 31st October, 1991 restraining the defendants their agents, employees, servants, officers or anybody else acting for and on behalf of the defendants from holding any demonstrations, resorting to dharna, gherao or putting up a loud speaker within a radius of 100 meters from the boundary wall of Taj Mahal Hotel, 1 Man Singh Road.
They were also restrained from interfering in the ingress and egress of the guests of the hotel, officers, employees and the vehicles to and from the hotel.
2.
It is for the vacation of this interim order passed on 30th October, 1991, that the present application has been filed inter alia on the ground that the employees are having peaceful demonstrations and that the order has been obtained by concealing the fact that the employees have already been restrained by the order of Justice BN Kirpal in S. 2515/87 passed on 15th April, 1988.
Since that order still subsists, no fresh order could be passed by this Court and that the respondents are abiding the same by submitting to the local police.
That the plaintiff in order to break the unity of the Taj Mahal Hotel Union have dubiously entered into a settlement in the eye of law, therefore, the employees are with defendant No. 1.
Since, there is no misdeed on the part of the defendants, the stay should be vacated.
In similar circumstances, IA 10638/90 in S. 3544/90 filed by the plaintiff was dismissed as withdrawn by the plaintiff when the fact of previous suit was brought to the notice of that Court.
3.
This application has been contested by the plaintiff on the ground that the settlement arrived at on 26th October, 1991 is with majority of the employees.
Only few employees have not accepted the settlement, the rest of the employees have not only accepted the settlement but have also taken benefit accruing thereunder.
The defendants have no locus to challenge the said settlement.
They are outsiders and stranger to the Union of the Hotel.
Moreover, these defendants inspite of the stay order granted by this Court have indulged in violence inside the premises for which the news item appeared in the press and even the complaint was lodged with the SHO, Tilak Marg, police station for necessary help.
So far as the injunction granted in S. 2515/87 is concerned, that will not debar the plaintiff to ask for the injunction on a fresh cause of action.
IA 10638/90 in S. 3544/90 was withdrawn because that suit was filed for a specific purpose and for a specific period.
A world conference was to take place at Delhi and since there was apprehension of violence stay was sought which was duly granted by Justice RL Gupta.
As soon as that conference was over, the suit became infructuous and was got dismissed as withdrawn.
4.
I have heard Mr. DN Vohra, counsel for the applicant/defendants and Mr. Vinay Bhasin, or the plaintiff.
So far as the pendency of S. 2515/87 is concerned, that is an admitted fact on record.
It is also not disputed that in that suit an injunction was granted restraining the defendants from indulging in illegal and unlawful activities.
They were also to abide by the order by informing to the local police.
Admittedly, the plaintiff could have filed an application for contempt in that case, but that by itself is no ground to debar the plaintiff to file afresh suit on the new cause of action which has arisen on 29th October, 1991, when according to the plaintiff the defendants collected a mob of the employees outside the cafetaria and held demonstrations and made noisy scene within the premises of the hotel.
They also made highly inflammatory speeches and resorted to violence and did not permit the settlement to be implemented.
Mr. Vinay Bhasin contends that majority of the employees have already settled their disputes with the plaintiff-Management and have received the benefit therefrom.
In support he has filed the copy of the settlement and the receipts showing that almost all the employees have received the benefit of the settlement.
It is to frustrate this settlement that the defendant indulged in violence on 29th October, 1991, therefore, it is a fresh cause of action.
I find force in this submission of the plaintiff.
In view of the intervening circumstances which have arisen on account of the settlement between the plaintiff and majority of the workers, a fresh cause of according action has accorded in favour of the plaintiff.
Previously pending suit will not debar the plaintiff from filing a new suit.
Hence, the plaintiff is within its right to seek the relief in view of the fresh cause of action.
As regard suit bearing No. 3544/90 that was filed for a specific period, for which period leading hotels in the world were having conferences in Taj Mahal Hotel.
The stay as duly granted by Justice RL Gupta restrain the Union and the abetters from holding any demonstration or dharna or resorting to gherao or interfering in the ingress and egress of the employees, officers, guests and vehicles etc. That stay remained operative of the full period of the conference and it was only when the conference was over, the suit became infructuous and was got dismissed as withdrawn.
On this reply of the plaintiff, there is no rejoinder by the defendants and there is no reason to disbelieve this part of the assertion of the plaintiff.
5.
Now reverting to the assertion made by the defendant that they did not indulge in violence or in any manner by which injunction order was violation.
Whether the defendant violated the injunction order or not will be decided after recording of evidence.
Suffice it to say that SHO, defendant No. 15, when appeared in Court, apprised the facts at site.
According to him who ever tried to create violence was stopped.
He also admitted the receipt of letter dated 31st December, 1991 written by the plaintiff.
By this letter plaintiff wrote to police for help.
That happened on 29th October, 1991.
This incident appeared in the newspaper which is on record.
In view of these circumstances, when there is an apprehension of incidents it is not advisable nor in the interest of justice to vacate the stay already granted.
Mr.Vohra, however, contended that it is a fundamental right of the defendants/employees to hold demonstration and if they are debarred to have the demonstration within the radius of 100 meters then this demonstration has no meaning and would adversely affect their right to project grievances for which purpose, he wants that the radius within which the demonstration should take place be reduced from 100 meters to 50 meters.
According to him, by putting a restriction of 100 meters, strike has become ineffective or useless.
Therefore, he wants that the restraint order should be upto the radius of 50 meters.
In this regard, he has placed reliance in the case of Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. v. TM Nagarajan and others, reported in 1988 Labour and Industrial Cases page 1067.
This authority is of no help to the defendants because it has been clearly observed by SN Sapra, J that how much distance should be there, depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
SN Sapra, J restrained the demonstration within the radius of 50 meters after taking various undertakings from the defendants.
Mr. Vohra then relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of All India Bank Employees Association v. The National Industrial Tribunal (Bank Dispute), Bombay and others, reported in AIR 1962 Supreme Court page 171.
In this case, the Supreme Court analised as to what is the position of the labour union.
While interpreting Article 19 of the Constitution, it observed that while the right to form a union is guaranteed by sub clause (c), the right of the members of the association to meet would be guaranteed by sub clause (b), their right to move from place to place within India by sub clause (d), their right to discuss their problems and to propagate their views by sub clause (a), their right to hold property would be that guaranteed by sub clause (f) and so on each of these freedoms being subject to such restrictions as might properly be imposed by clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 as might be appropriate in the context.
It is one thing to interpret each of the freedoms guaranteed by the several articles in Part III in a fair and liberal sense, it is quite another to read each guaranteed right as involving or including concomitant rights necessary to achieve the object which might be supposed to underlie the grant of each of those rights.
6.
After having said so, the Supreme Court, thereafter held that a right to form unions guaranteed by sub clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 19th does not carry with it a fundamental right in the union so formed to achieve every object for which it is formed.
Even a very liberal interpretation of sub clause (c) of Clause (1) of Article 19 cannot lead to the conclusion that the trade unions have a guaranteed right to an effective collective bargaining or to strike either as part of collective baring or otherwise.
The right to strike or the right to declare a lock out may be controlled or restricted by appropriate industrial legislation, and the validity of such legislation would have to be tested not with reference to the criteria laid down in Clause (4) of Article 19 but by totally different consideration.
Now it cannot be denied that the Unions have a right to demonstrate their point of view and propagate and discuss their problems but that has to be within the framework of law and should not be led to violence and misrepresentation of law and order in the society.
In the instant case, according to the prima facie evidence placed on the record, the defendants had indulged in some sort of fact agitation which may be akin to violence and this act finds support from the photographs placed on record which have not been categorically denied by the defendants and even the SHO when appeared had stated that he curbed the violence.
Therefore, it is in this background that I have to consider this case.
Mr. Vohra, thereafter, relied on another decision of our own High Court in the case of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd v. Bhartiya Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Karamchari Sangh & Ors., reported in 1992(1) SCT 374 : 1991(3) Delhi Lawyer, 361.
This case relied by Mr. Vohra in fact helps the contention of the plaintiff because justice Anil Dev Singh in this case has already taken the view that there is no right or freedom to hold a demonstration including a sit in demonstration in property belonging to another.
No one can be allowed to exercise his right so as to prejudice the right of another.
Rather this decision support the contention of the plaintiff.
Plaintiff is running a hotel where the foreigners, dignitaries, tourists and even the local customers go every day.
Tourists and foreigners might be staying in this hotel.
If the defendants are permitted to make inflammatory speeches, and provoke and incite the employees to indulge in violence.
It will not only disturb the functioning of the hotel but also the peace of the inhabitants of the same.
This cannot be permitted.
Therefore, the defendants have been rightly restrained from holding demonstration, picketing, dharna and gherao inside the plaintiffs premises.
As regards the distance.
I have already said that they will not hold demonstration within the radius of 100 meters.
Mr. Vohra had pointed out that by prohibiting the peaceful demonstration within the radius of 100 meters, it amounts to depriving the right of the defendants completely.
The radius of 100 meters goes beyond the road into the residential area.
7.
Taking into consideration the location of this hotel, I am prima facie of the view that the defendants have to be restrained from demonstrating, holding dharans, gherao, sit in etc. within the radius of 50 meters and this is subject to the defendants giving individual undertakings that they shall not physically prevent the ingress or egress of other workers and they shall not go near the gates of the hotel from either side and that they will not use any mike or shout so loudly which should disturb the peace of the inhabitants of the Hotel.
They will also give an undertaking that they will hold peaceful demonstration or dharna.
Petition allowed.