Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner, who was an employee of respondent No. 2 remained absent from duty for a certain period without leave, on account of which his services were terminated vide order dated 25th June, 1984, with retrospective effect from 31st March, 1984, without any notice, charge-sheet or enquiry, although the petitioner had completed more than seven years of service.
The order of termination was challenged in proceedings taken before the Labour Court, Patiala, and vide award dated 23rd August, 1988, Annexure P-1 to the petition, the order of termination with regard to the petitioner was set aside as being non est in law and wholly unsustainable.
The Labour Court, accordingly, directed the reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service, but allowed only 25 per cent of the back wages.
Aggrieved against the award of the Labour Court, respondent No. 1 came to this Court by way of a writ petition, which was dismissed and the Special Leave Petition against the order of the High Court was also dismissed on 23rd January, 1990.
The present petition has been filed by the workman claiming that he was entitled to full back wages as the Labour Court had found the order of termination to be non est.
2.
I have considered the argument of the counsel for the respondents.
3.
It has been held in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 P.L.R.
720 that ordinarily a workman whose services have been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent that he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
The normal rule is to pay the full back wages and the party objecting to this must establish the circumstances necessitating from the said rule.
4.
Mr Chahal, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, has argued that the petitioner had remained absent without leave and that itself was a ground for granting him only 25 per cent of the back wages.
This argument of the learned counsel is without substance.
The absence without leave was the charge which culminated in the order of termination of the services of the petitioner.
The said order having been found to be illegal and non est, the entitlement of the petitioner to the payment of back wages becomes undeniable.
5.
Having held as above, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to respondent No. 2 to make the payment of the back wages due to the petitioner within a period of four months from today.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.