GC Garg, J - The petitioners are students of B.Sc.
Engineering and are studying in Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana.
They have passed 1st and 2nd Semester examinations.
Petitioner No. 1 has secured 698 per cent marks in the 1st Semester and 711 per cent marks in the 2nd Semester whereas petitioner No. 2 secured 626 per cent marks in the 1st Semester and 692 per cent marks in the 2nd Semester examinations.
2.
The petitioners applied for migration from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
According to the stand taken in the writ petition the petitioners obtained no objection certificate from the Principal, Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana and have submitted the certificate in original to the Principal, Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh as required under the Rules relating to migration of students.
The petitioners claim that respondent No. 6 was allowed migration from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana although he had hardly attended the College.
He was in the 1st Semester.
It is further averred that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were allowed migration from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh by respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
The petitioners further averred in the writ petition that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have failed in the 1st and 2nd Semester examinations and the passing in the 1st and 2nd Semester examinations is one of the basic conditions for migration from one Engineering College to another.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 who have secured less marks than the petitioners have been allowed migration and the claim of the petitioners for migration was not considered.
The petitioners have been denied migration in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner.
It is submitted that the petitioners' fundamental right of equality before law and equal protection of law has been violated inasmuch as respondent Nos. 3 to 5 who have secured less marks than the petitioners have been allowed migration.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of University, respondent No. 1 through the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh.
In the written statement, the University has admitted that University is a State for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It is, however, stated in the written statement that migration is a matter of discretion with the University and no candidate can claim migration as a matter of right.
A vague attempt was made to justify that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have not failed in the 1st and 2nd Semester examinations.
4.
Written statement has also been filed on behalf of the Principal, Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh and the stand taken in the written statement by respondent No. 2 is that migration is not a matter of right.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have been granted migration on the ground of security risk and no criteria has been disclosed in the written statement on the basis of which migration has been allowed to these respondents.
It is stated that their cases of migration were recommended by the Chandigarh Administration and they have been allowed migration accordingly.
5.
Gagandeep Singh Bhalla, petitioner No. 2 has filed replication in reply to the written statement filed by Panjab University-Respondent No. 1.
In the replication he has appended copies of the University Gazette notifications as Annexures P/5 and P/6.
According to these notifications, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have not been successful in the 1st and 2nd Semester examinations.
In the replication it is averred that petitioner No. 2 had obtained 12225 marks in the joint entrance test whereas respondent No. 3 secured less marks in the joint entrance test.
With the replication, a certificate of the Inspector General of Prisons has been appended whereby Inspector General of Prisons has certified that father of petitioner No. 2 and the members of the family are on the hit list.
The petitioners claim that migration has also been allowed to candidates from Jammu and Kashmir by creating additional seats.
The respondents have not denied this position.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner has strongly contended that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have failed in the 2nd Semester examination and have been directed to reappear according to the University Gazette notifications (Annexures P/5 and P/6) have been allowed migration whereas the petitioners who have qualified the 2nd Semester examination have been denied migration.
He has also drawn my attention to the letter issued by the Inspector General of Prisons wherein it is written that father of petitioner No. 2 and members of his family are on the hit list.
He has also drawn my attention that the petitioners secured higher marks in the joint entrance test than respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
He has therefore submitted that ineligible candidates and with lower merit have been favoured and have been allowed migration whereas the petitioners who have higher merit and better academic accomplishment have been denied migration in an arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious manner.
This action of the respondent, according to the counsel for the writ petitioners, is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 1628.
7.
Counsel for the respondent has contended that migration is a matter of discretion and no one has a vested right to get migration and therefore the petitioners are not entitled to migration.
8.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar.
It is established on the record that the petitioners have qualified the 2nd Semester exanimation.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have not qualified in the 2nd Semester examination.
This position is clear from the University Gazette Notifications (Annexures P/5 and P/6) appended with the replication.
The counsel for the University has not been able to rebut this position.
Even in the joint entrance test petitioner No. 1 had higher merit.
It is also admitted that University has allowed admission even by creating more seats in the case of candidates from Jammu and Kashmir State.
It is true that University Rules lay down that a candidate has no right to migration but the action of the University is to be judged in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution The Supreme Court in Ramana Dayaram's case (supra) has clearly observed as under :-  "that it must, therefore, be taken to be the law that where the Government is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing quotas or licences or granting other forms of largess, the Government cannot act, arbitrarily at its sweet will and, like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be in conformity with standard or norm which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of largess including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences etc. must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government would be liable to be struck down unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory."
It is quite evident from the observations of the Supreme Court, referred to above, that even in the matter of grant of concession/subsidy the in strumentality of the State even in the matter of exercise of discriminatory power must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government is liable to be struck down.
Once it is established that the candidates who have failed in the 2nd Semester examination have been allowed admission, the petitioners who have got better academic accomplishment and have qualified the 2nd semester examinations, they have a better right to be considered for migration.
It is very significant to mention that Inspector General of Prisons had certified that father of petitioner No. 2 and members of his family are on the hit list.
This shows that respondents have acted in an arbitrary manner and picked up and granted migration to some and denied to others.
This hardly satisfies the constitutional requirement of Article 14 of the Constitution  9.
Article 14 of the Constitution confers a constitutional right of equality before law and equal protection of law.
Once it is established that constitutional right of the petitioners has been violated this court has no option but to direct respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to grant the necessary relief.
10.
The Supreme Court in Deepak Sibal v. Panjab University and another, A.I.R. 1989 S.C. 903 has laid down that even if seats are filled up this is no answer to deny admission to a candidate who is entitled.
The candidate who has been denied admission has to be admitted.
However, admission already made on wrong criteria should not be disturbed.
The Supreme Court in the above case observed as under :  "It has been already found that the impugned rule is discriminatory and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and, as such, invalid.
The refusal by the respondents to admit the appellants in the evening classes of the three-year L.L.B.
Degree Course was illegal.
The appellants are, therefore, entitled to be admitted in the evening classes.
It is, however, submitted on behalf of the respondents that all the seats have been filled up and accordingly, the appellants cannot be admitted.
As injustice was done to the appellants, it will be no answer to say that all the seats are filled up.
For the reasons aforesaid, the judgment of the High Court is set aside and the impugned rule for admission in the evening classes is struck down as discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and accordingly invalid.
We, however, make it clear that the striking down of the impugned rule shall not, in any manner whatsoever, disturb the admissions already made for the session 1988-89.
The respondents are directed to admit both the appellants in the second Semester which has commenced from January, 1989 and shall allow them to complete the Three-Year L.L.B.
Degree Course, if not otherwise ineligible on the ground of unsatisfactory academic performance.
As was directed by this Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 2 SCR 79; AIR 1981 SC 487, the seats allocated to the appellants will be in addition to the normal intake of students in the college."
In view of the above legal position, the petitioners are entitled to migration in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, even though additional seats are to be created.
11.
The cases of the petitioners who fulfilled all the eligibility conditions were to be considered for migration against seats which were available but these seats have been given to the students who were not eligible for migration as per the University Regulations.
It is in these circumstances a contention was raised that no seat was available.
By giving seats to the ineligible students it could not be successfully argued that no seat was available for students who otherwise fulfilled all the requirements.
It is the admitted stand of the respondents that the cases of the petitioners were not considered on account of non-availability of seats.
The contention of the respondents that the petitioners cannot be allowed migration for non-availability of seats has, thus, no merit.
12.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed and a writ of mandamus is issued to respondents 1 and 2 to allow migration to the petitioners in the 3rd, 5th or any other Semester of B.Sc.
Engineering, as the case may be, within two weeks from today, even if additional seats may have to be created.
In the peculiar facts of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.