Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - This judgment shall dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 5752, 4138 of 1981, 3099, 4842, 4843 of 1982 and C.W.P.
No. 9186 of 1989 as common question of law and fact is involved in all these writ petitions.
The facts are taken from C.W.P.
No. 4842 of 1982.
2.
Petitioners joined service under the State of Punjab as Drivers, Conductors, Carpenters, Assistants, Clerks and Electricians etc. on different dates.
Petitioners continued to serve under the State of Punjab from the dates of their appointments till the State of Punjab took a policy decision to transfer some of the buses to Municipal Corporations, Amritsar, Jalandhar and Ludhiana.
The staff which was necessary for running those buses was transferred from Punjab Roadways and the services of such staff were placed at the disposal of the said corporations.
Some of the petitioners were transferred to the Municipal Corporations on options and the other petitioners were transferred to the Corporations being the junior most in the respective depots as otherwise they had to face retrenchment due to the decrease of posts on the transfer of vehicles to the Municipal Corporations along with the operation.
Several writ petitions were filed by the affected employees in this Court on the ground that the conditions of service of the Municipal Corporations were not the same as those were of the Punjab Roadways.
The petitioners alleged that the conditions of service were less advantageous in the corporations as compared to the conditions of service in the Punjab Roadways.
3.
One such writ petition No. 4350 of 1980 reported in Ajmer Lal v. State of Punjab, 1981(2) S.L.R.
775, came up for hearing before learned Single Judge of this Court which was decided on 2551981.
This was a case of those employees whose options had not been taken and their services had been transferred by the State of Punjab of its own.
Learned Single Judge held that the services of the employees with the State Government came to an end with the passing of this order and the status of the petitioners as civil servants stood extinguished.
It was further held that rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Vol.
I Part-I provides that a government servant could be transferred either on account of inefficiency or misbehaviour or on his written request.
Since the employees had not given their consent and were not found guilty of misconduct or inefficiency, they could not be transferred by the State to the Municipal Corporations.
The order was held to be illegal and beyond jurisdiction.
4.
Another writ petition No. 5746 of 1982 Avtar Singh Inspector v. State of Punjab, came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court.
That writ petition was disposed of at the motion stage with the following observations :-  "The learned counsel for the parties agree that the writ petition is covered by the ratio of decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 4350 of 1980 Ajmer Lal v. State of Punjab, decided on May 2, 1981, with the result that the impugned order dated January 1, 1980, (P-1) is liable to be quashed.
The writ petition is consequently allowed and the impugned order of the Director, State Transport, Punjab, dated January 1, 1980 (P-1) is quashed.
No order as to costs."
Against the judgment of this Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra), State of Punjab filed Special Leave Petition which was granted and numbered as Civil Appeal No. 1219 of 1984.
This appeal was disposed of by the Supreme Court on 311989 with the following observations :-  "There are 73 employees who are concerned in this case.
They were originally the employees of the Punjab Roadways.
They are now working as drivers, fitters, mechanics, inspectors, clerks, carpenters etc under Jullundur Municipal Corporation.
Having regard to the facts of this case, we feel that the Punjab Roadways should be directed to take back these employees as and when the vacancies become available in the Punjab Roadways in the categories in which these 73 employees belong.
In other words if a vacancy the category of drivers arises in the Punjab Roadways a driver amongst these 73 employees shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways.
Similarly, if a post of clerk falls vacant in the Punjab Roadways an employee who is working as a clerk amongst these 73 employees shall be taken back by the Punjab Roadways and so on.
If when the vacancy of a driver or a clerk etc. arises in the Punjab Roadways and there are two or more employees answering the said description amongst these 73 employees the senior-most amongst them shall be reabsorbed in the vacancy concerned.
The entire period of service of the employees who are reabsorbed as per this order shall be treated as part of the qualifying service in the Punjab Roadways for purposes of pension.
Such employees obviously are not entitled to any payment from the provident fund account.
This process shall continue until all the 73 employees are taken back into the service of the Punjab Roadways.
On such retransfer to the Punjab Roadways the employees concerned shall be assigned the seniority which they originally held before their transfer to the Corporation.
If any of the employees concerned has either already ceased to be or ceases to be in the service of the Corporation before it is possible to reabsorb him in the service of the Punjab Roadways he shall have any right to be treated as the employee of the Punjab Roadways.
This order shall not however be treated as a precedent.
This order is passed in substitution of the order passed by the High Court.
We also make it clear that no other employee who is transferred to the service of any of the Corporations under the scheme of transfer shall be entitled to prefer any claim on the basis of this order since nearly a decade has already passed from the date of the transfer of the employee to the Corporation concerned.
The Civil appeal is disposed of accordingly.
No costs."
Since the petitioners in this case have been transferred under the same policy which was under challenge before the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra) it would be appropriate to dispose of the present writ petition in terms of Avtar Singh's case (supra).
Apex Court has given positive directions in the said case.
Accordingly, the present writ petitions are disposed of in the same terms and with the same directions as were given by the Supreme Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra).
No costs.
Writ petition dismissed.