Ashok Bhan, J - Vide Advertisement dated 18th July, 1988, published in the Daily Tribune Annexure P-1, Chief Medical Officer, Hissar, invited applications for admission to three years' General Nursing Course to commence in the following three institutions :  1) General Hospital, Bhiwani, 2) General Hospital, Hissar; and, 3) General Hospital, Karnal.
As per the advertisement, an applicant was required to fulfil the following eligibility qualification for applying for admission to the said Course :  1.
Minimum qualification is matriculation or its equivalent with 45% marks, 40% marks in case of scheduled caste/scheduled tribes/backward classes and for the children of deceased, disabled and discharged military personnel/Ex-servicemen, Hindi upto Matric standard is compulsory.
2.
Medium of instruction will be English.
3.
Age should not be less than 17 years and more than 27 years as on 2981988 relaxable upto 30 years in case of scheduled caste, backward class and 40 years in case of widows.
Petitioner, along with various other applicants applied in response to the aforementioned advertisement being fully eligible and qualified.
Petitioner applied against the post reserved for scheduled caste candidates as she belongs to Kabir Panthi (Julaha) community, which is recognised as a scheduled caste by the Haryana Government.
Along with her application, petitioner submitted true copies of certificates and documents affirming eligibility and qualifications of the petitioner.
Petitioner had passed her High School Examination from the Board of High School and Intermediate Education, Allahabad, UP In the year 1986.
A copy of the certificate is appended as Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
High School examination of the aforementioned Board is "recognised" by the Board of School Education, Haryana" as equivalent to its matriculation examination for purpose of admission to higher course".
This fact is evident from Annexure P-5 attached to the writ petition which is a letter containing a list of the Boards which have been recognised by the Haryana Education Board and whose specific examinations have been recognised as equivalent to its matriculation examination.
Annexure P-6 is the marks sheet which depicts that petitioner had passed her High School examination in five subjects with almost 50% marks.
2.
Petitioner was called for interview in the month of October, 1983.
Petitioner was selected and she joined the training course on 2221989.
Petitioner was being paid a monthly stipend of Rs. 100/- per month for the first year of her course.
This stipend was further increased to Rs. 120/- per month in the second year.
This was in accordance with the terms stated in the advertisement.
Petitioner continued in the training course uninterruptedly for two years but vide impugned order Annexure P-9 the petitioner was expelled from the General Nursing Training Course with the observation that she did not fulfil the required basic qualifications as per rules.
It was further stated that the stipend paid to the petitioner during the training period amounting to Rs. 504320 be also recovered and deposited within a week from the issue of the said Letter.
Petitioner was not afforded any opportunity of being heard before the issuance of the impugned order, Annexure P-9.
It further does not state as to which basic qualification the petitioner lacked as per rules.
Petitioner filed the present writ petition for quashing the impugned order, Annexure P-9.
3.
This Court while issuing notice of motion on 25th January, 1991 stayed the operation of Annexure P-9 which was also continued after the admission of writ petition on the 10th April, 1991.
Petitioner continued her studies till date and the final examination is to be held in March, 1992.
4.
In the written statement, the basic facts stated in the writ petition have been admitted but the plea taken is that Haryana Education Board, Bhiwani, intimated to the respondents that Board of High School and Intermediate Education, UP has been recognised subject to the following conditions :  i) Prior to 1988 - Candidates should pass the subjects including Hindi, English and Maths obtaining 33% marks in each subject.
ii) After 1988-Candidates should pass five subjects securing 33% marks in each subject.
That the petitioner had passed her matriculation examination from the Board of High School and Intermediate Education UP In the year 1986 without mathematics as a subject and that prior to 1983 only those certificates were treated to be equivalent to the matriculation certificate of the Haryana Education Board which included Hindi, English and Mathematics and, therefore, the said certificate which had been issued prior to 1988 could not be treated equivalent to the qualification upto matric level of Haryana Education Board.
I have heard the counsel for the parties at length.
In my opinion, this petition deserves to be allowed.
Petitioner had appended with her application all the certificates, the original of which were produced at the time of interview.
No fault was found with those certificates at the time of selection of the petitioner.
She continued uninterrupted for almost two years, during which period she participated in the training course.
The impugned order, Annexure P-9, expelling the petitioner from the Course without giving her an opportunity of being heard is bad in law.
She should have been afforded an opportunity to show cause before passing such an order.
Further it is not mentioned that which of the basic qualifications the petitioner did not fulfil in the impugned order.
It should have been specified in the order itself so that the petitioner could have had an opportunity to repel the same and demonstrate that she fulfilled all the requisite qualifications.
This order is in violation of principles of natural justice and liable to be set aside.
5.
Even on merits, this case deserves to be allowed.
As per the advertisement, various eligibility qualifications were required to be fulfilled for applying for admission.
Petitioner submitted all the requisite certificates and documents with her application on the basis of which she claimed herself to be eligible for being selected.
At the time of interview she produced original certificates before the interviewing authorities.
She continued to study in the training Course for a period of two years without any break.
It was the duty of interviewing Committee to have scrutinized the matter before permitting admission to the Course.
It was not open to the authorities to expel the petitioner after the petitioner had completed 2/3rd of her Course.
Moreover, the advertisement Annexure P-1 was issued on July 12, 1988 which prescribed the qualifications.
As per this advertisement read with Annexure P-5, any candidate who had passed the relevant examination from some other Board which was treated to be equivalent to Haryana Education Board (in any five subjects securing at least 33% marks in each subject).
Even a cursory look on Annexures P-4 and P-5 would indicate that petitioner fulfilled these qualifications.
Petitioner had passed High School examination from the Board of High School and Intermediate Education, UP in the year 1986 in five subjects securing nearly 50% marks.
Thus the requirement of qualifications as prescribed in the advertisement, Annexure P-1, issued in the year 1988 was fulfilled.
Therefore, on merits also the expulsion of the petitioner from the training Course was not justified.
6.
Accordingly, the impugned order Annexure P-9 is set aside and the writ petition is accepted with costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition accepted.