Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal') on 732003, whereby his application challenging the order dated 182000 (Annexure P16) enhancing the punishment imposed vide order dated 2091999 (Annexure P.8), has been dismissed.
2.
The petitioner while working as Signal Inspector was charge sheeted on 331998 (Annexure P.1).
The reply filed by the petitioner was considered unsatisfactory and an Inquiry Officer was appointed.
The Inquiry Officer gave his report on 851995, exonerating the petitioner from the charges levelled against him.
The finding of the Inquiry Officer was communicated to the petitioner and the representation of the petitioner was sought in respect of the said report.
The petitioner submitted his reply on 991999 to the effect that he is satisfied with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
However, on 2091999 vide order Annexure P.8, the penalty of reduction to a lower stage time scale for a period of 9 months was imposed upon the petitioner without postponing the future increments.
The petitioner filed appeal against the said order but notice dated 332000 was issued to the petitioner to show cause by the Appellate Authority as to why full cost of the material misappropriated should not be recovered from him.
However, the petitioner did not submit any reply to the said show cause notice.
Thereafter, the order was passed on 182000 (Annexure P16), whereby the penalty of reduction to the next lower stage in the same scale for a period of one year and six months with cumulative effect and recovery of Rs. 3 lacs from his dues, was imposed upon the petitioner.
3.
It may be noticed that no reasons of disagreeing with the report of the Inquiry Officer were communicated to the petitioner before the Disciplinary Authority passed the order of punishment on 2091999.
The reasons of disagreement were recorded by the Disciplinary Authority on 372000 (Annexure P.6) and communicated to the petitioner on the the same date vide Annexure P14.
It was thereafter that the punishment was enhanced by the Appellate Authority on 182000.
4.
Earlier, the petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal vide O.A. No. 603-HR-2000.
The same was disposed of on 2212001 for the reason that the petitioner had not availed the remedy of appeal though it was recorded that the disagreement note was supplied to the petitioner before passing of the order of penalty on 2091999.
After the aforesaid order was passed by the Tribunal, the appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed on 2772001 (Annexure P.19).
It is thereafter, the petitioner again invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal vide OA No. 762-PB-2001, which has been dismissed vide order dated 732003, the subject matter of challenge in the present writ petition.
5.
The argument raised before the Tribunal was that reasons of disagreement were not recorded nor supplied to the petitioner before the order of punishment was passed by the Disciplinary Authority on 2091999.
Therefore, the order of punishment and the subsequent order of enhancement of the punishment are wholly illegal and unjustified.
The learned Tribunal found that there is no violation of the principles of natural justice as the petitioner had a fair opportunity of taking grounds against the disagreement note in an appeal, which was filed after the reasons of disagreement were recorded and, therefore, dismissed the application filed by the petitioner.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behari Misra, 1998(3) SCT 833 : (1998)7 Supreme Court Cases 84 and Yoginath D Bagde v. State of Maharashtra and another, 1999(4) SCT 403 : (1999)7 Supreme Court Cases 739, to contend that if the Inquiry Officer has exonerated the delinquent official and the Competent Authority does not agree with the findings recorded, the Disciplinary Authority is required to communicate the reasons of disagreement to the delinquent and thereafter provide an opportunity to show cause against such reasons recorded.
The final decision in respect of the charge-sheet served upon the delinquent is required to be taken after considering the reply filed, if any.
In the present case, the reasons of disagreement were not communicated to the petitioner before the order of punishment was passed and, therefore, the entire proceedings stand vitiated.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the order passed by the Tribunal on 732003 is not sustainable.
7.
In Kunj Behari Misra's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that whenever the Disciplinary Authority disagrees with the Inquiry Authority on any article of charge, it must record its tentative reasons for such disagreement and give delinquent officer an opportunity to represent before it records its finding.
The principles of natural justice require the authority which has to take a final decision to give an opportunity to the officer charged before it takes a final decision.
It was held to the following effect :-  "19.
The result of the aforesaid discussion would be that the principles of natural justice have to be read into Regulation 7(2).
As a result thereof, whenever the disciplinary authority disagrees with the enquiry authority on any article of charge, then before it records its own findings on such charge, it must record its tentative reasons for such disagreement and give to the delinquent officer an opportunity to represent before it records its finding.
The report of the enquiry officer containing its findings will have to be conveyed and the delinquent officer will have an opportunity to persuade the disciplinary authority to accept the favourable conclusion of the enquiry officer.
The principles of natural justice, as we have already observed, require the authority which has to take a final decision and can impose a penalty, to give an opportunity to the officer charged of misconduct to file a representation before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charges framed against the officer."
Following the aforesaid judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India and others v. KP Narayanan Kutty, 2003(3) SCT 743 : (2003)2 Supreme Court Cases 449, did not accept the argument that in cases where the reasons of disagreement are not communicated, the delinquent employee has to show the prejudice caused.
It was held to the following effect :-  "In Para 19 of the judgment in Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behari Misra, (1998)7 Supreme Court Cases 84, extracted above, when it is clearly stated that the principles of natural justice have to be read into Regulation 7(2) [Rule 50(3)(ii) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules, is identical in terms applicable to the present case] and the delinquent officer will have to be given an opportunity to persuade the disciplinary authority to accept the favourable conclusion of the enquiry officer, we find it difficult to accept the contention advanced on behalf of the appellants that unless it is shown that some prejudice was caused to the respondent, the order of dismissal could not be set aside by the High Court."
8.
In the present case, the reasons of disagreement were not communicated by the Disciplinary Authority before the order of punishment was passed on 2091999.
The reasons were communicated before the petitioner availed the remedy of appeal on 372000.
The communication of reasons of disagreement after the punishment imposed contravenes the principles of natural justice and is in direct contravention of principles of law enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above said judgments.
Therefore, the finding of the Tribunal that there is no violation of the principles of natural justice, is not sustainable.
9.
Consequently, the order passed by the learned Tribunal on 732003 is set aside and as a necessary consequence, the order of punishment dated 2091999 (Annexure P.8) and the order in appeal dated 182000 (Annexure P16) enhancing the punishment are also set aside.
However, liberty is granted to the respondents to proceed further from the stage of receipt of the Inquiry Report, in accordance with law.
With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition stands disposed of.
.