MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction declaring the action of the respondents as illegal in as much as the provisions of statute known as The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full participation) Act, 1995 has not been followed by the respondents in conducting the Civil Services Examination 2002.
2.
In para 2 of the written statement filed by respondent No. 1 a preliminary objection has been taken that the matter concerning recruitment to civil services is to be adjudicated by the Central Administrative Tribunal (for brevity `the Tribunal') set up under the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for brevity `the Act').
The objection seems to have emanated from Section 14(1)(a) of the Act which deals with the jurisdiction and powers of the Tribunals.
According to the afore-mentioned provision on and from the appointed date all the jurisdictional powers in relation to the recruitment and matters concerning recruitment to all India service or any Civil Service of the Union or any service under the Union or any service connected with the defence service etc. has to be adjudicated upon by the Tribunal.
Reliance has been placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of L Chandra Kumar v. UOI, 1997(2) SCT 423 (SC) : (1997) 3 SCC 261 to strengthen the submissions made in para 2.
3.
Shri Raman Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, has not been able to dispute the afore-mentioned legal position because a grievance has been made with regard to the violation of filling the civil post under the Union of India by the Union Public Service Commission.
On the plain language of Section 14 of the Act is patent that the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 cannot be invoked although after the judgment of the Supreme Court in L Chandra Kumar's case (supra) a writ is competent before a Division Bench of this Court against the order of the Tribunal.
4.
In view of the above, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the instant petition be transferred to the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal for its adjudication.
In support of his submission, he has placed reliance on para 13 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kendriya Vidayalaya v. RD Vishwakarama and others, 2002(2) RSJ 497.
5.
For the reasons stated above, I am of the view that this Court cannot entertain the instant petition under Article 226 without relegating the petitioner to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Accordingly, Registrar (Judicial) is directed to transfer the instant petition to the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal as early as possible.
The Registry shall, however, keep record of the instant petition.
Petition stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.