Hemant Gupta, J - The plaintiff-appellant is aggrieved against the judgment passed by the learned Addl.
District Judge dismissing the suit of the plaintiff for declaration challenging the order terminating his services.
2.
The appellant was employed as Conductor with Haryana Roadways.
He was found to have received Rs. 747/- as fare from 21 bus passengers but had not issued tickets to them.
Unpunched tickets were collected from the appellant at the time as a proof of not issuing tickets.
Thereafter the appellant was placed under suspension and ultimately after conducting departmental inquiry the order of termination of services was passed on 26111996.
The appeal against the order of dismissal was dismissed by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana on 1872000.
Subsequently, the appellant filed the civil suit challenging the order of termination passed by the punishing authority as well as the appellate authority.
The suit was decreed.
However, in appeal the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside and the suit was dismissed.
3.
Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon State of Haryana v. Mohan Singh, 1985(1) All India Services Law Journal 597 to contend that the case is of no evidence.
However, it has been found by the lower appellate court that the services of the appellant had been dismissed after conducting inquiry.
DW3 Laxman Dass was appointed as Inquiry Officer after the reply submitted by the appellant to the charge-sheet was found unsatisfactory.
Inquiry proceedings Ex. P5 were conducted wherein statements of Inspectors Thakur Dass and Sumer Singh were recorded and both of them were cross-examined by the appellant.
The statement of the appellant was recorded as well as Kailash Chand, driver, who appeared as a defence witness.
Since the Inspectors, who had found that the plaintiff had not issued the tickets, were examined by the Inquiry Officer, the order of dismissal passed in pursuance of departmental inquiry was found not suffering from any infirmity so as to warrant interference by the civil court.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the case of the appellant is parallel to the case of Mohan Singh (supra).
The argument is that in the said case also neither the cash was checked nor the statement of any passenger was recorded and, thus, it was found that the inquiry against the delinquent was vitiated.
A Full Bench of this Court in The State of Haryana and others v. Shri Ram Chander, 1976(2) SLR 690 has held that there is no bar against the reception of hearsay evidence by domestic tribunals.
It has been held that the enquiry officer would be justified in acting upon the evidence of the checkers stating these facts even though the passengers themselves are not examined as witnesses.
A finding of guilt arrived at by him would not be based on pure hearsay.
It would be based on the evidence of the checker that he found passengers travelling without tickets and the statements made by the passengers to the checker at the time of checking.
The following observations would be relevant :-  "Where a bus is checked and it is found that tickets have not been issued to several passengers and the passengers state in the presence of the conductor that they paid the fare, the enquiry officer would be justified the in acting upon the evidence of the checkers stating these facts even though the passengers themselves are not examined as witnesses.
A finding of guilt arrived at by him would not be based on pure hearsay.
It would be based on (1) the evidence of the checker that he found passengers travelling without tickets, and (2) the statements made by the passengers to the checker at the time of checking.
The second item of evidence alone would be hearsay but it would be hearsay of high probative value because of the circumstances that statements were made in the presence of the conductor and on the spot.
In such a case, it cannot be said that the enquiry officer's findings are based on pure hearsay or hearsay of unreliable nature."
5.
Subsequently, in State of Haryana and another v. Rattan Singh, AIR 1977 SC 1512, it has been held that in a domestic enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the Evidence Act may not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
There is no allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
The sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond scrutiny.
Absence of any evidence in support of a finding is certainly available for the court to look into because it amounts to an error of law apparent on the record.
The said was also a case where a bus conductor of a State Transport undertaking was chargesheeted for not collecting fares from certain passengers and on his guilt being established there was simple termination of his services because of his long services and young age.
It was held that merely because statements of passengers were not recorded by the Inspector of the flying squad the order that followed was invalid.
The evidence of the Inspector was some evidence which had relevance to the charge against the bus conductor.
In the present case, Inspectors Thakur Dass and Sumer Singh were examined.
The appellant has cross-examined the said witnesses.
On the basis of such statement, respondents have taken an action after conducting departmental inquiry.
It is not a case of absence of evidence.
The findings of the departmental inquiry are based on appreciation of evidence.
No infraction of any procedure has been pointed out.
Thus, there is no illegality in the departmental inquiry nor has been found by the first Appellate Court.
Consequently, I do not find any substantial question arises in the present second appeal for the consideration of this Court.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.