SS Saron, J - This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, mandamus or any other writ, order or direction directing for quashing the orders dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5) and 2491983 (Annexure P-7) and 2951986 (Annexure P-9) and further for directing the respondents to pay the disability pension to the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army during National Emergency in the year 1963, at the age of 19 years and was commissioned in April 1964 in the 20 Lancers (Armoured Corps).
At the time of his entry into the defence services, he was medically examined and was placed in Category A-1, which is now called as Shape I During Indo-Pak war in 1965 the petitioner was sent to Chhamb-Jourian operation Sector.
In other words, he was in the thick of actual war.
The petitioner fought the war for about 27 days and thereafter was ordered to move with his troops of three tanks to Sialkot Sector under the Command of Col. S Asghar Hussain of the 9th Bn.
the Grenadiers (Mewar).
It is during this period while manoeuvring the tanks into operational positions, he slipped from the tank on or about 891965 and sustained injuries to his left knee.
He was removed to the Medical Room of the 9th Grenadiers and was treated by the Medical Officer of that Unit Lt. Virender Singh.
At the time of his injury he was of a very young age and keeping in view the fact that hostilities between India and Pakistan were still continuing, he took the injury to be of a minor nature.
However, the same gave him trouble off and on and when he approached the doctor, he was advised that after a few exercises it would get alright and he need not worry about the same.
3.
The petitioner continued to serve the army till September 9, 1968 when he was boarded out of the Army.
However, during the second Indo-Pak conflict in 1971, he was again recalled to the Army and he was posted in the Sambha sector of J & K, where on active military service, he started suffering acute pain to his right leg and there was also some swelling.
In the year 1973-74, when the petitioner was posted under Major General Arun Vaidya as 2nd in command of the Provost Unit in Ambala Cantt, the aforesaid injury on the left leg started giving the petitioner acute pain and he reported for thorough investigation/examination/medical treatment for the injury suffered during 1965 operation.
The petitioner was admitted to Military Hospital, Ambala Cantt, where he was given initial treatment.
Initial treatment was given to the petitioner at the Military Hospital, Ambala Cantt, on 251974 (Annexure P-1).
The clinical notes thereon are as follows :-  "A case of post traumatic wasting of left leg.
Injury to left knee in 1965 Op."
4.
The Medical Authorities at Ambala Cantt.
then referred the case of the petitioner to MHD Military Hospital, Delhi Cantt for expert opinion.
The Medical Authorities came to the positive finding the injury has been suffered during 1965 operation, but opined it to be minor in nature which could be set right after some exercises.
The petitioner was thereafter released from the Military in the year 1974 as per policy of the Government.
However, despite the fact that the initial opinion with respect to the injury was that the injury is a minor injury but that continued to deteriorate.
Finding that the petitioner's left leg was affected by the injury, he requested the army authorities for medical board.
It is on the request of the petitioner that the Ministry of Defence decided to refer the case of the petitioner to Medical Board belatedly to assess the nature, cause and degree of his disablement, at the time of his release from the service as well as the degree of his disablement, at that time.
The copy of the letter of the Government of India, in this regard is dated 1041981 (Annexure P-2).
The said letter records that the officer has stated he suffered a `knee injury' during September/October 1965 and treated in MI Room, for which no medical documents are available.
On 781974, he was admitted to MH Ambala Cantt.
A photostat copy of the admission sheet produced by the officer was enclosed.
It was recorded that the Officer has not claimed disability pension for this disability which he claims has since aggravated.
The Command Hospital (MC) Chandigarh, was requested to bring the Officer before RSMB, to assess the nature, cause and percentage of disability at the time of his release in 1974 as well as the present degree of his disability at the time of his release in 1974 as well as at the time of despatching the letter dated 1041981 (Annexure P-2).
It is indicated that the report of the Medical Board should be recorded on AFMSF-16 and forwarded to the Head Quarters issuing the letter for approval of ADMS.
5.
The Medical Board was held at Chandigarh and it assessed the disability in respect of the petitioner to the extent of 40% to 50% at the time of release of the petitioner in 1974 and to the same extent at the time the Medical Board examined him in 1981.
The copy of the proceedings of the Medical Board dated 1841981 are Annexure P-3.
After the report of the Medical Board, the Ministry of Defence sought the view of the Army Doctor, who treated the petitioner and also of the Commanding Officer under whose command the petitioner was serving at the time of suffering the injury.
The Doctor sent his report directly to the Army Headquarters.
However, the Commanding Officer, while sending his report to the Army Authorities sent a copy of the same to the petitioner also, which is attached as Annexure P-4.
However, despite the material on record including the opinion of the Medical Board, the report of the Commanding Officer Col. S Asghar Hussain and the medical opinion, the same was not adverted to by the respondent No. 1 Union of India while reaching its decision, which was communicated vide letter dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5).
It is recorded therein that the disability viz. `Injury Left Knee' from which the petitioner was found suffering at the time of release from service should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
It is then mentioned that the petitioner, if so desires, prefer an appeal against the decision within six months from the date of receipt of the communication on such grounds as he may deem fit to put forth.
The petitioner made a representation/Appeal to the Government of India dated 21.4.1983 (Annexure P-6) against the order dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5).
In terms of order dated 2491983 (Annexure P-7), the under Secretary to Government of India, communicated to the petitioner that his appeal dated 21.4.1983 (Annexure P-6) against the rejection of disability pension had been re-considered by the Government and that it was regretted that no reasonable ground had been found to alter the decision already conveyed vide letter dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5).
The petitioner was informed that if he so desires he may submit a final appeal along with fresh grounds to the Defence Secretary for consideration by the Defence Minister's Appellate Committee, on pensions, against the said decision within a period of six months from the date of receipt of the letter.
The petitioner accordingly filed final appeal dated 19101983 (Annexure P-8) against the order dated 2491983 (Annexure P-7).
The appeal of the petitioner was also rejected on 2951986 (Annexure P-9).
It is mentioned therein with reference to the petition dated 19101983 (Annexure P-8) regarding rejection of disability pension claim, the Government of India, decided in consultation with Defence Minister's Appellate Committee on Pensions that the cause of his invalidment was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service.
It was, therefore, regretted that no disability pension is admissible under the rules.
It is thereafter that the present writ petition was filed assailing the aforesaid order dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5), 2491983 (Annexure P-7) and 2951986 (Annexure P-9).
6.
The writ petition was admitted on 1091986.
7.
The respondents filed their written statement.
In the written statement it is admitted that the petitioner was granted Emergency Commission on 2641964 and was released from service w.e.f.
191969.
It is also admitted that the petitioner was granted Special Short Service Commission w.e.f.
1991972 and released from service w.e.f.
19 September, 1974.
It is also accepted that the petitioner was deployed in Indo-Pak war in 1965 and he fought in the Chhumb-Jourian Sector.
However, there was no record of his having sustained injuries during the period as contended by him.
There was no medical documents relating to the knee injury suffered by him during September-October 1965 and treatment in MI Room.
It was also admitted that the petitioner was hospitalised in 1974 at MH Ambala and was examined by Surgical Specialist and orthopaedic surgeon and neuro surgeon and was diagnosed as a case of injury left knee with disuse aboply left lower limb for which he was advised physiotherapy.
The other averments were denied.
It is stated that the medical case sheet indicates that no injury was recorded at the time of its occurrence nor any Court of Inquiry was held.
Besides, no fresh medical opinion could be rendered in the absence of medical documents which have since been destroyed.
It was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
9.
The petitioner who appears in person has contended that he was entitled for disablement pension as he sustained the injury on his left knee during 1965 Indo-Pak War where he admittedly fought for the nation as an Army Officer.
However, the respondents are denying this benefit primarily on the ground that there are no medical documents available of the petitioner having sustained the injury during the period contended by him.
Besides, it is contended that whatever material there is on the record has also not been taken into account and therefore the decision reached at to deny the benefit of disability pension is arbitrary and unreasonable.
Besides, it does not justify the conclusion reached at.
10.
On the other hand Ms. Ranjana Shahi, Advocate learned counsel for the respondents has contended that the decision is just and reasonable.
Besides, in the absence of any record that the petitioner sustained the injury during war operation is not established from any record.
Therefore, he has rightly been denied the benefit of disability pension and there is nothing wrong in the decision reached at.
She has further contended that the case was examined thrice in terms of orders Annexures P-5, P-7 and P-9 and therefore the decision reached at is just and reasonable.
11.
Disablement pension benefit is awarded in accordance with the provisions of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, Part I, Section III.
The relevant portion of which reads as follows :-  "48(a) An officer who is retired from military service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by such service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over may, on retirement, be awarded a disability pension consisting of a service element and a disability element in accordance with the regulations in this section; (b) The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in appendix II."
12.
The perusal of Regulation 48(a) of the above Pension Regulations show that an Officer, who is retired from military service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by such service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over may on retirement, be awarded a disability pension consisting of a service element and a disability element in accordance with the regulations in this section.
Regulation 48(b) envisages that the question whether disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in appendix II.
13.
The relevant portion of Appendix II, which is referred to in Regulation 48 and also finds mention in Regulations 173 and 185 of the Pension Regulations reads as follows :-  "1.
With effect from 1st April 1948, in supersession of all previous orders on the subject, the entitlement to disability and family pension, children's allowance and death gratuities will be governed by the following rules.
Invaliding from service is necessary condition for the grant of a disability pension.
An individual who at the time of his release under the Release Regulations is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalid from service.
JCOs/Ors/NCs(E) who are placed permanently in a medical category other than `A' and are discharged because no alternative employment suitable to their low medical category can be provided as well as those who having been retained in alternative employment but are discharged before the completion of their engagement will be deemed to have invalided out of service.
2.
Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to military service provided it is certified that :- a) the disablement is due to a wound, injury or disease which -  i) is attributable to military service; or ii) existed before or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby; b) the death was due to or hastened by -  i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to military service; or ii) the aggravation by military service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during service.
3.
There must be a casual contention between disablement or death and military service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
4.
In deciding on the issue of entitlement all the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and benefit of reasonable doubt will be given to the claimant.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in the field service cases.
(emphasis added) 5.
Post discharge claims - Cases in which a disease did not actually lead to the member's discharge from service but arose within 7 years thereafter, may be recognised as attributable to service if it can be established medicaly that the disability is a delayed manifestation of a pathological process set in motion by service conditions obtaining prior to discharge and that if the disability had been manifest at the time of discharge the individual would have been invalided out of service on this account.
In cases where an individual in receipt of a disability pension dies at home and it cannot, from a strictly medical point of view, be definitely established that the death was solely due to the disablement in respect of which the disability pension was granted :- (a) the benefit of the doubt in determining attributability should go to the family of the deceased, if death occurs within 7 years from the date of his invalidment from service unless there are other factors adversely affecting the claim; and (b) If death takes place more than 7 years after the date of man's invalidment from service, the benefit of doubt will go to the State.
In cases where an individual outlives a normal span of life, i.e. where death takes place at the age of 60 or above, the death should be held to be due to normal causes and not to military service.
6.
In respect of accidents the following rules will be observed :- a) Injuries sustained when the man is on duty will be deemed to have arisen in or resulted from Army/Naval/Air Force Service unless they were self-inflicted or due to serious negligence or misconduct in which case the question of withholding the pension in full or in part will be considered.
(b) A person subjected to the Disciplinary Code of the Armed Forces is on duty during the period of time when he is in the course of performance of an official task or a task failure to do which would constitute an offence triable under the disciplinary Code applicable to him.
The course of performance of a task includes the journey or transport by a reasonable route from one's quarters to and back from the appointed place of duty under organised arrangements.
(c) A person is also deemed to be on duty during the period of participation in recreation, organised or permitted by service authorities and of travelling or a body or singly under organised arrangements.
A person is also considered to be on duty when proceeding to his leave station or returning to duty from his leave station at public expense.
(d) An accident which occurs when a man is not strictly on duty as defined may also be attributable to service, provided that it is not an accident which can be attributed to risk common to human existence in modern conditions in India, unless such risk is definitely enhanced in kind or degree by the nature, conditions, obligations or incidents of the persons service.
Thus for instance where a person is killed or injured by another party by reason of belonging to the Armed Forces he shall be deemed on duty at the relevant time.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in cases occurring on active service as defined in the Army/Air Force Act."
The perusal of the above Appendix II shows that invaliding from service for the purpose grant of disability pension is to have the following basic features :-  a) Invaliding from service is a necessary condition for the grant of disability pension and an individual who at the time of his release under the Release Regulations is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalided from service.
b) Disablement is accepted being due to military service if it is certified that the disablement is due to a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to military service, or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
c) There must be a casual connection between disablement and military service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
d) In deciding the issue of entitlement all the evidence, both direct and circumstantial is to be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt is to be given to the claimant.
This benefit is to be given more liberally to the claimant in the field service cases.
e) Post discharge claims cases in which a disease did not actually lead to the member's discharge from services but arose within 7 years thereafter, may be recognised as attributable to service if it can be established medically that the disability is a delayed manifestation of a pathological process set in motion by service conditions obtaining prior to discharge had been manifest at the time of discharge the individual would have been invalidated out of service on this account.
f) In respect of accidental injuries sustained when the person is on duty is to be deemed to have arisen in or resulted from Army Force Service unless they were self-inflicted or due to serious negligence or misconduct in which case the question of withholding the pension in full or in part is to be considered.
It is in the light of the above characteristics that the case of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension, in accordance with the Pension Regulations is to be considered.
As already noticed above, the petitioner admittedly fought in the Indo-Pak operations during 1965 War.
It is not in dispute that the extent of disability of the petitioner is 40% to 50%.
The clinical notes recorded by the Orthopedic Specialist at the Military Hospital Ambala Cantt.
on 251974 (Annexure P-1) records injury to left knee in 1965 operation.
The petitioner has also placed on record a letter dated 1041981 (Annexure P-2) wherein decision was taken that the petitioner would be brought before a Medical Board belatedly to assess the nature, cause and degree of his disablement at the time of his release from service as well as the present degree of his disablement.
The report of the Medical Board was asked to be recorded on AFMSF-16 and forwarded to the Mukhyalaya PH and HP Area HQ PH and HP Area, Ambala Cantt.
for approval of ADMS.
The case was accordingly examined as per the said letter and the proceedings thereof have been placed on record as Annexure P-3.
While recording the history of the case, it was mentioned that the Officer stated that he had injury to his left knee in 1965 for which he was bedded in local MI room.
In the column relating to nature of cause of injury it is mentioned that the Officer stated that he had slipped from AMX tank in 1965 and injured his left knee when his left knee flexed and rotated (the type of rotation i.e. medically and literally) is not known to the officer.
It is also mentioned that swelling over left knee appeared 12 hours after injury for which he was treated.
The injury, however, was not recorded nor any Court of enquiry was held.
After recording the various other factors, the Medical Board, in its report dated 1841981 (Annexure P-3) came to the conclusion that the disability percentage of the Officer at the time of his release was 40-50 per cent.
Col. Narula, while agreeing with Wing Commander Kapoor further observed that in all probability the weakness of left lower limb was due to disuse of alophy as a result of injury.
14.
Apart from the Medical Reports, the petitioner has placed on record the report of his Commanding Officer Col. S Asghar Hussain as Annexure P-4.
It has been averred that the petitioner fought in the Chhamb-Jourian Section under the command of Col. S Asghar Hussain, In para-18 of the petition, the petitioner avers that after the report of the Medical Board i.e. the report dated 1841981 (Annexure P-3), the Ministry of Defence sought the views of the Army doctor, who treated the petitioner also of the Commanding Officer under whose command the petitioner was working at the time of injury.
A copy of the report sent by the Doctor was sent to the Army Headquarters directly.
Besides, the Commanding Officer while giving his report to the Army Authorities, also sent a copy of the same to the petitioner.
The said averments are not denied by the respondents in para 18 of the written statement.
It is merely stated that the matter was decided by the Competent Authority, after taking into consideration the report of the Medical Board as well as the report of the Commanding Officer and that the Commanding Officer was not competent authority to decide the matter himself.
At this stage, it is apposite to reproduce the report of the Commanding Officer that is Col. S Asghar Hussain, under whose command the petitioner admittedly was when he sustained injury.
The said report dated 821982 (Annexure P-4) reads as under :-  "STATEMENT OF IC 5514F COLONEL S. ASGHAR HUSSAIN (RETD.)
I, IC 5514 Col. S Asghar Hussain (Retd) was commanding 9th Bn The Grenadiers (Mewar) during operation in September 1965 in Sialkot Sector.
During this period a troop of AMX tanks of 20th Lancers was attached to me.
The troop was commanded by Captain Vinod Chaudhri of 20th Lancers.
It was during this period, while manoeuvring the tanks into operational positions the troop commander Capt.
Vinod Chaudhri, had a slip from the tank he was standing on and fell down hurting his knee.
He was immediately removed to Grenadiers' (Mewar) MI Room and my then RMO.
Lt. Verinder Singh treated him for the injury.
I do not recollect the exact date of the accident; but I vividly remember the incident.
A few days later Capt.
Vinod Chaudhri moved out from my area to join his Regiment."
The above said report of the Commanding Officer, in my view is relevant piece of evidence and material which was liable to be considered and taken into account in determining the question of entitlement of disability pension.
Para 4 of Appendix II of the Pension Regulation, referred to above, clearly enjoin that in deciding on the issue of entitlement, all the evidence both direct or circumstantial is to be taken into account and the benefit of doubt is to be given to the claimant and that this benefit is to be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
Therefore, in my view the said report of the Commanding Officer, Col. S Asghar Hussain is a most relevant piece of evidence.
However, it is not shown to have been considered by the respondents in the impugned orders dated 28.3.1983 (Annexure P-5), 2491983 (Annexure P-7) and 2951986 (Annexure P- 9).
15.
The only reason, however, for declining the benefit to the petitioner is that there is no document available on the record which can connect the injury to the War operation of 1965.
The learned counsel for the respondents has particularly high -lighted that the initial document that is available is that of the Military Hospital, Ambala Cantt, Annexure P-1 and that the same is dated 251974, which is much subsequent to the Indo-Pak War of 1965.
She has also contended that the other documents placed on the record by the petitioners i.e. the proceedings of the Medical Board (Annexure P-3) is dated 1841981 and that therefore, the same are not relatable to the point of time when the injury was sustained by the petitioner.
16.
I have considered the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondents and find the same to be not of much consequence.
17.
As per the Pension Regulations, which have been enumerated above, it is evident that even a casual connection between disability and military service for attributability or aggravation can be taken into account to consider the benefit of disability pension.
Besides in deciding the issue of entitlement the evidence both direct and circumstantial is to be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt is to be given to the claimant.
This benefit is to be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
Therefore, in the light of the above Pension Regulations, particularly para Nos. 3, 4 and 5 of Appendix II, casual connection, the material on record and liberal benefit is to be given to the petitioner.
18.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the judgments in the case titled Union of India v. Ex. Hav.
Cik Wishwa Nath, L.P.A. No. 1549 of 1991 decided on 4101999 [2000(2) SCT 570], wherein their Lordships of the Letters Patent Bench referred to with approval the following observation of the Division Bench Judgment in the case of Union of India and others v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(2) RSJ 493.
In Shyam Lal's case, (supra) while dealing with Regulation 14(b) of the Pension Regulations it was observed as under :-  "A combined reading of the provisions reproduced above shows that the cause of disability which has led to the person concerned being discharged from service will be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of entry in the Armed forces or that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined the service."
Besides, in the case of Ashwani Kumar Ex-Havaldar v. Union of India, 1996(4) SCT 154 (P&H) : 1997(1) RSJ 277, a Division Bench of this Court made the following observations :-  "4.
There is no controversy between the parties that at the time of petitioner's entry in the service he was subjected to medical examination and there is no mention of any disease in the record prepared at the time of petitioner's enrolment in military service.
It is also borne out from the record that the medical board or any other competent authority has not recorded any reasoned conclusion that the disability disease suffered by the petitioner is such which could not have been detected at the time of his entry in the service.
Therefore, we find merit in the contention of the learned counsel that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of presumption contained in first part of Rule 7(b), namely, that the disability should be deemed to have been arisen during the course of the service and is attributable to military service.
The fact that the petitioner had served in the field operation during his 12 years service has also not been contested by the respondents and this clearly supports the contention of the learned counsel that the disability due to which the petitioner has been boarded out from service is attributable to military service.
The judgment of this court dated 9111995 squarely applies to the case of the petitioner and therefore he is entitled to the benefit of disability person."
In the above circumstances, the stand of the respondents that there is no record of the petitioner having sustained injury during the period as contended by him and that no medical document/records relating to the knee injury suffered by him during September 1965 and his consequent treatment in the MI room being not available is hardly of any substance.
The Doctor on duty during war operation would be more concerned in attending to casualties than filling up the medical documents and preparing records.
In war operations casualties keep flowing into the MI room and the Doctors would first attend to them rather than prepare documents and maintain records in respect of the injured and wounded soldiers.
Therefore, the fact that there is no record of the MI room being available in respect of the petitioner is a factor which ought not to have been taken into account to deprive him the benefit of disability pension.
This is moreso in the face of the report of Col. S Asghar Hussain, the Commanding Officer of the petitioner, who has given vivid account of the petitioner suffering injury which is a relevant material which ought to have been taken into account.
The petitioner admittedly was a young army officer during the 1965 war and he having suffered an injury would take it in his stride and in his fighting spirit would under play it so as not to be out of active operation and later be dubbed as a run away.
The petitioner in the circumstances may not have paid much heed to the injury being of young age as also the will to fight for the nation.
However, this Court in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot substitute its decision for that of the authorities.
However, the test of reasonableness requires that the material and documents which are available on record ought to have been taken into account and at the same time irrelevant factors excluded from consideration.
The medical report dated 251974 (Annexure P-1), the competent authority itself asking for a Medical Board belatedly in terms of its letter dated 1041981 (Annexure P-2) and the proceedings of the Medical Board dated 1841981 (Annexure P-3) as also the report dated 821982 (Annexure P-4) of Col. S Asghar Hussain the Commanding Officer of the petitioner at the relevant time were documents which ought to have been considered.
The perusal of the impugned orders Annexures P-5, P-7 and P-9 do not reflect that the same were taken into consideration.
In fact the impugned orders do not record any reasons in support of its decision to decline the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner.
The recording of reasons it is now well known is an accepted facet of the principles of natural justice.
According to this a party has a right to know not only the result of the decision but also the reasons in support of it.
This is a statutory rule of a good administration.
Besides, for judicial review to be effective reasons are necessary.
The recording of reasons introduces clarity and excludes arbitrariness and satisfies the party concerned against whom the order is passed.
Therefore, the failure to record reasons in support of an order which entails civil consequences vitiates the decision.
Even otherwise the non recording of reason shows that there has been failure to consider the material on record.
This is moreso keeping in view the statutory regulation referred to above which provide for casual connection between disablement and military service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded and the fact that this benefit is to be given more liberally to the claimant in the field service cases.
When deciding the issue of entitlement the evidence both direct and circumstantial is to be taken into account and benefit of reasonable doubt is to be given to the claimant.
In view of the above facts and circumstances, this writ petition is allowed with costs.
The respondents are directed to calculate the disability pension due and payable to the petitioner and grant the same to him along with arrears from the day the same became due to the date of actual payment along with interest @ 12% pa on arrears from the date they became due the date of payment and continue to pay the petitioner the disablement pension in future, in accordance with the provisions of the pension regulations.
Costs are assessed as Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.