Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J. (Oral) - Rule.
2.
With consent of learned counsel for the parties, the petition is taken up for final disposal.
3.
The only question which arises for consideration in the present petition is whether the judgment of the trial court dated 22nd February, 2000 should be construed as a case of clean acquittal or acquittal as a consequence of benefit of doubt.
The relevant para 11 is as under :  "11.
In the light of best possible evidence not brought on record.
In the light of AIR 1984 SC 1622 and AIR 1987 SC 1572; the benefit of doubt tilts in favour of the accused.
Accordingly the accused is held not guilty and acquitted of the charged offence u/s 381 IPC."
4.
Thus though the expression used is that "the benefit of doubt tilts in favour of the accused" the final order is that accused is not held guilty and acquitted of the charges under Section 381 IPC.
5.
A perusal of the order would show the nature of evidence adduced by the prosecution.
The same is as under :  "9.
PW-1 Gulab Rai Asstt.
Manager, UCO Bank was examined but deferred.
He was not produced for cross-examination.
In consequence, thereby his deposition cannot be looked into and relied upon.
PW-2 is Suresh Kumar Mittal, Asstt.
Manager, UCO Bank did not utter anything incriminating against the accused regarding the theft or recovery of article vide seizure memo mark A Thus, his deposition is also of hardly any relevance to establish the prosecution case.
10.
PW-3 was examined by the Prosecution.
His examination was deferred since case property was not produced by Mal Khana; he was thereafter not examined.
Thus, his disposition also cannot be looked into or relied upon".
6.
A reading of the aforesaid paras makes it clear that one of the witnesses states nothing against the petitioner and the other two witnesses did not turn up for cross-examination and thus the deposition cannot be relied upon.
A bare reading of the judgment makes it clear that it is a case of clean acquittal and not of a benefit of doubt.
The question of acquittal on benefit of doubt would only arise if there are two views possible on the basis of the evidence available and after analysis of the evidence the Court gives the benefit of doubt in view of the two views possible.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgment in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1622.
Relevant paragraphs 162 and 163 are reproduced as under :  "162.
We then pass on to another important point which seems to have been completely missed by the High Court.
It is well settled that where on the evidence two possibilities are available or open, one which goes in favour of the prosecution and the other which benefits an accused, the accused is undoubtedly entitled to the benefit of doubt.
In Kali Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (1973) 2 SCC 808 (AIR 1973 SC 2773 at P. 2782), this Court made the following observations :  "Another golden thread which runs through the web of the administration of justice in criminal cases is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view which is favourable to the accused should be adopted.
The principle has a special relevance in cases wherein the guilt of the accused is sought to be established by circumstantial evidence."
163.
We now come to the mode and manner of proof of cases of murder by administration of poison.
In Ramgopal's case (AIR 1972 SC 656) (supra) this Court held thus (at p. 659) :  "Three questions arise in such cases, namely (firstly), did the deceased die of the poison in question ?
(secondly), had the accused the poison in question in his possession ?
and (thirdly), had the accused an opportunity administer the poison in question to the deceased ?
It is only when the motive is there and these facts are all proved that the Court may be able to draw the inference, that the poison was administered by the accused to the deceased resulting in his death."
8.
In view of this judgment where the expression benefit of doubt has been analysed, the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the ratio of the said judgment.
9.
The consequence of the aforesaid is that the petitioner should be treated as having got a clean acquittal from the criminal court and all consequences of the same insofar as terms of services are concerned shall follow.
10.
The petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.