Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Bijender Kumar has approached this Court through petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing order dated March 4, 1993 vide which the services of the petitioner have been terminated.
A further claim has been made to issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to regularise his services in accordance with policy letter dated March 29, 1991.
Order dated March 4, 1993 has been appended as Annexure P-5 with the petition whereas policy dated March 29, 1991 under which the petitioner claims regularisation of his services, has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the petition.
2.
In brief, the facts are that the petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste category.
He claims brilliance in academics in his educational career.
After passing the degree of B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) from the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, his name was sponsored from the Employment Exchange for the post of Sub Divisional Officer in Panchayati Raj.
A High Powered Committee interviewed the various candidates for the aforesaid post.
Ultimately, two candidates came to be selected.
One of them was the petitioner.
Vide order dated June 20, 1988, the petitioner was appointed as Sub-Divisional Officer, Panchayati Raj.
A copy of the aforesaid appointment letter dated June 20, 1988 has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the petition.
3.
The State Government of Haryana issued instructions dated March 29, 1991 to regularise the services of those Class-II employees who were working on ad-hoc basis.
It was stipulated in the aforesaid policy letter that the employees who had completed two years' service as on December 31, 1990 and were in service on the aforesaid date and who had been recruited from the Employment Exchange or directly appointed by the Appointing Authority after obtaining the non-availability certificate from the Employment Exchange or appointed through approved procedure and whose work and conduct was of over- all good category and where no disciplinary proceedings were pending against them, then the aforesaid candidates were entitled to the regularisation.
It was further required that such employees should possess the requisite qualifications while working on ad-hoc basis.
In fact, the policy further laid down that keeping in view the impact of regularisation of Class-II ad-hoc employees, the number of available vacancies in the department may undergo a change and affect the requisition already sent to Haryana Public Service Commission for advertisement and, therefore, it was desired that in a case where the vacancies had not yet been advertised, then the requisition sent to Haryana Public Service Commission was to be withdrawn and a fresh requisition after recalculation of the vacancies, was required to be sent to Haryana Public Service Commission.
4.
The petitioner claims that he fulfills the requisite qualifications of the aforesaid policy decision, Annexure P-2 and as such as entitled to the regularisation of his services.
5.
The petitioner was expecting regularisation of his services under the aforesaid policy instructions.
On the contrary, what he got from the Government was termination order dated March 4, 1993 which was received by him on March 10, 1993.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated March 4, 1993 is appended as Annexure P-5 with his petition.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid termination order, Annexure P-5 and has also made a claim that, in fact, rather than termination, he was entitled to regularisation of his services under the policy instructions, Annexure P-2.
6.
Upon notice of the writ petition, respondents have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
7.
The main stand taken by the respondents to contest the claim of the petitioner is contained in para 8 of the written statement as follows :-  "That in reply to this para, it is submitted that on a reference from Haryana Public Service Commission, it was intimated to them that recommendation against the post meant for scheduled caste category may not be sent as one ad-hoc Sub Divisional Officer belonging to this category is working against the direct quota post who had then completed two years service at his credit.
This intimation was sent with the intention not to fill up the post through direct recruitment and to consider the case of the petitioner for his regularisation.
At the same time reports were received of serious omission and commission against the petitioner and the charges were prima facie substantiated against him and it was contemplated to take disciplinary action against him, but as he was working purely on ad-hoc basis and was not covered under the service rules, therefore, disciplinary action could not be taken against him.
Therefore, his services were terminated as he did not fulfil the conditions of regularisation."
8.
I have heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, Shri RK Malik and learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, appearing for the respondents and with their assistance, have also gone through the record.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner Shri RK Malik submits that in fact order, Annexure P-5 was not an order simplicitor of termination but was passed by the respondents by way of punishment.
He further submits that from the stand taken by the respondents in the written statement, it is apparent that the aforesaid order had been passed because of alleged misconduct committed by the petitioner inasmuch as the case of the respondents in the written statement is that the petitioner had allegedly committed "serious omissions and commissions".
Shri Malik further maintains that since order, Annexure P-5 has been passed by the respondents by way of punishment, it was mandatory for the respondents to have issued show cause notice to the petitioner and also take disciplinary proceedings as envisaged under the rules before initiating any action against him on the aforesaid alleged misconduct.
It is further pointed out by Shri Malik that in the order, Annexure P-5, it has been mentioned that the appointment of the petitioner was against direct quota post which had not been agreed to by Haryana Public Service Commission.
According to Shri Malik, even the said fact was totally against the record and against the policy, Annexure P-2 inasmuch as it was clearly stipulated in the policy that such posts as were filled up by regular employees working on adhoc basis and who fulfilled the conditions laid down therein were to continue and the requisition sent to Haryana Public Service Commission was to be withdrawn and after recalculation of the vacancies, a fresh requisition was to be sent.
10.
On the other hand, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the respondents, submits that no fault can be found with order, Annexure P-5.
Shri Sehrawat maintains that, in fact, the petitioner was merely working on ad-hoc basis and had no vested right to continue in the post.
According to him under the policy, it was required that the persons should have over-all good category with regard to work and conduct and no disciplinary proceedings should be pending against him.
As per Shri Sehrawat, once it was found that the petitioner was guilty of "serious omissions and commissions", then it would be taken that he was not eligible for the post under the policy.
11.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and I am of the view that the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
12.
As per the case put forth by the respondents, the services of the petitioner have been terminated because some `omissions and commissions' were found against the petitioner by the respondents.
As a matter of fact, no details of the aforesaid `omissions and commissions' have been given in the written statement.
The plea raised by the respondents is absolutely vague.
Although order, Annexure P-5 is totally silent with regard to this aspect of the matter, yet the aforesaid order, Annexure P-5 has to be read in conjunction with the defence taken by the respondents in the written statement.
As a matter of fact, the Court itself is even entitled to lift veil to find out the real attending circumstances which have resulted in passing of an order against an employee in a given case.
However, in the present case, such a situation has naturally not arisen since the respondents have been candid enough to admit themselves the real reason for passing the order, Annexure P-5.
13.
The admitted case of the parties is that no show cause notice or opportunity of hearing was ever provided to the petitioner before passing order, Annexure P-5.
Obviously, the principles of natural justice have been given a complete go-by particularly when the real reason for passing the order, Annexure P-5 is something different rather than the order of termination simplicitor.
The respondents cannot take shelter of the petitioner being an ad-hoc or temporary employee.
In fact, the Supreme Court in the case of AP State Fed.
of Co-op.
Spinning Mills and another v. PV Swaminathan, 2001(3) SCT 128 (SC) : 2001(2) Recent Service Judgments 247 has held as follows :-  "The legal position is fairly well settled that an order of termination of a temporary employee or probationer or even at tenure employee, simplicitor without casting any stigma may not be interfered with by Court.
But the Court is not debarred from looking to the attendant circumstances, namely, the circumstances prior to the issuance of order of termination to find out whether the alleged inefficiency really was the motive for the order of termination or formed the foundation for the same order.
If the Court comes to a conclusion that the order was, in fact, the motive, then obviously the order would not be interfered with, but if the Court comes to a conclusion that the so-called inefficiency was the real foundation for passing of order of termination, then obviously such an order would be held to be penal in nature and must be interfered with since the appropriate procedure has not been followed.
The decision of this Court relied upon by Mr. K Ram Kumar also stipulates that if an allegation of arbitrariness is made in assailing an order of termination, it will be open for the employer to indicate how and what was the motive of passing of the order of termination, and it is in that sense in the counter-affidavit.
It can be indicated that the unsuitability of the person was the reason for which the employer acted in accordance with the terms of employment and it never wanted to punish the employee.
But on examining the assertions made in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the counter- affidavit, in the present case it would be difficult for us to hold that in the case in hand, the employer appellant really terminated the services in accordance with the terms of the employment and not by way of imposing the penalty in question."
14.
Faced with this difficulty, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has relied upon judgments in the case of Madhya Pradesh Hasta Shilpa Vikas Nigam Limited v. Devendra Kumar Jain and others, 1995(1) SCT 784 (SC) : 1995(1) SC Service Law Judgments 122 and State of UP and another v. Ram Krishna and another, 1999(4) SCT 267 (SC) : JT 1999(6) SC 391.
I have gone through the said two judgments.
In my considered view, the aforesaid judgments have no application to the facts of the present case.
15.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, I find that the termination order, Annexure P-5 cannot be legally sustained and the same deserves to be set aside.
As regards the claim of the petitioner with regard to regularisation of his services, petitioner's stand is that he is covered under the policy, Annexure P-2 and, therefore, his services are to be regularised in terms thereof.
16.
Consequently, the present writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P-5 is hereby set aside.
Respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner under the policy, Annexure P-2.
If the claim of the petitioner is found to be covered under the aforesaid policy, then his services would also be ordered to be regularised.
On setting aside of the termination order, the petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits including continuity of service and his salary for the aforesaid period.
Respondents are further directed to implement this order within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.