Amitava Lal, J - On 1841960, the petitioner was appointed as Physical Instructor in Hooghly Girls' High School temporarily.
The petitioner's service was confirmed on 891961 as an Assistant Teacher.
On 951977, the petitioner applied for extraordinary leave without pay for two years with effect from 471977.
The school authority granted leave with full pay by treating the same as extraordinary leave for a period of one year from 3171977 to 3071978 and the same was also extended for another one year from such date the same was without pay.
On 1.9.1977 another incumbent was given appointment in stead and place of the petitioner in leave vacancy.
Two show cause notices were issued upon the petitioner which were replied by the petitioner on 1241979.
On 491979, the school authority terminated the service of the petitioner with effect from 3171978.
Twice the writ jurisdiction of this court was invoked earlier for not hearing an appeal and on two occasions, i.e., on 161984 and 1991991, the Appeal Committee heard the matter and rejected the contention of the petitioner.
Challenging such rejection rather the last rejection dated 1941991 confirming the earlier rejection of the Appeal Court dated 161984 writ jurisdiction of this Court was invoked.
2.
The fact remains that the petitioner's husband was transferred to United Kingdom on the basis of the Government direction when she had to go there with her two children aged about 6 years and 2 years.
She was not in a position to live (in) India leaving her husband alone in United Kingdom when she lost her parents within a period of three months.
However, ultimately she left India along with her husband and children on 471977.
But due to her ill-heath she was also not in a position to come back in India and join her services.
Although it appears from the reply of the petitioner that she proposed to come back to the country by July, 1980 but it appears that she actually came back in India on 1541981 along with her family as it was recorded in the impugned order as July, 1981.
In any event, there is no such factual dispute in this regard.
3.
It appears from the First Appeal Committee report that the total period of extraordinary leave was little less that four years to which the Managing Committee was not inclined to grant.
After obtaining the approval of the Board, the Managing Committee decided to terminate her service.
From the documents and from the facts and circumstance of the case it appears that though from the very beginning the petitioner prayed for leave on the ground of illness and also prayed for extension on the ground of illness but the main reason for the prayer for leave was that her husband was transferred to United Kingdom and she accompanied him.
She came back in India only when her husband came back.
The school authority cannot possibly grant her leave for such a long period in the interest of the school.
There is, therefore, nothing to interfere with the decision of the school authority.
4.
From the subsequent order of the Appeal Committee it transpired that the Managing Committee took into consideration of the Medical Certificate and decided not to grant extension of leave.
Her service was terminated while she was in United Kingdom.
She came back in India sometime in July, 1981 (the period is wrong as per the petitioner) when her husband came back.
The case of the respondent (school) is that she was away from India to accompany her husband and she came back when her husband came back.
This story appears to be true.
Proper procedure was followed by the respondent (school) before terminating the service of the petitioner.
The approval of the Board as required under rules before initiating Disciplinary Proceeding and before terminating the service were obtained.
Ultimately, the appeal was dismissed.
5.
Mr. Tarun Kumar Ghosh-II, learned counsel appearing in support of the petitioner fairly contend before this Court that in spite of having opportunity no affidavit has been filed by the respondent nor they have appeared at any point of time to contest this matter.
As a result whereof, in the earlier occasion the Court was pleased to direct the petitioner to serve further notice and file affidavit-on-service which is ready and such affidavit-of-service has been produced before this Court when the matter is taken up for hearing but even then nobody appears to represent the case on behalf of the respondents.
From the said affidavit-on-service, it appears that when the matter will appear in the list and when will be taken up by this Court today itself, leave is granted to the learned Counsel for the petitioner to file the same in course of tomorrow (19.1.2001) which subsequently (was) filed by the petitioner.
In this connection the learned counsel for the petitioner is called upon to place his case.
6.
The matter is an old one pending from 1992.
Therefore, no further opportunity should be given unnecessarily to delay the case.
In turn, the learned Counsel for the petitioner made so many annexures to the writ petition wherefrom I find that although the termination was effected from 3171978 but the petitioner was directed to join the school or before 3091978.
Therefore, technically, such termination is not existable at all  7.
Be that as it may, I do not find any record from which I can construe that all the requirements made under Rule 28(8) of the Management Rules have been followed although in the Appeal Committee report it was recorded that the same has been followed.
8.
Rule 28(8) of the Management Rules, 1963 is very categorical in respect of determining the issue from the very inception.
I do not find any record as to the enquiry proceeding arising out of a reply to the show cause dated 1241979.
It appears that the order of termination was passed by the Secretary of the Managing Committee abruptly and also in hasty manner without drawing up the formal proceeding as provided under the Rules against the petitioner.
Neither there is any Disciplinary Proceeding nor there is an Enquiry Officer appointed for the purpose of holding the Disciplinary Proceeding against the petitioner.
It also appears that the authority concerned by hook or by crook wanted to terminate the service of the petitioner even without following the Rules for drawing up the formal proceeding followed by a regular Disciplinary Proceeding as against the petitioner.
Mere recording of such submission in the order of the Appeal Committee will not serve the purpose because all stages following of Rule 28 of the Management Rules, 1963 is categorical from the very inception to show the bona fide and fair play.
It is also required that the reference in the respect should be given in all the correspondences and in the order of the Appeal Committee in respect of passing or approving of such order of termination.
Therefore, the stand on the part of the school authority is improper.
9.
Moreover, the petitioner as delinquent must know the charges and she should be given an opportunity to prove her case in the Disciplinary Proceeding which is the out-come of a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court reported in 1997(2) CLJ 497 (Sujit Das v. West Board of Secondary Education).
Therefore, following such principle I am of the view that the order of the Appeal Committee in approving the termination of the petitioner cannot be sustainable at all.
As a consequential effect, the entire proceedings being Annexures 'G' and `K' stand set aside.
However, the original age of superannuation of the petitioner expired on 31121995.
Since the petitioner has not rendered any service in the school, the principle of no work no pay will be applicable but this will not anyhow prevent the petitioner in getting her all benefits treating such period under notional service.
Accordingly, I direct the authority concerned to give her incremental benefits with effect from 3171978, the leave salary benefit within a period of two weeks from the date of communication of this order and forward all Provident Fund, Gratuity and Pension papers within such period to the authority for such purpose within two weeks thereafter and in such case, the authority will finalise the benefit so that the petitioner can, actually, start getting such benefit within two weeks thereafter.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned counsel for the petitioner within 7 days from the date of submitting the requisites.
Orders accordingly.