RL Anand, J - This is an appeal filed by the State of Punjab and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1121999 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Faridkot, who dismissed the first appeal of the State of Punjab as well as the cross-objections of the plaintiff-respondent.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that plaintiff Shri Ram Pal filed a suit against the State seeking mandatory injunction to the effect that the defendants be directed to include and count the service of the plaintiff w.e.f.
1991963 to 551975 rendered by him in the National Defence Scheme (for short the `NDS') towards the benefit of seniority, increments, pension and gratuity and directions be further given to the defendants to release all these benefits to the plaintiff along with interest.
3.
The case set up by the plaintiff in the trial Court was that he was serving as P.T.I.
and was posted in Government High School, Jalaleana.
He entered in this service through proper channel by making an application so as to take up this job.
Earlier he was working as NDS under the Union of India from 1991963 to 551975.
There was no gap between the service of Union of India and PTI in Punjab Government.
When the plaintiff was working as NDS, he was working in the State of Punjab in a School under the control of the Government of Punjab and therefore, the nature of his job remained the same.
The only difference which arose after the change in service was about the supervisory charge.
The plaintiff made several representations and requested the defendants to count him service from 1991963 to 551975 towards increments, seniority, pension and gratuity but to no effect.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendants.
Joint written statement was filed on behalf of the defendants who contested the claim of the plaintiff taking preliminary objections that the suit of the plaintiff was not legally maintainable; that the plaintiff did not serve any legal notice under Section 80 CPC; that no cause of action arose to the plaintiff because he had resigned from the previous post as NDS and joined the PTI service afresh under the Government of Punjab and, therefore, he was not entitled to the benefit of the service under Rule 317, Volume-II of C.S.R.
On merits, the stand of the respondents was that the plaintiff acted as NDS and he resigned from that post.
His resignation was accepted by the Union of India vide letter dated 17111975.
The case of the plaintiff was forwarded by the Union of India for his appointment as PTI under Punjab Government by making it clear that in the event of his selection he will have to resign from the post of NDS.
The plaintiff resigned from his previous job and assumed the new charge with the State of Punjab.
There was no channel for shifting from the post of NDS to the post of PTI as the former was under the control of Union of India and the latter was under the control of the State of Punjab.
In these circumstances, the continuity of service was not possible.
In both the services the appointing and supervisory authorities were different.
Rule 317(A)(v) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II is applicable to the Punjab Government employees who had rendered the services under the State of Punjab after taking proper permission for resignation from the previous post.
In the present case, the plaintiff had rendered his previous service with the Central Government and not with the State Government, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of his previous service.
From the above pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the services rendered by the plaintiff from 1991963 to 551975 as NDS are entitled to be counted for the purpose of seniority, increments and other appurtenant benefits ?
OPP" 2.
Whether no legal notice under Section 80 CPC was served upon the defendant before institution of the suit ?
if so, effects thereof ?
OPD.
3.
Whether plaintiff lacks cause of action to file the present suit ?
OPD.
4.
Relief.
The parties led evidence and on the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court gave a finding on issue No. 1 favour of the plaintiff by partly decided this issue in his favour and it was declared that the plaintiff was entitled to count his previous service for the purpose of pensionary benefits, but he was not entitled it increments and seniority.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendants.
Lastly, the suit of the plaintiff was partly decreed and the declaration was granted in his favour that he was entitled to all the benefits of his previous service for the purpose of qualifying service and this qualifying service entitled hin to get the pensionary benefits.
Not satisfied with the findings of the trial Court, the State of Punjab and the plaintiff filed an appeal and the cross-objections vide impugned judgment and decree dated 1121999.
The State of Punjab not satisfied with the decision the first Appellate Court has filed the present Regular Second Appeal.
Hence this appeal.
4.
The notice of the appeal was given to the opposite party.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants submitted that the plaintiff-respondent cannot take the benefit of his previous service in view of Rue 317(a)(v) which lays down as follows :  "Service preceding resignation except where such resignation is allowed to be withdrawn in public interest by the appointment authority as provided in the relevant rules or where such resignation has been submitted to take up, with proper permission, another appointment whether temporary or permanent under the Government where service qualifies for pension."
The counsel further submitted that it is the case of the plaintiff-respondent that earlier he was an employee of the Central Government and was working as NDS.
He submitted his resignation.
His application was forwarded to the Government of Punjab with a clear stipulation of the Union of India that in the event of the selection of the plaintiff-respondent in (sic) the year 1975.
He is not qualified for the purpose of pension and, therefore, the decision of the Courts below is illegal.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that, in fact, it is a case of transfer.
When the respondent was serving in the Union of India, virtually he was serving the State of Punjab.
This scheme was being run by the Government of India but under the control of the State of Punjab.
Later on this Scheme was transferred to the State of Punjab, as a result of which fresh applications were invited.
The plaintiff applied for the post of PTI.
He was serving in the State of Punjab.
This amounts to transfer and, therefore, he can get the benefit of his previous service.
7.
I have considered the case of the parties.
The undisputed facts are that the plaintiff-respondent was working as NDS under the Central Government and he made an application for joining service under the State of Punjab as PTI and his application was sent to the Government of Punjab by the Union of India.
At the time of sending the application by the Government of India it was clearly stipulated that in case the plaintiff is selected in Punjab, he shall have to resign from his previous service.
The plaintiff was selected.
He gave his resignation which was accepted w.e.f.
651975 to enable him to join the service as PTI and the plaintiff also joined the post on the same day without any break.
Rule 317 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume.
II lays down as under :-  "If an employee was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of :- (i).........x.........xxx........xx (ii)........xx........xxx........xxx.... (iii)........xx........xxx.......xxx....
There is a Note under Rule 317 which is important for our purposes and it lays down as follows :-  "In case of a Central Government employee who is permanently transferred to the Punjab Government and becomes subject to these rules, under rule 1.1.
(b) of these rules, the term "continuous temporary/officiating service" shall include such service rendered under Central Government."
Now it is to be seen whether the case of the plaintiff-respondent is a case of transfer or it is a case of fresh appointment.
This case can be examined from two angles and if examined from these angles, I have no doubt in my mind that the appellants have no case.
It is the admitted case of the parties that earlier the plaintiff was serving as NDS but the benefit of his service was being taken by the State of Punjab, though his control was with the Union of India.
The scheme was amended and later was transferred to the State Govt. With this background, the applications were invited by the State Government even from the employees earlier working under this Scheme.
In pursuance of that, the plaintiff applied that he is ready to serve as PTI by way of transfer.
Since his application was to be forwarded from the Central Government, therefore, it was forwarded that (with ?)
the condition that in the event of the selection of the plaintiff with the State Government, he will have to resign.
In these circumstances, I hold that virtually it was a case of transfer.
Be that as it may, that it was not a case of transfer, still I am of the opinion that the case of the plaintiff-respondent is covered under Rule 317(A)(v) which lays down as follows :  Subject to the provisions of rule 423 and other rules and except in the case mentioned below, all service rendered on establishment, interrupted or continuous, shall count as qualifying service : (i).....xx......xx......xxx (ii).......xx.....xx......xx.....xx (iii).......xx.....xx.....xxxx (iv).....xx.....xxx......xxx....xx (v) Service preceding resignation except where such resignation is allowed to be withdrawn in public interest by the appointing authority as provided in the relevant rules or where such resignation has been submitted to take up, with proper permission, another appointment whether temporary or permanent under the Government where service qualifies for pension."
Further, the reading of the above would show that the plaintiff-respondent will be entitle to the benefit of his past service prior to his submitting resignation with the Central Government.
In other words, the plaintiff's past service from 1991963 to 551975 will be considered as qualifying service and the plaintiff is eligible to take the benefit of the past service towards pension.
8.
The counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has also supported his case by citing a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court reported as State of Punjab v. Hem Raj Mittal, 1992(2) SCT 116.
In this case the employee was working in Education Department.
He submitted his resignation only for the purpose of joining an appointment under the Government.
It was observed that the employee had resigned to take up another appointment under the Government with its permission and the period of service preceding the resignation has to be counted as qualifying service for the purpose of determination of his pension.
Reliance has also been placed upon Balwant Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(1) Recent Service Judgments 515 : 2000(1) SCT 862 (P&H).
It has further been clarified by the Government of India itself in the letter dated 29th June, 2001 and it was stated by the Government of India "that NFC scheme was ceased in 1972 and all the employees attached to then scheme were transferred to the State Government where they were permanently absorbed.
As per terms and conditions of the transfer of staff from NFC to State Government, the service rendered in NFC period will count for retirement benefit of NFC personnel.
In view of this, Shri Rajinder Singh is entitled for the pensionary benefits on account of service rendered in NFC organisation.
It was further stated by the Government of India that the objections raised by the Assistant Programme Adviser, NSS Regional Central, in its letter dated 6.2.1989 are incorrect and invalid.
In view of the clear stand taken by the Government of India in the case of Shri Rajinder Singh, the plaintiff - respondent Shri Ram Pal is entitled to the benefit of his past service which he rendered as NDS from 1991963 to 551975.
Thus, I do not find any illegality or error of jurisdiction in the judgment of the first Appellate Court.
The appeal of the State is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.