Amitava Lala, J - This is a writ petition challenging the impugned order, passed by the concerned District Inspector of Schools (SE) Purulia, under Memo No. 63(3)/Law dated 229999.
Under the impugned order the following grounds are taken for the purpose of refusal of approval of the panel as follows :  "(1) That the Selection Committee framed for the purpose was not represented by the Administrator as well as not by the Teachers' Representative by the provisions of recruitment Rules contemplate the presence of all 5 (five) members of the Selection Committee.
(2) Even the observer as appointed by the Hon'ble High Court, Calcutta under whose supervision the interview ought to be held has not attended the meeting of the Selection Committee.
(3) Without showing the reasonable ground or obtaining prior permissions from the contempt authority the venue of interview was shifted from the premises of the school.
(4) The Staff Council has not sent its nominee to represent the Selection Committee which is one of the conditions as contemplated in the recruitment Rules.
(5) There was apprehension of breach of peace on the date of interview and there was least possibility to hold the interview in a peaceful and congenial atmosphere.
(6) The Subject Expert, being one Headmaster who represented the Selection Committee, the school of which belongs to another Block and Police Station and as per condition the employer, being the Managing Committee will have to spare him to attend the interview as subject expert.
There is no such certificate from the Secretary sparing to act as expert to him, being backed by the resolution of the Managing Committee and thereby tantamount to unauthorised representation in the Selection Committee.
(7) There is no resolution of the Administrator forming a panel of 3 (three) subject experts for which it is not possible to ascertain whether there were other 2 (two) Headmasters in the panel from the same Block and Police Station of Baghmundih who were proposed to act as subject expert.
(8) As per provision of the Recruitment Rules, the panel in question has not been accepted by the Administrator through resolution."
The writ petitioner has been supported by the ex-Headmaster who was the Headmaster at the relevant point of time.
On the other hand, the writ petitioner was opposed by the teacher-in-charge and the Secretary of the present Managing Committee being respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
No State- respondents has been shown any interest whatsoever in respect of this writ petition.
2.
It appears to me from the record that several names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange including the name of the petitioner herein following the process of selection.
The selection was held.
The petitioner was selected by the Selection Committee.
It is alleged by the petitioner that pursuant to the notice the other candidates were present but did not take part in the interview for the reasons best known to them.
Under such circumstances, there cannot be any embargo of preparing, sending or approving his name alone.
3.
I being the judge of the writ court cannot analyse the factual controversy in the manner as proposed regarding selection process.
But I want to analyse the legal position in this respect on the basis of the judgments cited before this Court.
4.
In 1987(2) C.L.J.
144, District Inspector of Schools (SE), Murshidabad v. Samsul Huda and others, it was held that there may occasions when one or two of the members of the Selection Committee, for the reason or other, despite notice being served on such members may fail to appear on the date of interview, but simply on such score of absence of such members the interview, if taken by 50% or more members of the Selection Committee, should not be held invalid.
This is the true spirit of the Rule 4 of the Management of Recognised non-Govt. Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969.
In the instant case, admittedly, three members out of five members of the Selection Committee being expert, Headmaster and the Panchayat nominee were present.
Therefore, it cannot be held by the following the ratio of Division Bench Judgment that the Selection Committee did not form properly.
5.
So far as the other part is concerned in respect of `one man panel' tow judgments were cited before this court.
One is a Single Bench Judgment reported in 1995(4) SCT 236 (Calcutta) : 1995(2) C.L.J.
308, Smt. Tandra Mondal v. State of West Bengal and others wherein it was held that the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange were called for interview but only two had chosen to appear for interview and out of two, one withdrew during the process of selection.
There were nothing left to be done by the Selection Committee but to prepare a panel consisting of only candidate who has obtained minimum qualifying marks.
There is no reason to reject the `one man panel' on the ground that more candidates were not available.
6.
The Division Bench of this Court under an unreported judgment and order in Mat 2736/98 (Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) Sought 24-Pgs.
v. Debasis Kabir and others) dated 14th September, 1998 considered at length the question of preparation of a `one man panel'.
It was held therein that as per rule 6(j) of the Recruitment Rules, 1995 if the same do suggest or prescribe that for very selection the minimum member of candidates has to be three, there cannot be any doubt that any selection process where numbers of the candidates is actually less than three gets vitiated being contrary to the rules.
It was further held that on an perusal of all the rules it appears that there is neither any prescription nor any requirement, much less a binding obligation that in every selection process the minimum member of the candidate is required to be three or more.
In any event, after the observation as made by the Division Bench which has a binding effect, there is hardly any scope of the Single Bench to reopen the issue although under the rule 6(j) the word `shall' was incorporated for the purpose of preparation of submission of the Managing Committee.
Such word `shall' if read in consonance with the judgment of the Division Bench will have to be construed as made.
7.
Under such circumstances, I do not find any reason to deviate from the observation of the Division Bench of this court as to why the `one man panel' should not be sent or approved.
In the circumstances of the case, I am only concerned in respect of the impugned order passed by the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE), Purulia.
8.
It is contended by Mr. Dutta, learned Advocate for the then Headmaster of the institution, that in respect of all the points as taken by the Dist.
Inspector of Schools, that the Selection Committee was called upon by the Administrator himself.
Therefore, if he was not present in the interview there cannot be said to be any laches unless the Managing Committee was formed.
It is the duty of the Administrator to forward the name of the selected candidates to the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools for the purpose of approval.
9.
So far as the other parts are concerned, according to Mr. Dutta, that facts are based on surmises and conjecture and more so in some of the parts it is to be treated as perversed finding.
He particularly emphasised in respect of Rule 5(M) of the Recruitment Rules by saying that the observation of the Dist.
Inspector of Schools is totally de hors of the rules itself.
Under such circumstances if the finding of the Dist.
Inspector of Schools is treated to be an appropriate finding then it will be hit the principle of natural justice.
So far as the natural justice part is concerned, I do not think there is any objection even on the part of the respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
In fact, they have applied for vacating the interim order in the earlier occasion giving much more emphasise on the materials of this application.
10.
Therefore, considering all pros and cons I am of the view that the impugned order being Memo No. 63(3)/Law dated 29999 cannot be sustained and the same is accordingly set aside.
11.
Therefore, the Director of School Education, West Bengal is directed to consider the issue in the light of the judgment and order passed by this Court specifically in respect of (a) whether all the candidates were called for interview; and (b) whether procedure for holding interview was followed or not.
If the authority concerned finds that as per the Recruitment Rules and in the light of the judgment and order passed by this Court including the principles followed therein, there cannot be any embargo upon him either to approve or send to the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools, Purulia to approve the panel he will be able to do so irrespective giving reasoned order as prescribed herein.
12.
However, all the points as formulated above are kept open for the authority concerned to be decided upon giving fullest opportunity of hearing to all the parties and by passing a reasoned order within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
13.
The writ petition and the application for vacating the interim order being CAN No. 7711 of 2000 are disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.