SB Sinha, J - This appeal involves a short question as to whether the petitioners who are Stenographers working in Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA for short) are entitled to the third stage increment as is being paid to Schedule `A' Stenographers of the State of West Bengal.
2.
The fact of the matter lies in a narrow compass.
The petitioners filed a writ application before this Court praying for similar benefit granted to the Schedule `A' Stenographers of the State of West Bengal on the ground that they are similarly situated.
3.
A learned Single Judge of this Court directed the matter to be considered afresh by the respondent.
As against the said order, this appeal had been preferred.
During pendency of the appeal, the Review Committee constituted by the State of West Bengal submitted a report.
A Division Bench of this Court without giving an opportunity to the appellant to raise objection thereto passed an order in terms of the said report.
A Special Leave Application was filed by the appellant herein and the Apex Court in terms of an order dated 24th July, 1998 passed in Civil Appeal No. 3473 of 1993 directed the matter to be heard by the Division Bench on the ground that the report of the Review Committee had been accepted without serving copy thereof upon the appellant herein and without giving an opportunity to file an objection thereto.
4.
Pursuant to the said order the matter was heard afresh by this Court.
The petitioners herein have filed a supplementary affidavit, inter alia, questioning the correctness of the said report.
5.
In CMDA there were four grades of Stenographers, viz. A, B, C and D following the pattern of grading prevalent in the State of West Bengal for the Schedule `A' Stenographers working in the Secretariat.
6.
For all intent and purport, Stenographers of CMDA were directed to be treated equal to Schedule `A' Stenographers of State of West Bengal.
In CMDA, the posts of Grade `D' Stenographers were abolished following redistribution of Schedule `A' Personal Assistants of the State Government in Three Grades, A, B and C in the ratio of 4 : 3 : 3.
7.
By a letter date 11th July, 1988, the Deputy Secretary of establishment, CMDA wrote a letter to the Secretary, MD Department, Government of West Bengal proposing that the benefits available to Schedule `A' Stenographers may be extended to the Stenographers of CMDA  8.
By another letter dated 28111988, however, the said request was turned down.
The CMDA by a letter dated 6.7.1989 stated :-  "I am directed to refer to you letter No. 5238-MD/E-39/80 dated 28111988 on the above subject and to say that the Stenographers of CMDA had been enjoying the same benefits as enjoyed by the Schedule `A' Stenographers under Secretariat Department prior to the enlargement of their promotion prospects as made in the Finance Deptt.
Memo No. 12065-F dated 7111987, except in the matter of promotion.
Like the Schedule `A' Stenographers under Secretariat Department, the Stenographers of CMDA were also (and are still) divided into 4 grades, viz., `A', `B', `C' and `D', borne on the same pay scales and with same higher initial start for grades `B' and `C'.
The only differences between the Secretariat Stenographers and the Stenographers of CMDA was that the Stenographers of Grade `C' and Grade `B' in CMDA were (and are still) required to complete the prescribed period of service to acquire eligibility for promotion to the next higher grades whereas there was no such restriction in the case of the Secretariat Stenographers of Grade `C' and Grade `B', promotion being given to them in order of seniority depending on the availability of vacancies.
Accordingly while proposing, in para 3 of this office letter No. 1115/CMDA/2A-2/80 dated 1171988, extension of the same benefits to the Stenographers of CMDA along with the pay fixation benefits as granted to the Schedule `A' Personal Assistants in the Finance Department Memo No. 12065-F dated 7111987 as partially modified in Finance Department Memo No. 4370-F dated 1641988, it was also proposed in para 4 of this office letter that the minimum number of years to be spent by a Stenographers of Grade `C' and a Stenographers of Grade `B' in their respective Grade in CMDA for acquiring eligibility for promotion to Grade `B' and Grade `A' respectively should be fixed at 4 years like the other categories of staff in CMDA In view of the position stated above, it would not be fair to deny the Stenographers of CMDA the benefits as already granted to the Schedule `A' Stenographers Finance Department Memo No. 12065-F dated 7111987, as partially modified in Finance Department Memo No. 4370-F dated 1641988, on the ground that they belong to an "autonomous body".
I am, therefore, to request you again kindly not to treat the Stenographers of CMDA at par with the Stenographers of other autonomous bodies but to take up the matter with the Finance Department and communicate the approval of the State Government to the proposed extension of benefits to the Stenographers of CMDA as indicated in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of this office letter No. 1115/CMDA/2A-2/80 dated 1171988."
9.
It was stated that such benefit should not be denied to the appellant on the ground that CMDA is an Autonomous Body.
Shri Anish Majumder, Chief Executive Officer, in his letter dated 13th December, 1989 stated :-  "You are aware that the Finance Department has not agreed to extend the benefit of the memo No. 12065-F dated 7111987 to the Stenographers of CMDA on the ground that the said GO is applicable exclusively to Schedule `A' Stenographers under the Secretariat Departments (Vide MD Department's file No. MD/E-39/88).
Being a member of the CMDA yourself, you are aware that CMDA cannot be compared with a public sector undertaking or a Government company, nor is it an elected local body like the Municipal Corporations.
It is merely an arm of the Government which has been set up to discharge some functions which the Government itself could very well discharge, but for certain operational reasons thought it advisable to get done through a statutory authority like CMDA The officers and employees at all levels in CMDA enjoy the same pay scales and benefits as are enjoyed by the State Government employees.
They do not get anything extra.
Therefore, in all fairness they should not get anything less than that the State Government employees get.
The financial implication for CMDA will be quite small compared to our annual expenditure on establishment charges.
Lastly, the foresaid GO No. 12065-F dated 7111987 has been given effect to although the Third Pay Commission had in the meantime been set up for examining the pay structures of State Government employees.
The reform, the fact that the matter relating to pay revision of organisations like CMDA has been referred to the Third Pay Commission may not possibly stand in the way of extending the benefit of the aforesaid GO to the CMDA Stenographers.
I shall be grateful if you would kindly consider the matter and give your clearance to extending the aforesaid GO No. 12065-F dated 7111987 to the CMDA Stenographers."
10.
On 12th July, 1990 the Government allowed implementation of the promotional policy subject to strict adherence to the norms envisaged in the said order which included that there would be a 3 tier system of Grades, namely, A, B and C. The said order was issued with the concurrence of the Finance Department.
The said position was reiterated by the State in its letter dated 19th July, 1990.
11.
In a statement of policy contained in order dated 6th September, 1990 it was, inter alia, directed :-  "In all the aforesaid three grades of Stenographer so redistributed i.e. in each of the scales No. 9 (Rs. 380-910), 13 (Rs. 470-1230/- with higher initial start at Rs. 650/-) and 16 (Rs. 550-1470/-) the holders of the posts shall be given a higher initial start from the third stage of the scales provided that where there is already a provision of higher initial (start) i.e. in Scale No. 13 (Rs. 470-1230/- with higher initial start at Rs. 650/-), the third stage shall be counted after taking the higher initial into account, in other words the higher initial start will be at Rs. 700/- (Seven hundred).
These Stenographers who were enjoying the unrevised scale of Rs. 450-675/- as personal to them and were granted the revised scale of Rs. 425-1050/- with higher initial start at Rs. 490/- w.e.f.
141981 shall also be given the higher initial at the third stage counting from the existing higher initial at Rs. 490/- i.e. the higher initial will be at Rs. 530/- (five hundred thirty).
It has further been decided that for the existing incumbents to the posts of Stenographers i.e. those who were in service on 141981 or any date subsequent to that date and upto 1641988 after fitment in their respective scales as per existing rules, two incremental benefits will be allowed."
However, on or about 1191990 it was directed :-  "According to the accepted norms for promotion of Stenographer in CMDA as had been prevailing prior to the introduction of 3-tier system of grading a Stenographer in Grade `D' had to put in at least 4 years' service to acquire eligibility for promotion to Grade `C'.
Similarly, a Stenographer in Grade`C' acquired eligibility for promotion to Grade `B' after 6 years service in Grade `C' or 10 years service in Grade `C' and Grade `D' taken together.
Again, a Stenographers in Grade `B' acquired eligibility for promotion to Grade `A' after 8 (eight) years' service in Grade `B'.
As, with the abolition of Grade `D' promotion of a Stenographers in Grade `C' to Grade `B' will be his/her first promotion, it has been decided that minimum number of years to be spent by a Stenographer in erstwhile Grade `D' and Grade `C' taken together for acquiring eligibility for promotion to Grade `B' shall be 4 years.
As for the number of years to spent in Grade `B' for acquiring eligibility for promotion to Grade `A' it shall also be 4 years, following the same principle in respect of other categories of staff in CMDA" 12.
It may be noticed that so far as Schedule `A' Stenographers of the State of West Bengal are concerned, they had also been granted the same benefit by a Memorandum dated 7111987 in the following terms:-  "The fitment in the above mentioned higher scales according to the above ratio shall be treated as promotion and the pay of the incumbents on such promotion shall be fixed in terms of the provisions of Rule 11 of WBS (ROPA) Rules, 1980.
The revised grades as per above distribution shall be as follows :- Grades Pay scales Grade `A' Rs. 550-1470/- Grade `B' Rs. 470-1230/- with higher initial start at Rs. 650/- Grade `C' Rs. 380-910/- 13.
In the matter of filling of the posts in the higher grades viz. Rs. 550- 1470/-, Rs. 470-1230/- with higher initial start at Rs. 650/-, selection shall be made strictly on the basis of the rules and order regarding promotion.
14.
Since Schedule `A' posts of Personal Assistants are promotion posts, in all the grades of Schedule `A' P.A.
i.e. in each of the scales No. 9 (Rs. 380-910/-), No. 13 (Rs. 470-1230/-) with higher initial start at Rs. 650/- and No. 16 (Rs. 550-1470/-) the holders of Schedule `A' posts shall be given a higher initial start from the third stage of the scales, provided that where there is already a provision of higher initial start i.e. in scales No. 13 (Rs. 470-1230/- with higher initial start at Rs. 650/-), the third stage shall be counted after taking the higher initial into account, in other words, the higher initial start will be at Rs. 700/- (Rupees seven hundred).
Those Schedule `A' P.As.
who were enjoying the unrevised scale of Rs. 450-675/- as personal to them and were granted the revised scale of Rs. 425-1050/- with higher initial start at Rs. 490/- with effect from 141981 shall also be given the higher initial at the third stage counting from the existing higher initial at Rs. 490/- i.e. the higher initial will be at Rs. 530/- (Rupees five hundred thirty)."
15.
Clause 4 of the said memorandum appears to be a replica of Clause 6 of the memorandum dated 6th September, 1990.
The said order was implemented.
16.
However, despite the said fact the order impugned before this Court dated 13th December, 1990 was issued which is to the following term :  "The question of admissibility of fixation of pay of the Stenographers of CMDA in terms of para 6 of this Authority's Order No. 1583/CMDA/2A-2/80 dated 691990 is being reviewed in consultation with State Finance Department pending further decision in this respect the benefit of pay fixation as envisaged in said para 6 of the order shall not be given effect to and no amount of arrears, if drawn already on that basis be disbursed.
Fresh fixation of pay of the Staff concerned may be made in accordance with the provisions contained in other paras of the said order and payment of salary be made accordingly in the regular monthly pay bills of the staff from the month of December, 1990 onwards and arrears on the basis of such refixation be paid after the same is vetted by the Establishing Wing.
Hd.
Qrs.
CMDA, instructions regarding recovery of money already overdrawn, following the fixation of pay vetted earlier will follow separately."
17.
The contention of the petitioner is that if in the light of two increments payable to the Schedule `A' Stenographers at the rate of Rs. 25/- each (i.e. Rs. 650/- + 25 + 25 = Rs. 700) had been granted there is no reason as to why the third increment would not be granted to them as had been granted to Schedule `A' Stenographers of State of West Bengal.
According to the appellant no reason exist as to why the said benefit would not be extended to the petitioners despite the aforementioned memorandum and, thus, the action on the part of the respondent must be held to be discriminatory and in any event violative of the principles of natural justice.
18.
The reasons purported to have been assigned in passing the impugned order, viz. CMDA is an autonomous body and the matter has been referred to Pay Commission, according to Hr.
Hirak Mita, are wholly unsustainable grounds.
The learned Counsel submits that it was the opinion of the authorities of the CMDA that both the categories of the employees stand on equal footing and, thus, there was absolutely no reason to review the order, wherefor also no provision exists.
It has been pointed out that it may be true that CMDA is an autonomous body but the very fact that all financial sanctions are required to be obtained from the Finance Department of the State clearly go to show the extent of control by the State in the affairs of CMDA  19.
Mr. Mitra would contend that a bare comparison of Clause 6 of the memorandum dated 12.7.1990 with Clause 4 of the memorandum dated 691990 would clearly show that they are identical in nature.
It has been submitted that even other automous departments have been granted third stage increments to their employees as would appear from the holder of the Calcutta Metropolitan Water and Sanitation Authority dated 25th April, 1991.
Our attention has also been drawn to an advertisement being No. 22 of 1990 wherefrom it appears :  "A competitive examination will be held in April, 1991 by the Public Service Commission, West Bengal in Calcutta for recruitment to the post of English Stenographer (Basic Grade) in Schedule `A' and Schedule `B' in the Secretariat and certain other offices under the Government of West Bengal.
The number of vacancies to be filled on the results of the examination will be announced later.
Some of the vacancies to be filled on the results of the examination may be reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and physically handicapped persons.
All appointments will initially be made on a temporary basis pay Rs. 1260-35-1540-45-1630-55-2070-65-2460-75-2610/- plus other allowances as admissible (for Schedule `A' posts, the initial appointment will be made in the third stage of the time scale)."
20.
Mr. Sumit Panja, the learned Counsel led by Mr. Pradip Ghosh, the learned Counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondent submitted that the appellants herein intend to get rid of the restriction on their promotion which had been stated and repeated in all the relevant circulars.
The learned Counsel would contend that these eligibility criteria can neither be abolished nor the promotion policy can be directed to be given a go-bye.
21.
It was submitted that the petitioners and the Schedule `A' Stenographers of the State of West Bengal cannot be said to be equal in view of the following:-  "CMDA has its own Act, Service Regulations and Promotion Policy.
In CMDA there are Grades of Stenographers in Grades `A', `B' and `C' and all are promotional posts.
The feeder post being Grade `C' and tier promotions are given in the ratio of 2 : 3 : 5 for `A', `B' and `C' Grade Stenographers.
22.
In the Government Schedule `A' Stenographers are attached to M.I.C.
of a department, down to the Deputy Secretaries of the Secretariat Departments.
Schedule `B' Stenographers are attached to the Heads of the Directorate and District Magistrate  23.
Schedule `A' and Schedule `B' Stenographers are recruited through Public Service Commission, West Bengal while in CMDA Stenographers are recruited not through P.S.C., CMDA Stenographers are recruited according to recruitment Regulations of CMDA in the basic Grade Post i.e. Grade `C' through Employment Exchange.
24.
In the State Government Offices the appointing authority for Schedule `A' post is the Deputy Secretary, Finance Department, Government of West Bengal and for Schedule `B' posts, Deputy Secretaries of the Departments, Head of the Directorate and Head of Office.
25.
In the State Government, recruitment qualifications are School Final pass/Madhyamik from the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education or its equivalent.
26.
In CMDA essential qualification is Degree in Arts/Science/Commerce.
27.
The learned Counsel contends that in this case neither the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" nor the question of discrimination arises at all.
It has submitted that by reason of the impugned order only a mistake is sought to be rectified and the petitioners having not derived any enforceable right, this writ application was not maintainable.
28.
It is not a case where for the purpose of giving effect to doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" the differences pointed out by the learned Counsel are required to be gone into.
The State of West Bengal has passed an order in favour of the petitioners.
The authorities of the CMDA cannot go thereagainst.
As noticed hereinbefore, Clause 6 of the memorandum which is applicable to the employees of the CMDA is a replica of Clause 4 of the benefit granted to the Schedule `A' Stenographers of the State of West Bengal.
It is also not correct to contend that by claiming the third stage increment, the petitioners have sought to overcome the difficulties as regards the promotion policy adopted by CMDA The fact that they have been promoted as Grade `A' Stenographers is not in dispute.
They could only be so promoted, after they satisfied the requirement of promotion policy, namely, working at least for a period of four years each in Grade `C' and Grade `B' respectively.
Once they had been promoted to Grade `A' and had been granted two increments, there does not appear to be any reason why the third start increment should be denied to them.
29.
Such benefits had been granted only for a limited period.
After the Pay Revision Committee submitted its report, both the Department and the concerned employees would be bound thereby.
The report of the Pay Commission have been placed before us.
It appears that whereas separate ROPA Rules were prepared in respect of the employees of CMDA in the year 1980, the matter relating to fixation of Scale of Pay was referred to the Pay Commission for the next terms.
Pay Commission submitted their reports in 1986.
After 1980 three reports have been submitted by the said Commission.
All the circulars issued by the State Government, therefore, would not be applicable only if the same was inconsistent with and contradictory to the recommendations of the Pay Revision Committee.
30.
In Administrator, UT, Lakshadeep v. Kunnashada Muthukoya, reported in 2000(4) SCT 987 (Kerala) (DB) : 2000 Lab I.C.
1528, a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court held :-  "Classification of posts has nothing to do with the fixation of pay scales.
It only classifies posts into several groups based upon the pay scales already fixed.
Classification and prescription of pay scales for several posts are two different and distinct functions.
This position was amply elaborated by the Apex Court in Union of India v. PV Hariharan, 1997(2) SCT 649 (SC) : 1997(3) SCC 568.
As was observed in the said case, the Pay Commission which goes into the problem at great depth and happens to have a full picture before it, is the proper authority to decide upon the issue and the Tribunal should not interfere such matters, as they are to be considered by the Pay Commission."
31.
We, therefore, allow this appeal and set aside the order passed by the learned Trial Judge.
We direct the concerned authorities to consider the matter afresh in the light of the observations made hereinbefore and in the light of the recommendation of the Pay Commission and/or any other materials which will be brought on record by the parties.
As opportunity of hearing may also be granted to the appellants before arriving at a finding.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.