Amitava Lala, J - The petitioner made this writ petition for the purpose of a direction upon the Chairman, Nadia District Primary Schools Council, to revise the screening result and to include the name of the petitioner as an eligible candidate from OBC (Other Backward Class) category to sit for the written test to be held on 18th July, 1999 or on any adjourned date for preparation of panel of assistant teachers in Primary Schools under District Primary Schools Council, Nadia, and further consequential reliefs in connection thereto.
2.
The petitioner further contended that the Sub-Divisional Officer, Kalyani, Nadia, had issued a certificate in favour of the petitioner to the effect that the petitioner belongs to Goala (Gope) community which is recognised as backward class under the Government of India, Ministry of Welfare Resolution No. 12011/68/93-BCC/(C) dated 10th September, 1993, published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part I Section I dated 13th September, 1993.
3.
It is significant to note that although the petitioner applied for such OBC certificate in the year 1993 but the certificate was actually obtained by him in the year 1995.
4.
The petitioner enrolled his name with the concerned Employment Exchange namely, District Employment Exchange, Kalyani, Nadia, in the year 1976.
Thereafter in the year 1995 the concerned authority renewed the employment exchange card incorporating his OBC candidatnre.
5.
For the purpose of recruitment of assistant teachers in the Primary Schools, District Primary Schools Council, Nadia, started taking steps in the year 1993 but due to order of injunction granted by the Hon'ble High Court at Calcutta the process of recruitment could not be completed.
6.
The petitioner was one of the candidates whose name was sponsored by the concerned Employment Exchange.
Under Memo No. 1575 dated 7th October, 1997, the petitioner was informed accordingly.
By the said memo, the petitioner was also asked to send a duly filled up form which was forwarded to him thereunder.
The petitioner supplied all the particulars on 22nd October, 1997 accordingly which was receipted under Serial No. 963 as per office record of the authority.
7.
Till such time the petitioner has not been favoured with any letter of interview or written test.
8.
On 8th July, 1999, the petitioner got a "special notice" published on behalf of District Primary Schools Council, Nadia, in a vernacular newspaper whereunder he got information about process of recruitment of Primary Teachers of the year 1993 which was injured (injuncted ?)
by an order of the court as already mentioned above.
9.
It is also stated in the notice published in the newspaper that the merit list will be prepared on the following basis :  (a) Educational qualification : 65 marks of every 100 marks obtained in Madhyamik or its equivalent examination; (b) For teachers training examination : 20 marks out of every 100 marks obtained in basic training or its equivalent examination; (c) Extra curricular: A maximum of 5 marks, one mark for every extra curricular activities.
10.
Under the said notice minimum marks for the merit list has been fixed for respective categories of candidates either Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Physically handicapped or Ex-serviceman but there is no special notice of mentioning in respect of minimum marks for the category of OBC which ought to be done by the authority in respect of OBC i.e. Other Backward Classes.
11.
The petitioner contended that he has obtained 415 marks in Higher Secondary Examination.
The petitioner submitted 3 extra curricular certificates.
Had the District Primary School Council, Nadia, fixed minimum marks for OBC candidate, similarly with the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or other specified categories, he would have secured totally 30 marks in the merit list as per notice for the purpose of getting opportunity for sitting in the interview or written test.
He has also stated that he is now 42 years old and the upper age limit for the OBC candidates is fixedat 45 years, therefore, if he misses the chance in the present requisition for the purpose of interview or written test, he may cross his age limit.
12.
He has further emphasised and stated that the respondent authority has not followed the 100-point roster by fixing any minimum marks for the OBC category in the preparation or merit list and as such the petitioner, being an OBC candidate is deprived in getting an opportunity of interview or written test which is a fit case for interference of the writ court in this respect specifically, leaving aside the other points as above.
13.
The respondent has come forward basically with a judgment of a Single Bench of this court in W.P. No. 29853 (W) of 1997 (Tulshi Charan Mondal & another.
v. State of West Bengal & others) wherein the Court held that a provision in respect of other eligible candidates as provided under Clause (e) of sub-rule (viii) of Rule 9 of the 1991 Rules of Recruitment of Primary Teachers does not speak another eligible reserved candidate other than Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Physically handicapped but the general category candidates.
14.
As I have already discussed this part in earlier occasions in several judgments, I reiterate the same and again discuss that the observation of this Court is not the same as it has been observed by another Single Bench of this Court for various reasons which have to be taken into consideration hereunder.
15.
The part under Clause (e) of Sub-rule (viii) of Rule 9 of 1991 Rules is as below :  "The reservation for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and physically handicapped persons shall have to be strictly maintained in the panel.
The panel shall show separately names of Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes, Physically Handicapped and other eligible candidates."
16.
This does not speak at all about any general candidate other than specified candidates otherwise there is no necessity of incorporation of the words other eligible candidates.
17.
Therefore, my interpretation is that words which are general should be understood in a general way.
The special derogates from the general.
A general clause does not apply to those matters for which special provision has already made by applying the test of maxim `generalis clausula non porrigitur ad ea quae antea specialiter sunt comprehensa'.
18.
The law maker did not make the provision by incorporating the words `and other eligible candidates' loosely.
No casual incorporation can be made by the law maker at the time of making the same.
Therefore, legislature kept in the mind the wide connotation of the words "and other eligible candidates" which is to keep protection to the other weaker, backward and neglected sections not specified like other categorised candidates who might have been deprived after publication of law unless and until such words are incorporated.
If the other eligible candidates are to be treated as general category then how under the 100-point roster as to the category of OBC can be maintained is an unanswered question before the Court.
Therefore, I have no hesitation in my mind that other eligible candidates do not necessarily mean general candidates.
19.
Under such circumstances, I allow the writ petition.
As a result whereof the petitioner will be entitled for interview/written test and/or selection by the appropriate District Primary School Council by treating separate category of other backward class and by making separate merit list by adding marks keeping parity with other specified categories under the same sub-rule under the rule for the present requisition or the future but not beyond the period of 45 years being the period of age relaxation as available for the petitioner under such category.
20.
No order is passed as to costs.
21.
Xeroxed certified copy will be supplied to the parties within a period of one week from the date of putting requisition.
Petition allowed.