RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of three writ petitions - No. 7975 of 2000 (Neetu Kad and others v. State of Punjab and others), 7900 of 2000 (Jasmandeep Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) and 7976 of 2000 (Dupinder Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab and others), as common question of law and fact is involved in these writ petitions.
For the sake of facts, I have taken the same from Civil Writ Petition No. 7975 of 2000.
It may also be mentioned here that the fate of two writ petitions No. 7900 of 7976 of 2000 will be different in view of the lack of evidence with regard to basic requisite qualifications.
Though all the three writ petitions the petitioners have prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent No. 2, Baba Farid University, Faridkot to allow them to appear in the B.D.S.
2nd Year Examination which was to be held w.e.f 2062000 and also to declare their result.
2.
It may also be mentioned here that under the orders of this Court the petitioners did appear in the examination but their result has been withheld.
3.
The common premises built by the petitioners are that they undertook their 1st Year Examination of B.D.S.
Course in May, 1999.
They were the students of respondent No. 3 College which was affiliated to Punjabi University Patiala.
They appeared in the examination but all had compartments.
They again appeared in the compartment examination in September, 1999 but failed to clear the same.
Till this date their examinations were conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala.
It is at that stage that Baba Farid University, respondent No. 2, took over conducting the dental courses in the State of Punjab.
Despite the compartment, all the petitioners were permitted to appear in B.D.S.
2nd Professional Course on provisional basis subject to clearing the compartments.
Baba Farid University, respondent No. 2, in order to save one academic year of all the candidates, who could not clear that compartment in September, 1999, sent a letter dated 4111999 to the Principals of all the Colleges under the Faculty of Dental Science and vide this letter details were asked about the various candidates who had failed to clear the compartment examination.
As a result of this letter another examination was held for the compartmental candidates of the Ist Year BDS Course all over the University.
All the petitioners despite failing in the compartmental examination in September, 1999, continued their studies in 2nd Year B.D.S.
Course.
By the passing of this examination, all the petitioners were eligible to take the 2nd Year BDS Examination, as provided by Clause 12(b) of the Prospectus Annexure P1.
The examination was to be held from 2062000 onwards and was to be completed on 572000.
The petitioners were shocked when they were not allotted roll numbers to appear in the 2nd Year BDS Examination.
The College of the petitioners told them for the first time that they would not be allotted roll numbers because instructions in this regard have been received by the College from the University.
The petitioners then approached the University as also the College authorities and tried to show that they were eligible for the examination.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they had passed the Ist Year Examination in the special test taken by the University in pursuance of the decision dated 4111999 and the intention of the letter was to save one academic year of the students and now it is too late for the University to say that the petitioners are not eligible to appear in the 2nd Year B.D.S.
Course.
The action on the part of the University is illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional and against the provisions of the Prospectus.
This is the broad case set up by the petitioners.
4.
When these writ petitions were taken up by the Hon'ble Division Bench for motion hearing, directions were given after admitting the petitions to the Principal of respondent No. 3 to be present in Court on the date of hearing along with relevant record and respondents No. 2 and 4 were also directed to produce the record, if any, available with them.
5.
Notices of the writ petitions were given to the respondents.
Two sets of written statement were filed in these cases - one by the University and another by the College.
So far as the stand of the University is concerned, it is that the petitioners have not completed their 75% lectures and they have not passed the internal examination with a minimum pass percentage of 33 and in such a situation they are not entitled to undertake the examination of June, 2000.
The College has also taken a similar stand by stating that as per the University Calendar in order to be promoted to the next class a student must complete one academic year preceding the examination and should have also attended separately in theory and practicals not less than 75% of the full Course of lectures delivered and practicals conducted in each of the subjects prescribed for the examination.
The petitioners do not fulfil these conditions and, therefore, they are not entitled to the declaration of their result of the examination in which they appeared.
6.
In support of their respective cases, the parties have placed some documents on record and I will make brief mention of the relevant documents in the subsequent portion of this judgment.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the cases.
8.
The first point for determination in this case would be whether the petitioners fulfilled the requisite qualifications.
Here this controversy can be divided in two parts.
I must say frankly that the clients of Ms. Anu Chatrath have no case.
They have not been able to prove that they fulfilled the requisite basic conditions.
On the contrary, there is an overwhelming evidence led by the University and the College that the petitioners did not fulfil the basic requirements.
Take the case of Jasmandeep Singh.
His admission form shows that it was certified by the Principal that this candidate has not been on the rolls of the College for the academic year preceding the examination and he has passed the Ist Professional less than one academic year and has not fulfilled the conditions laid down under the Ordinance/Regulations for appearing in the 2nd Professional B.D.S.
It was further certified that this candidate had attended less than 75% lectures of the theory and practicals and he has not even appeared in the sent up examination.
Finally, it was certified by the Principal that this petitioner does not fulfil any condition of eligibility.
His admission form has been sent to the University as per the directions of the High Court.
9.
Dealing with the case of Sarabpal Singh petitioner, it has been stated by the college authorities that he has not been on the rolls of the college for the academic year preceding the examination and has passed the Ist Professional less than one academic year.
Further, it has been certified that he has not even appeared in the sent up examination.
Taking the case of Kulwinder Kaur, it is stated that she has not attended 75% lectures in theory and practicals.
Similarly, in the case of Gaganpreet Kaur even the college authorities have not certified that she fulfilled the requisite conditions.
It is pertinent to mention here that writ petition (No. 7900 of 2000) on behalf of Veerpal Kaur, Sukhdeep Kaur and Mandeep Kaur has already been dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 792000.
Ms. Anu Chatrath, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of these petitioners vehemently submitted with the aid of notice Annexure P4/1 that her clients did attend the classes during the disputed period starting from 112000 to 642000, but the college authorities have not taken their attendance in their registers.
She submitted that on 1532000 some students remained absent from the classes and they were fined Rs. 25/- each.
The students were required to deposit the fine with the cashier failing which they would face disciplinary action.
As against this, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the college authorities submits that the petitioners attended the classes between 1.8.1999 to 31.12.1999, 742000 to 3152000 and from 112000 to 642000 they did not attend the classes because the petitioners could not clear the main examination as well as the compartment and they were relegated to their houses.
In the record of the college and in the attendance-registers which were brought in the Court there is no proof with regard to the attendance of the petitioners nor it has been certified by the Principal at any point of time that these petitioners were the students for full one academic year preceding to the examination.
In these circumstances, these petitioners are not eligible to appear in the 2nd Professional Examination held in June, 2000 in pursuance of the concession given by the University vide letter dated 4111999.
10.
During the course of submissions, learned counsel appearing on behalf of BJS Dental College, Ludhiana, Mr. Karaminder Singh, submitted that as per his instructions Kulwinder Kaur and Gaganpreet Kaur petitioners of C.W.P.
No. 7900 of 2000 and Dupinder Ahluwalia petitioner of C.W.P.
No. 7976 of 2000 had completed the requisite lectures and passed the sent up examination.
Since there is no written statement from this College nor there is any certificate to this effect, therefore, I am not inclined to give any weightage to the contention of learned counsel.
11.
There is a merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent-University to dislodge the petitioners of two writ petitions represented by Ms. Chatrath.
The object of the letter dated 4111999 definitely was to help the candidates who were re-appear or supplementary cases so that they may be able to save their one year.
But this was subject to the fulfilment of the basic conditions of the Calendar of the University.
In such a situation the writ petitioners of CWP Nos. 7900 and 7976 were not eligible and this Court has no difficulty in dismissing these two writ petitions.
12.
With regard to Civil Writ Petition No. 7975 of 2000 titled Neetu Kad and 5 others v. State of Punjab and others, this is totally distinguishable.
Mr. Mutneja, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners of this writ petition, produced the original certificate dated 592000 issued by the Principal, Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam, which runs as follows :-  "This is to certify that the following supplementary batch students of 1998 admission who appeared in BDS IInd Year Examination of May-June, 2000 completed their requiste of 75% attendance with regular batch of same year.
1.
Neetu Kad 2.
Payal Markan 3.
Nitya Nagpal 4.
Bhimpal Singh 5.
Gurprem Singh Buttar 6.
Mandeep Singh Brar Principal  Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam."
Mr. Mutneja has also produced another certificate dated 1292000 issued by the Principal of said College certifying that aforesaid six petitioners, who were the students of 1998-99 admission batch of BDS, appeared in sent up examination of BDS 2nd Professional and qualified for appearing in annual examination to be held in May-June, 2000.
13.
Thus it is proved that these petitioners completed the first requisite criteria.
With regard to the marks, no challenge has been given by the college authorities that these petitioners did not undertake the internal examination.
The counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that there is no proof on the record that these students hail from the original batch.
Rather they are the students of supplementary batch and they would become eligible in September, 2000 to undertake their examination.
14.
I do not find any merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents.
The best person who could rebut the case of the petitioners was the Principal of Sunam College.
That institution did not file any written statement.
C.W.P.
No. 7975 is mainly contested by the University and I have already incorporated the letter dated 4111999 for the benefit of the petitioners by saying that the intention of the University was to protect one year of the students.
In these circumstances, this Court is inclined to hold that the writ petitioners of C.W.P.
No. 7975 were eligible to appear in June, 2000 examination and the University was bound to issue roll numbers to them.
The act on the part of the University in withholding the roll numbers of these 6 writ petitioners was unjustified and that is why the Court gave the interim direction to the University to issue the roll numbers.
15.
The relief sought for in this writ petition was to direct the respondent-University to allow these 6 petitioners to appear in the B.D.S.
2nd year Examination.
They have already appeared in the examination.
Consequently, the respondent-University is directed to declare the result of Neetu Kad, Payal Markan, Bhimpal Singh, Mandeep Brar, Gurprem Singh Buttar and Nitya Nagpal on receipt of the copy of this judgment.
Therefore, C.W.P.
No. 7975 of 2000 is allowed as prayed for while CWP Nos. 7900 and 7976 of 2000 are hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.