RL Anand, J - Though the initial controversy was different when Shri Satnam Singh Bajwa filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India and claimed the benefit of service element as well as the retiral benefits but after the filing of the replication, the controversy has become short as to whether the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension or not.
2.
During the course of submission, the learned counsel for the petitioner has simply briefed the case of the petitioner for the disability pension by stating that petitioner joined the service in the Air Force on 2181982.
He became invalided on 27.12.1996 due to neuorosis historical conversations with 40% disability and was placed in the medical category "EEE".
The petitioner has rendered 14 years 4 months and 9 days of service.
3.
The case of the petitioner vis-a-vis the disability pension is being denied by the respondent-authorities that the disease is a constitutional one is not attributable to the military service and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the disability pension.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents in support of the defence of the Government of India, relies upon a judgment reported as 1997(5) SLR 341 : 1997(3) SCT 414 (P&H)(DB)., Gurdip Singh v. Union of India , wherein, it was held as follows :-  "What is the position in the present case ?
The competent authority has after consideration of the matter, come to the conclusion that the disability was not attributable to or aggravated by the military service.
The petitioner was admittedly examined by a Medical Board.
A copy of the proceedings of the Board was produced before us.
We have retained a photo copy on record as Mark `A'.
It clearly shows that the petitioner's problem was found to be "constitutional" and "not attributable to the Army Service".
If the competent authority has taken a positive decision on the basis of the advice of the Medical Board, it cannot be said that it has exercised its discretion arbitrarily or unfairly.
The view taken by the authority was a possible one.
It would not be fair for this Court to substitute its own opinion for that of the competent authority."
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the petitioner has brought to my notice an order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in case Union of India v. Inder Dutt Sharma in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has affirmed the judgment dated 26.9.1997 passed by the Delhi High Court in C.W.P.
No. 3345 of 1995.
5.
There is nothing on the record to indicate that when the petitioner joined the Indian Air Force, he was suffering from any disability.
It is difficult for this court to hold that the disease of which the petitioner was suffering was a constitutional one.
6.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also relies upon a Division Bench of this Court, reported as 1998(4) RSJ 467, Union of India v. Ex-Sepoy Satwinder Singh through his wife Smt. Kulwant Kaur.
7.
By relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court, referred to above, I allow this writ petition and grant the relief to the petitioner by giving directions to the respondents to release the disability pension of the petitioner with effect from 28121996, within three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order, failing which, the petitioner shall be entitled the interest at the rate of 12%.
No order as to costs.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board, if called upon by the respondents.
Petition allowed.