RL Anand, J - Delay of 19 days in filing the appeal and delay of beyond 40 days in re-filing the appeal is hereby condoned for the reasons stated in the applications.
2.
The only submission raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the suit of the plaintiff was not within limitation.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant, the plaintiff was claiming the promotion with effect from 28.8.1992 and he slept over his rights for a period of one and half years and, therefore, his suit was time barred.
In support of this contention the learned counsel relies upon AIR 1974 SC 2271.
He also relies upon 2000(1) ISJ 332, a Division Bench judgment of this Court.
3.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by Mr. Sehgal for the reasons ; firstly that there was no such issue framed by the trial Court to that effect.
Even if for the sake of arguments it is assumed that the plea of limitation can be taken up by the present appellant at any stage of the case, still this Court is of the opinion that in the present case it was not a pure question of limitation.
It was a mixed question of law and fact.
It is necessary to adjudicate whether the suit of the plaintiff was within limitation or not ?
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration and in these circumstances, it could be filed within a period of three years when the cause of action arose to the plaintiff.
It was the case of the plaintiff thatt he did not have the knowledge of the impugned orders dated 31590 and 28.8.1992 when his juniors were promoted.
Moreover, the plaintiff made a representation before the authorities and his representation was rejected on 20.5.1993/9.6.93.
Thereafter a legal notice was served upon the State under Section 80 CPC on 16121993.
4.
In these circumstances, it can be held that the suit of the plaintiff which was instituted within three years from the date of the rejection of his representation or from the date of order dated 28.8.92, when his juniors were promoted, was within limitation.
5.
I do not differ with the reasons as adopted by learned District Judge, as contained in paras No. 10 and 11 of his judgment which are reproduced as under :-  "On thoughtful consideration of the rival submissions and the law cited by both the parties on the subject, I do not find force in the arguments raised by the counsel for plaintiff-respondent/cross-objector.
It is well established that it cannot be said that there is no limitattion for instituting the suit for a declaration by a dismissed/terminated employee on the ground that the dismissal or termination order was void or inoperative.
The party aggrieved by the invalidity of the order has to approach the Court for relief of declaration, but he must approach the Court within the prescribed period of limitation as the Courts would be constrained to grant relief if the statutory time limit expires.
Under the Limitation Act if a suit is not governed by any of the specific Article, it must fall within the residuary article, i.e.
Article 113, which prescribes a period of three yeears when the right to sue accrued.
The right to sue, however, accrues only when the cause of action arises i.e., the right to prosecute to obtain relief by legal means.
11.
In the present case, the plaintiff filed representation before the departmental authorities and the said representation was rejected and conveyed to him vide order dated 20th May, 1993/9th June, 1993, which is Ex. P3.
Therefore, the limitation in this case would start from the date of rejection of the representation of the plaintiff.
The facts of PS Sadasivaswamy's case (supra) are clearly distinguishable from the facts of the present case.
In that case, the petitioner had slept over the promotion of his juniors for 14 years and then approached the High Court with a writ petition challenging the relaxation of the relevant rules in favour of the juniors and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in such circumstances had observed that such an aggrieved person should approach the Court at least within six months or at the most a year of the promotion of his juniors.
In view of the above discussion, I am of the view that the suit is well within limitation.
6.
No other point was urged before me.
The appeal is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.