Swatnater Kumar, J - The main contention raised by the petitioners in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is that the respondents have failed to adhere to the instructions contained in the information book for entrance test 1998 and the law enunciated by this Court in allocation of the seats to the Elementary Teachers Training Course, hereinafter referred to as ETT course.
Resultantly, the allotment of seats to the other respondents is contrary to law and is liable to be quashed by this Court.
However, the petitioners contend that they be allotted a seat each in the said course on the basis of their merit in the entrance test.
2.
Both the petitioners passed their 10 plus 2 examination by securing 270 and 248 marks out of a total of 450 marks respectively.
Thereupon they appeared in the entrance test conducted by the respondent in accordance with the information brochure issued for the entrance test 1998 to the ETT Course.
This course is for two years.
The admission was finalised on 15.3.1999 in furtherance to the entrance test held on 721999.
The petitioners claim that they were fully eligible to appear in the entrance test and upon publication of the results they had qualified.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 was in the waiting list at Sr. No. 15 and petitioner No. 2 was at Sr. No. 17 of the said list.
According to the instructions and policy adopted for admission to the seats maximum 100 students can be admitted to a District centre out of which 50 seats are to go to male candidates while other 50 seats have to go to the female candidates.
There are certain reasons provided in the brochure against each category and each category is known by the code under which it is specified.
The relevant reservation of seats and the manner in which they are to be allotted has been specified in Note 1 to Annexure P.1 i.e. the distribution of seats.
The said Note reads as under :-  NOTE  1.
The Code No. of General categories is 50.
2.
If a seat in any reserved category remains vacant for one reason or the other then such seat except in the case of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe, will be offered to the eligible candidate in the general category.
The vacant reserved seat for male shall be filled by a general male candidate and the vacant female seat in the reserved category shall be filled up by a female candidate from the general category.
Sr. No. Category Code % Seats 1.
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes 51 25 2.
Backward Classes 52 05 3.
Rural Area 54 02 4.
Border/Bet/Backward area 54 02 5.
Political Sufferes/Children/grand sons/grand daughters of freedom fighters 55 02 6. a) Children/widows of soldiers killed or disabled upto 50% in the Warsb) Children of Servicemen/Ex-servicemen.
5657 0101 7.
Physically disabled 58 01 8. a) Children/widows of Policemen/killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in the Wars.b) Children of Serving/Ex-paramilitary/Policemen.
5960 0101 9.
Children/widows of employees of Punjab Police and PAP killed or disabled upto 50% 61 03 10.
Sportsmen/Sportswomen.
62 03 11.
Wards of Teachers/Serving/retired.
63 02 12. a) Children of innocent men Soldiers killed in aid of security forces by militants or disabled upto 100%b) Children of riot victims of 1984.c) Children of disabled upto 100% deceased army deserters.d) Children of non- resident Indian.
64 02 The reservation made by government of 2% in favour of Wards of teachers (Serving/retired), serial No. 11 has been quashed by the Hon'ble High Court.
So these candidates will be considered as general category candidates.
But still the decision of the Hon'ble Court in LPA/SLP will be applicable to these candidates.
4.
It is the case of the petitioners that five seats fell vacant in the different categories and as per the above instructions they were to be converted into general category and filled up or allotted in accordance with clause (1) of instructions relating to distribution of seats.
However, the respondents have out of the five seats, allotted four to boys and one to female candidate while they should have been distributed so as to maintain a balance of 50 :50 for female and male respectively in the joint seats.
This allotment is contrary to the instructions as contained (contended ?)
by the petitioners and if the seats were allocated in accordance with law both petitioners would get a seat on their own merits.
5.
The respondents have filed a detailed reply to the writ petition and it has been stated by the respondents that the allocation of seats is in consonance with the instructions contained in the brochure which is binding on all.
The respondents submit that they have allocated the seats as per the reservation criteria upon conversion to the person of a higher merit.
It is, however, not disputed by the respondents that as per present allocation 53 seats have been allocated to the male candidates while 47 have been allocated to the female candidates in general category.
6.
The terms and conditions of the information brochure are not in (sic) and the parties are ad-litem in relation to the language of the brochure reproduced or referred to in the writ petition and annexures thereto.
It is no more res integra and stands fully settled by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc., 19943-2(104) PLR 212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB) that the terms and conditions contained in brochure are binding on the candidates as well as the authorities for selection and method of allotment of seats to the course in question.
They have the force of law and create enforceable obligations and restriction on all concerned.
7.
While interpreting clause (1) of the information brochure under the head `distribution of seats' it is clearly postulated that 50 seats out of 100 in every district in the State of Punjab for the ETT course shall be given to the boys while remaining 50 seats to the girls.
Another Full Bench of this Court in the case of Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(1) Judicial Reports (L & S) 25 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(FB) held as under :-  "A perusal of the admission notice/Brochure issued by Council makes it clear that 100 seats allotted to each district have to be distributed between the boys and girls in the ratio of 50-50 and all the reservations provided for in favour of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Backward Classes and other categories are subject to the aforesaid ratio of 50 :50.
In no case can the boys or the girls exceed their quota of 50 seats.
In other words, the boys or the girls from the reserve categories together with those from the general category must not exceed the figure of 50.
What happened in the instant case is that due to the percentage of reservation provided for four reserve categories fraction of a seat became available for admission.
It is obvious that fraction of a seat cannot be filled up and that whole of that seat had to be given to an eligible candidate.
The question is to whom - to an eligible boy or to an eligible girl or to the one who has more marks.
In our opinion that seat will go to that candidate male or female whose quota of 50 is short.
It cannot go to the one only because he or she has more marks than the other as that can upset the 50-50 ratio fixed in the brochure."
8.
Clause (1) admits no ambiguity and having the force of law is binding on the respondents.
Its adherence is not optional but is mandatory.
The remaining clauses of the information book under the head `distribution of seats' are entitled to deal with specific seats i.e. the seats reserved for various categories.
that is why clauses (2) to (5) as well as Note 2 under that chapter deals and relates to and in fact opens with the expression, "reserved seats for different categories".
These classes are intended to cater to the need of the situations which are likely to arise in relation to the reserved category of different kinds.
9.
The principle of adopting a particular method of filling a seat depending upon the number of the seats being odd or even, thus has no application to the categories other than the reserved category.
Clause (1) is an absolute clause and does not provide for any exception to its absolute rule of 50 seats for boys and 50 for girls out of 100 seats in each District.
Reading other clauses or their effect on clause (1) would be totally un-necessary because some seats out of the 100 have been reserved and so far they are being allotted or filled in under the reserved category the method of allotment specified in a particular kind of reservation shall have to be adhered to.
But, then the seats are converted to general category, they would lose their original character of the reserved seats and resultantly the method of filling such a reserved seat would also lose its significance.
The conversion of the seat from reserve to general category would essentially leave its characteristic of reservation and consequently shed all its limitations as well.
The seats in the general category must necessarily get 50 :50 to the male and female.
10.
At this stage it may be relevant to make a reference to a judgment of this Court titled as Rimpi Mahajan v. State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 4513 of 1999, where the Court held as under :-  "A cumulative reading of the Clauses aforesaid clearly reveals that 100 seats in all had been allotted i.e. 50 for the boys and 50 for the girls and that amongst the seats so allotted reservation had also been provided within the category.
Clauses 2, 3 and 4 primarily deal with distribution of seats in the reserve category but Clauses 4 provides that in case of the non- availability of eligible candidates from amongst the reserved category, the seats left vacant would be given to a candidate of the general category.
Admittedly, two seats (1 under Code No. 59 and the other under Code No. 61 both belonging to the reserved category) had to be transferred to the general category on account of the non-availability of eligible candidates of that category as per clause 4.
Clause 4 dealing with preparation of merit clearly provides that seat that had been de-reserved would be filled in from amongst the eligible candidates belonging to the general category.
As no specific provision has been made as to how this seat is to be filled up, the general rule that half the seats must be kept for boys and the other half for girls must be maintained."
11.
From the distribution of the seats provided in the brochure, it is clear that out of 100 seats, 50 seats are reserved under different categories while 50 seats have been allocated to the general category.
The various Clauses of the brochure except clause (1) have application only to the seats falling under the reserved category.
They provide the manner and criteria for allotment of such seats and what would be the methodology adopted if there is one seat left under a particular category.
As far as general category seats are concerned, there is no doubt that out of the 50 seats 25 have to go to male candidates while remaining 25 have to go to female candidates in order of merit.
In other words, general category seats are to be equally divided between the male and female candidates.
Even when other seats are converted from reserved category to general category in accordance with the note mentioned in the brochure, they necessarily have to fall within the limited scope of clause (1) i.e. distribution of equal seats.
12.
Clause (1) is the substantive and principal clause while other clauses are ancillary or explanatory clauses.
Interpretation of an explanatory clause must be in conformity to the principal clause and must take its colour and meaning in consonance to the basic clause.
The paramount consideration being distribution of seats between the male and female candidates in equal proposition (proportion ?)
must be permitted to be frustrated by giving explanatory clauses an over-riding effect on the main clause.
It must be construed harmoniously so as to achieve the principal object underlining the scheme formulated in the brochure.
The seats under the reserved category upon conversion to general category, but necessarily would have to shed their basic characteristics and restrictions, implied upon allocation of such seats.
Conversion to general category would change the character of the seat not only in its characteristic but also in its limitations.
Once the seats were converted to the general category, as no eligible candidates were available in reserved category the respondents were under obligation to maintain the ratio of equal distribution of seats between the male and female candidates.
The increase in general seats would have to be distributed equally and the remaining seats, if any, despite equal distribution in the general category would have to go to a candidate of higher merit.
13.
For the reason aforestated this writ is allowed limited to the extent that the respondents shall maintain equal distribution of seats between the male and female candidate in the general category.
The respondents No. 1 to 3 are further directed to first re-allocate seats in the above manner and then, if necessary, they would disturb respondents No. 4 to 6, if it is inevitable.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the cased, there would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.