Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - The learned Single Judge disposed of Service Writ Petition No. 3130 of 1994, Bashir Ahmad Mir v. State and others, vide judgment dated August 8,1997, in terms holding Bashir Ahmad Mir, appointed as Draftsman in Rural Development Department of the State and Shah Pasandeeda as Draftsman in Public Works Department of the State from their original date of appointment with consequential benefits.
2.
Pursuant to Advertisement Notice 7 of 1993 dated 22121993, both Appellant (Shah Pasandeeda) and Respondent No. 1 (Bashir Ahmad Mir) applied for selection to the post of Draftsman (Civil).
In all 21 posts (20 in PWD and 1 in RDD) in terms of advertisement notice were required to be filled on direct recruitment.
Both were selected and figured in the selection list for the posts of Draftsman (Civil) (Annexure P2).
The recruitment and selection was made by the Jammu and Kashmir Service Selection Board.
The Board recommended the case of appellant for appointment as Draftsman in Rural Development Deptt.
against the one post available at Anantnag and respondent - Bashir Ahmad Mir, was recommended for appointment in Public Works Department against one of the available posts.
The Government accepted the selection and recommendations, issued orders of appointment, appointing Shah Pasandeeda as Draftsman in Rural Development Department and Respondent No. 1 Bashir Ahmad Mir as Draftsman (Civil) in Public Works Department.
Bashir Ahmad Mir aggrieved of his posting in Public Works Department and not in Rural Development Department, filled Writ Petition No. 3130/94 in the High Court at Srinagar.
A learned Single Bench of this Court on 26.10.1995 disposed of the Petition directing the Government to allot Bashir Ahmad Mir to Public Works Department, inter alia on the ground that, Shah Pasandeeda-Respondent No. 7 to the Writ Petition had no objection in case she is allotted to and appointed in Public Works Department as Draftsman.
As follow up of this judgment and orders in the Contempt petition, the allocation of Shah Pasandeeda was changed to Public Works Department and that of Bashir Ahmad Mir to Rural Development Department vide Government Order dated 361996 (Annexure P6).
3.
Appellant, Shah Pasandeeda, challenged the judgment of the learned Single Bench in LPA No. 95/96.
Speaking for the Division Bench, his Lordship M Rama Krishna, the then Chief Justice observed:  "The written-statement of objections reveals that the same has not been signed by respondent No. 7, though it is said to have been signed by Mr. KA Qureshi, learned counsel for respondent No. 7.
It is pertinent to note that, as the appellant (the respondent in the Writ Court) had not been served with the notice, she had no occasion to engage the services of an advocate at all.
It is a misnomer for the writ court to proceed on the premise that there were two Advocates appearing on behalf of respondent No. 7.
It is strange that the learned Single Judge, without applying his mind to the actual facts, as disclosed by the records, proceeded to hold that respondent No. 7 had no objection to do so.
At the outset the poor lady was kept in darkness, as she had not enjoying the post of Draftsman from 1987, we wonder, how she could come forward to say that she had no objection to send the writ-petitioner to the post held by her.
Sufficient to say, at this stage, that it is a fit case to allow the appeal on the above premise."
The L.P.A. was allowed and the judgment and order of October 26, 1995 of the learned Single Bench was set aside with request to the writ court to decide the matter afresh hearing the parties.
4.
The matter on remand was heard and decided by another Hon'ble Single Bench, resulting in disposal of the writ petition in terms of judgment and order, under appeal, directing the Government to treat Shri Bashir Ahmad Mir as selected for appointment in Rural Development Department and Shah Pasandeeda as selected for appointment in Public Works Department against the two post of draftsman.
5.
The Counsel for the appellant submits, that the Government, as employer has the ultimate choice of allocation of the selected staff to hold posts in different departments of the Government.
Once the appellant and Respondent No. 1, were selected as Draftsman (civil), it was for the competent authority to decide who amongst the selected candidates has to be appointed to a post in a particular department.
After selection, if Shah Pasandeeda has been found suitable for the appointment in Rural Development Department, any other selected candidate in the same process of selection has no right to claim that he alone has to be posted in Rural Development Department.
After all, a selected candidate cannot have selection on his terms and conditions.
The Government as employer is within its rights to allocate these selected candidates to different departments.
This is all the more so, because, the advertisement in this case has been for 21 posts of Draftsman Civil, with specification that 20 posts were to be filled in P.W.D.
and one post in R.D.D.
There is nothing in the advertisement notice or the applicable rules to show that a (selected) candidate had to give preference, for a particular post or for the post of draftsman in a particular department.
Once the selection was made in accordance with rules by the Jammu and Kashmir Service Selection Board, and recommendation of the selected candidates for appointment was made the Government, having accepted the recommendations and allocated the departments and issued appointment orders to selected candidates as Draftsmen with department, the Respondent cannot claim that he alone has a right to be allocated and appointed in the Rural Development Department.
6.
The counsel for the respondents submits, that as Shri Bashir Ahmad Mir had applied for the post of draftsman in Rural Development Deptt.
he cannot be allotted to Public Works Deptt.
Contextually, the respondent was working in the Rural Development on daily wage basis for some time earlier to his appointment and selection, as draftsman, therefore, he has a preferential claim to hold the post on appointment as Draftsman in Rural Development Department.
The counsel also submits, that during his engagement on daily wage basis as Draftsman in Rural Development Department, his case was recommended for appointment in the Department, but the competent authority did not acceed to his request and informed the concerned that he should apply for the post in terms of Rules, once the post stands advertised.
In this background, the petitioner has a preferential claim to be considered for the post of draftsman in Rural Development Deptt.
7.
In all 21 posts of Draftsman were advertised for selection by the Jammu and Kashmir Service Selection Board - 20 posts in PWD and one in R.D.D.
The candidates applying for the posts were not required to show the preference for the departmental post or to indicate the choice of the department, where he or they would prefer or choose to serve as Draftsman.
In fact, all 21 posts are shown as common category draftsmen (civil) posts.
The selection was indicated for all the 21 posts without any hint or whimper to show which candidate among selectees on completion of process of selection, shall be allocated to PWD or RDD of the State Government.
The selection process for all the 21 posts has been one integrated whole.
One and the same test was held for all the posts.
No option or choice for the post of Draftsman in either of the department was required to be indicated or given by any of the candidate applying for the post(s) of said advertised Draftsmen.
8.
Merely because the respondent No. 7 worked on daily wage basis on an interim or ad hoc arrangement with Rural Development Department prior to selection by the competent authority under applicable rules, does not confer any right on Respondent No. 1 that he alone has to be allocated and appointed in Rural Development Department.
The communication from the competent authority that Respondent No. 1 should apply for the post through the mode and medium of selection prescribed for the post of draftsman, in terms of rules, also does not confer any right on respondent No. 1, that he alone is to be allocated and appointed in Rural Development Department.
9.
It is an established principle of law that an eligible candidate has a right to be considered, but no person has a right to a particular post.
Equality of opportunity in matters of consideration for appointment cannot be overstretched, so as to stiffle the right of appointing authority to make a choice of the selected candidates to a post in a particular department.
The petitioner had a right to be considered for appointment as Draftsman.
He has been selected and appointed as Draftsman, but he cannot be heard to say that his selection and appointment has to be only on his terms and conditions.
He cannot be heard to say that he alone has a right to be allocated and appointed to Rural Development Department as Draftsman.
It is not a case of unequal treatment of the equals or equal treatment of the unequals.
The respondent No. 1-petitioner before the Writ Court, has not disclosed how his fundamental right of equality of opportunity has been infringed.
10.
Article 16 speaks of equality of opportunity and not of any right.
Once statutory body of Service Selection Board selected the candidates and recommended the Selectees for appointment in PWD and RDD, which recommendation culminated in appointment of appellant in RDD and Respondent No. 1 in PWD, the respondent No. 1 has no case to assert that the selection body has erred in not recommending him for the draftsman post in RDD and the Government committed a mistake in considering the recommendation and taking a decision of his appointment in PWD and that of Respondent No. 1 in RDD.
The placement of the selected candidates in the selection list may be meritwise, but that has nothing to do with allocation of the selected candidates to work as draftsman in various Departments where the posts of Draftsman are available.
Moreso, when the advertisement notice or the rules, do not provide anything of the sort.
The respondent No. 1, who joined and worked as Draftsman (Civil) in PWD, on selection, realised his dream of appointment on the post in RDD when the Government, pursuant to the judgment of Hon'ble Single Bench dated 261095 in SWP No. 313/94, re-allotted him to RDD and Shah Pasandeeda was re-allotted to PWD on 361996.
This judgment of October 26, 1995 was set aside on 1281996 by a Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 95/96.
Thereby the very basis of the order of re-allocation has been knocked out.
The Respondent No. 1 cannot claim any right on the basis of a judgment which has been set aside and that too in the context of L.P.A.
Bench disbelieving the theory and plea that Shah Pasandeeda has given her option of re-allocation to Public Works Department.
The Division Bench in L.P.A. has even seen traces of manipulation of the so-called `said option' to the ignorance and at the back of Shah Pasandeeda.
Though the contention of the counsel for appellant that there has been fraudulent manipulation of records, is not established on record by the norm and standard of proofs required to sustain such a charge, but all the same the fact remains that in the case record has been manipulated at some level by a person who is interested in the matter.
So called `no option' for PWD or RDD on the past of Shah Pasandeeda has been manuplated in a manner only to serve Respondent No. 1  11.
For the aforesaid reasons, we are not in agreement with the Hon'ble Single Bench, that Shri Bashir Ahmad Mir alone was to be selected and appointed in Rural Development Department of the State and allocation of Shah Pasandeeda by the Competent authority on appointment to the post of Draftsman (Civil) in Rural Development Department was legally wrong.
It is not just a question of "creation of mix-up", but essentially permeates the powers and functions of the Statutory body like Service Selection Board and the competence and powers of the Government as employer to allocate the appointees on selection to different departments of the Government.
As employer, the Government alone has right and choice to allocate the selectees/appointees to different departments and it has the sole prerogative of deciding and seeing to it how best it can utilise the services of its employees and enforce discipline and control within its ranks within the parameters of law.
12.
In the result, we accept this appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and order dated August 8, 1997.
The Writ Petition is dismissed.
With this shall go all other interim or other directions issued by this Court from time to time, as the whole matter shall be deemed finally governed by this judgment.
Appeal accepted.