OP Garg, J - Km.
Pragati Yog, a regular student, appeared in Intermediate Science Examination of the year 1994.
Her Roll Number was 0310743 (category B-1).
She passed the said examination in second division having secured 283 marks out of 500.
Subject-wise marks obtained by her are as follows -  Subject Max.
Marks Marks Obtained 1.
General Hindi 100 53 2.
English 100 67 3.
Physics 100 42 4.
Chemistry 100 49 5.
Biology 100 72 2.
The apprehension of the petitioner was that her answer books in Physics subject were not correctly and properly evaluated.
Her expectation was that she should have scored much higher marks than 42, which have been assigned to her.
The petitioner applied for scrutiny of her marks within the prescribed period.
Through letter dated 1431995 Annexure-2 to the Writ Petition, the petitioner was intimated that even after scrutiny of her marks, there was no change in her result.
By means of the present Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed, that the communication dated 1431995, Annexure-2 to the Writ Petition, be quashed and the respondents be commanded to appoint examiner/expert in the subject of Physics to examine the answer books of Physics and that the marks be awarded on the basis of the instruction/criterion fixed by the examination committee of the Board, copies of which are Annexures-6 and 7 to the Writ Petition.
Other ancillary and consequential reliefs have also been claimed.
3.
Counter and rejoinder affidavit have been exchanged.
Heard Sri AK Yog, assisted by Sri Sailendra, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned Standing counsel on behalf of the respondents.
4.
An interim order was passed by this Court on 2161995 directing that the record of the present case shall not be weeded out.
Answer books of the petitioner in Physics subject were directed to be produced.
In the counter affidavit, the respondents have taken the plea that the answer books of the petitioner have been weeded out.
A schedule showing the period fixed for retention of the records has been Annexed as Annexure-C.A.1, besides the report of office, as Annexure-C.A.2 in pursuance of which answer books are said to have been weeded out.
Sri Yog urged that even in view of the period fixed for retention of the records, as contained in Annexure-C.A.1, answer books could not be weeded out as there is a provision that marked answer books may be weeded out six months offer the examination or till the scrutiny is over.
It was pointed out that in the instant case, communication of the scrutiny was made in March, 1995 and, therefore, the marked answer books could not be weeded out before September, 1995 and since on 2161995, this Court ordered that the records concerning the petitioner shall be preserved, the respondents were duty bound to keep the answer books in safe custody.
It was also urged that in view of the report, Annexure-C.A.2, all those marked answer books were weeded out which were not required for scrutiny or in respect of which no Court case had been filed.
There was a specific order of this Court that the answer books of the petitioner shall be preserved.
The respondents have not only failed to preserve the answer books but have asserted that they have been weeded out.
If at all, the answer books have been weeded out, it was done in violation of the schedule, which is Annexure-C.A.1, as well as the orders of this Court.
The fact remains that at the moment, answer books of the petitioner in Physics subject are not available for perusal by the Court or for re-evaluation/rechecking by an expert in the subject.
5.
Now the question is as to what course should be adopted in the case like the present one where in spite of the orders of the Court, answer books are not forthcoming.
Learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned Standing Counsel frankly conceded that the only course left open at this stage is to award average marks to the petitioner in Physics subject.
The total of marks obtained by the petitioner is 6025.
Ignoring the fraction, which is less than half of 1 mark, the average marks, which the petitioner may be given in Physics subject is 60.
The course of awarding of the average marks in the situation like the present one has been judicially recognised in C Tulasi Priya v. AP State Council of Higher Education, 1998(4) SCT 144 (SC) : Judgment Today 1998(5) SC 246, and Praveen Kumar Rai v. Registrar, Sri Sahuji Kanpur University and another, 1997(2) AWC 1196.
6.
In view of the well established principle of law, I am inclined to award average marks which come to 60 to the petitioner in Physics subject.
7.
In the result, the Writ Petition is allowed and the respondent No. 1 is directed to issue a fresh and clean marks-sheet by substituting 60 marks, in total, in physics subject as against 42 marks, assigned to the petitioner.
By virtue of substitution of the above marks, if the petitioner is entitled to change in her division from second to first, the same shall be incorporated in the aforesaid mark-sheet and the amended Certificate be issued.
Petition allowed.