NK Agarwal, J - This is an appeal by the State of Punjab against the judgment and decree dated 2831992 by the trial Court and appellate decree dated 2081993.
2.
A suit for declaration was filed by Tarlok Singh, Social Studies Master, Government High School, Helar, Tehsil and District Jalandhar, seeking benefit of military service.
The plaintiff had joined the Army on 1591961 and retired after 15 years of service on 3091976.
The plaintiff was only a Matriculate at the time of his appointment in the Army.
He did his Graduation during his service in the Army.
After retirement from the Army in the year 1976, the plaintiff passed B.Ed.
in the year 1978 and he was appointed on 7.6.1980 as Social Studies Master.
He requested for being given the benefit of military service but his request was declined.
He then filed a civil suit, seeking a declaration regarding his entitlement.
3.
The State of Punjab opposed the suit with the plea that the plaintiff had not acquired the qualification required for the post of Social Studies Master before he had joined the military service.
It was, therefore, argued that the plaintiff was not entitled to the benefit of military service.
4.
The trial Court (the learned Sub Judge, Jalandhar) decreed the plaintiff's suit on the ground that the plaintiff was entitled to the benefit of military service under the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (for short, "the Rules").
The trial Court relied upon a decision of this Court in Harbhajan Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) R.S.J.
27 : 1991(2) SCT 302.
5.
The appellate Court also upheld the plaintiff's claim regarding the benefit of military service.
6.
The State of Punjab has challenged the judgments and decrees of the trial and appellate Courts with the same plea that the plaintiff was not at all entitled to the benefit of military service, because he possessed the requisite qualification for the post of Social Studies Master neither at the time he joined the Army nor when he was relieved from the Army.
Reliance has been placed on the instructions dated 18.4.1973 issued by the Punjab Government, wherein it has been laid down that, where a person, who had rendered military service, did not possess the minimum qualification prescribed for any service or post at the time when he joined the Army or at the time when he was relieved from the Army, he would not be entitled to the benefit of military service.
It has also been argued that the plaintiff was not entitled to the benefit under the Rules notified in the year 1965 nor under the 1982 Rules.
7.
It may be noticed that the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, were examined by this Court in Tarlok Singh, Assistant Superintendent, Jail v. The Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab and others, 1985(2) S.L.R.
177.
After examining the aforesaid Rules, it was held, following an earlier decision of this Court, dated 12121975, in Indraj Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 82 of 1974, that the benefits of military service were available to the released Indian Army Forces personnel who joined Government Service.
The aforesaid decision was subsequently followed in Harbhajan Singh's case (supra) wherein the aforesaid Rules were again examined and it was held that the petitioner in that case, was entitled to the benefits of military service.
In that case too, the petitioner had rendered military service and he had not possessed the minimum qualification required for the post of J.B.T.
teacher at that time.
He acquired the qualification after he was released from the Army.
Since a similar matter has already been examined by this Court, there is no occasion to take a different view in the matter.
8.
Consequently, the appeal is found to have no force and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.