JL Gupta, J - The petitioner retired from service on 12101971.
He claims that his pension has not been revised and fixed in accordance with the letter dated April 16, 1987 issued by the Central Government.
According to the petitioner, the respondents were bound to do so in pursuance to the directions issued by KP Bhandari, J in C.W.P.
No. 2535 of 1989 decided on September 25, 1989.
In this writ petition, the petitioner's prayer was that an appropriate writ, order or direction be issued to the respondents to "modify the grossly discriminatory nature of the orders issued vide Annexures P1 and P2 so as to pay pension and pensionary benefits on the revised scales without making any discrimination against pensioners on the basis of any date of their retirement/superannuation including the revised slabs/rates from subsequent dates without any discrimination whatsoever."
This writ petition was undoubtedly allowed.
However, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that in accordance with the direction given by this Court he, even though an employee of the State Government, had become entitled to the grant of same benefits as had been granted by the Central Government to its own officials.
2.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
The question that arises for consideration is - can officers who retire from the service of the State Government claim parity in the matter of pension with the employees of the Central Government in spite of the fact that the State Government is not shown to have adopted the said instructions ?
3.
If petitioner's claim is upheld, it would have wide repercussions and it may become open to every employee of the State of Haryana to claim parity with the employees of the Central Government.
The pleas of discrimination may be raised.
Since the issue has wide repercussions and is of importance, it deserves to be decided by a larger Bench.
Normally, the State Government which is aware of its financial constraints is entitled to take a policy decision with regard to the fixation of the pay scales and grant of pensionary and other benefits to its employees.
However, since Mr. Sadana has placed heavy reliance on the earlier decision which is undoubtedly inter se the parties, it appears appropriate that the issue is settled authoritatively by a larger Bench.
Let the papers of this case be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice and the matter be listed before a Division Bench.
JUDGMENT OF DIVISION BENCH DATED 8TH SEPTEMBER, 1997.
1.
The petitioner since deceased was appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police in the State of Punjab and was allocated to the State of Haryana on 1111966, on the reorganisation of the State.
He retired on superannuation on 12101971 as Central Intelligence Officer with the Ministry of Home Affairs Government of India.
As the pension of the petitioner had not been correctly fixed and he had received no redressal from the authorities, he filed C.W.P.
No. 2535 of 1989 in this Court praying that his pension should be fixed in terms of the Government of India Circular No. 2/1/87-PIC-I dated 16.4.1987 (Annexure P-2) to the petition.
This matter came up for hearing before a Single Judge of this Court and the petition was allowed vide judgment dated 2591989 (Annexure P-1) with the following observations :-  "Under the circumstances, I allow this petition with costs, direct that the revised pension be fixed as per Annexure P-3 within two weeks and the pension order should be issued to the petitioner according to the revised scale of pension.
However, the Government may invest the arrears of pension in the National Savings Certificates.
This also be done within one month from today.
Thereafter, the National Savings Certificates should be handed over to the petitioner.
Counsel fee Rs.
300/-."
2.
It is the admitted case that this judgment has become final as no appeal etc. was taken any further by the State of Haryana.
As the petitioner's pension was still not being fixed in accordance with the judgment of this Court, the petitioner filed C.O.C.P.
No. 1163 of 1989 and this too was disposed of vide order dated 691991 (Annexure P/3) with the following observations :-  "Learned counsel for the respondents undertakes that representation, if any, made by the petitioner pointing out the error in the release of pension shall be disposed of within 15 days from the date of representation, by passing a speaking order.
We hope, the representation, if made, shall be considered sympathetically.
Since there are no averments in the petition for wilful disobedience of the order of this Court, no further action can be taken in these contempt proceedings.
The rule is accordingly discharged.
However, in case, after passing of appropriate order on the representation of the petitioner, he still feels aggrieved with respect to any relief which is not granted to him, he will be at liberty to make a fresh petition in accordance with law."
The petitioner thereafter made a representation which has been dismissed by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, vide his order dated 13.11.1991 Annexure P-5, to the petition.
The present petition has been filed impugning this order on the premise that as the judgment Annexure P1 had become final it could not now be ignored and the petitioner's pension had to be fixed in terms of the Government of India circular dated 1641997 (1987 ?)
Annexure P2 to the petition.
3.
This matter came up for decision before the learned JL Gupta, J who referred the matter to a larger Bench on 12.10.1995 with the observation that if the judgment in CWP No. 2535 of 1989 was implemented it would have very wide repercussions as it could lay open the demand of every employee of the State of Haryana to claim parity with the employees of the Central Government, but as that decision was undoubtedly inter parties, it was proper that the matter should be settled by a larger Bench.
It is in that event that the matter has been put up before us today.
4.
It has been contended by Mr. Sadana, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that a judgment right or wrong had been rendered in his favour in CWP No. 2535 of 1989 and the State of Haryana appeared to be satisfied with those proceedings as no further appeal etc. had been taken and the judgment being inter se the parties, the matter could not now be unsettled by this Court.
Mr. Kapoor, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has however argued that the judgment required to be reconsidered in the light of the fact that the instructions issued by the Central Government could not be made applicable to the employees of the State of Haryana, and the directions issued being contrary to this principle, could not stand scrutiny.
5.
We have considered the rival contentions and find that both merit acceptance.
We accept Mr. Sadana's argument that the judgment inter se parties should not be disturbed by us in these proceedings after a lapse of 6 years.
More particularly as the petitioner had retired in 1971 and has since passed away leaving any benefit that might now accrue to him to his aged widow.
On the other hand, we feel that though the aforesaid judgment is based on a concession, but the broad principle that the State Government employees were entitled to the benefit of the Central Government's instructions without being adopted by the State Government has also been accepted.
We, therefore, dispose of this petition and direct that the petitioner will be entitled to such benefits as were made available in CWP No. 2535 of 1989, but make it clear that the aforesaid judgment will not form a precedent for the future as it does not lay down the correct law as we are of the firm opinion that the State Government employees are not entitled to the benefit of a Government of India Circular unless and until that has been specifically adopted by the State Government.
This petition is accordingly disposed of with a direction that all sums due shall be paid to the legal heirs of the petitioner within a period of four months from the date that a copy of this judgment is supplied to the respondents.
No costs.