S Dasaradha Rama Reddy, J - The petitioner who was a Line Inspector in Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board (for short 'the Board)' was suspended on 22111988 pending departmental enquiry into charges viz., that he has demanded and accepted money in the year 1983-84 from six casual labourers with a promise to get them appointed as regular helpers in the Board.
On 1871989, the Divisional Electrical Engineer, Operation, Kothapeta, who is the Disciplinary Authority, accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer, passed orders exonerating the petitioner of the charges and directed the period of suspension to be treated as on duty.
Meanwhile, the Superintendiing Engineer, Operations, Rajahmundry, issued memo dated 31.10.1989 appointing another Enquiry Officer to conduct de novo enquiry into the very same allegations under Regulation 10(2)(a) of the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board Employees' Discipline and Appeal Regulations (for short 'the Regulations') on the ground that the earlier Enquiry Officer had not taken the assistance of officials of Anti-Corruption Bureau while conducting the enquiry.
Challenging this memo, the petitioner filed this writ petition contending that the Regulations do not apply to staff of Operation and Maintenance, to which the petitioner belongs, that Regulation 10(2)(a) does not provide for de novo enquiry and that in any event, the Superintending Engineer has no power to reopen the matter when once final orders are passed by the Disciplinary Authority and that the impugned order is intended only to harass him.
2.
In the counter-affidavit, the Board says that the report of the Enquiry Officer has been reviewed by the Superintending Engineer who found that the enquiry was not done in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Board since the Enquiry Officer has not followed the procedure envisaged in Memorandum No. 3265 SC.E/86-2, General Administration (SG.E.)
Department dated 611987, communicated to the Board on 2511987 as per which the concerned Investigating Officer of the Anti-Corruption Bureau has to be associated with the departmental enquiry.
The Superintending Engineer has invoked Regulation 7(c) and the Regulations apply to staff of Operation and Maintenance Department.
The allegation of harassment is also denied.
3.
Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned Counsel for the petitioner, has not seriously pressed the contention that Regulations do not apply to the staff of Operation and Maintenance Department.
The learned Counsel contended that (1) the order of Disciplinary Authority which has become final cannot be reopened in the absence of any specific Rule to that effect, and (2) Regulation 10(2)(a) does not enable the Disciplinary Authority to order de novo enquiry and consequently the higher authority cannot order de novo enquiry acting under Regulation 7(c).
In support of first contention, learned Counsel for the petitioner relied on decisions in Dwarakchand v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1958 Raj.
38 and State of Assam v. JN Roy Biswas, AIR 1975 SC 2277.
In Dwarakchand's case (supra), it was held that once a departmental enquiry is over and a public servant has been exonerated, no departmental enquiry on the same set of facts can be ordered unless there is a specific provision for reviewing the order of exoneration in the Service Rules or any law to that effect.
In State of Assam v. JN Roy Biswas, the Supreme Court observed as follows :  "Once a disciplinary case has closed and the official re-instated, presumably on full exoneration, a chagrined Government cannot re-star the exercise in the absence of specific power to review or revise, vested by Rules in some authority.
The basics of the Rule of law cannot be breached without legal provision or other vitiating factor invalidating the earlier enquiry."
4.
These decisions do not help the petitioner in view of Regulation 7(c), (d) and (e) which are extracted below :  "7(c).
Where in any case a lower authority has imposed penalty or exonerated a member it shall not debar a higher authority from exercising his power under this regulation in respect of the same case.
The order of such higher authority shall supersede any order passed by a lower authority in respect of the same case.
Provided that in cases where a case is sought to be reopened after one year, the authority concerned (the reopening authority) should obtain the permission of the next higher authority or the Board as the case may be.
(d) the fact that a lower authority has dropped a charge against a person as not proved shall not debar higher authority from exercising it.
(e) Powers vested in an authority may be exercised by a superior authority in its discretion."
In view of this, there is no force in the first contention of the petitioner.
5.
The learned Standing Counsel for the Board contends that the Superintending Engineer can revise the order passed by Divisional Engineer by invoking Regulation 14(A) also which reads as follows :  "14.
(A) Powers of revision/review : (i) An authority superior to the authority having powers of appellate jurisdiction as provided in regulations 13 and 14 above may, suo motu or on application call for the records relating to any order passed or proceedings recorded by a subordinate authority, examine its legality, regularity or propriety and pass such orders as it deems fit confirming, setting aside, modifying or revising the order or proceedings under consideration; where the competent authority is satisfied that the order passed is : (a) due to inadvertance; or (b) on account of false representation of facts before the concerned authority; or (c) without hearing the party affected.
(ii) ........ (iii) ..........." 6.
It may be at once seen that the powers of reopening and revising are concurrent powers available to the higher authorities but the persons to exercise the power and the conditions for exercising that power are different.
While Regulation 7 can be invoked by any authority higher than the Disciplinary Authority, powers of revision under Regulation 14(A) can be exercised only by the authority higher than the appellate authority.
Again, while Regulation 7(c) does not envisage any condition or restriction on the exercise of the power, Regulation 14(A) limits the power only to cases of (1) inadvertance, (2) false representation of facts, and (3) no opportunity of hearing to the affected party.
In the instant case, it is obvious that Regulation 14(A) does not apply as none of the ingredients stated therein is satisfied and it is only Regulation 7(c) that is applicable.
7.
The next question is whether Regulations 7(c), (d) and (e) empower the higher authority to order de novo enquiry.
The contention of the Board is that under Regulation 7(c) read with (e), the higher authority can exercise same powers as are available to Disciplinary Authority and that accordingly he can order de novo enquiry under Regulation 10(2)(a).
Regulation 10(2)(a) reads as follows :  "In every case where it is proposed to impose on a member of a service any of the penalties specified in items (iv), (vi) (vii) and (viii) in Regulation 5, the authority competent to impose the penalty shall appoint an enquiry Officer, who shall be superior in rank to the person on whom it is proposed to impose the penalty, or shall itself hold an enquiry either suo motu or on a direction from a higher authority.
In every such case the grounds on which it is proposed to take action shall be reduced to the from of definite charge or charges, which shall be communicated to the person charged, together with a statement of the allegations on which each charge is based and of any other circumstances which it is proposed to take into consideration in passing orders in the case.
He shall be required, within a reasonable time, to file a written statement of his defence and to state whether he desires an oral enquiry or to be heard in person or both.
The person charged may, for the purpose of preparing his defence be permitted to inspect and take extracts from such official records as he may specify, provided that the enquiry officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing refuse such permission, if, in his opinion, such records are not relevant for the purpose or it is against public interest to allow access thereto.
On receipt of the statement of defence within the specified time or such further time as may have been give, an oral enquiry shall be held if such an enquiry is desired by the person charged or is decided upon by the enquiry officer or is directed by the competent authority.
At that enquiry, oral evidence shall be heard as to such of the allegatins as are not admitted and the person charged shall be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses to give evidence in person and to have such witnesses called as he may wish, provided that the enquiry officer, may, for special and sufficient reason to be recorded in writing, refuse to file, call a witness.
After the oral enquiry is completed, the person charged shall be entitled to file, if he so desires, any further written statement of his defence.
If no oral enquiry is held and the person charged desires to be heard in person, a personal hearing shall be given to him.
The enquiry officer shall on completion of the enquiry or the personal hearing of the person charged or both, forward the proceedings of the enquiry to the authority competent to impose the penalty unless he is himself such an officer.
The proceedings shall contain the charges framed against the person charged along with the grounds of charge, written statement filed in defence, if any, a sufficient record of the evidence adduced during the oral enquiry, a memorandum of the point urged by the person charged during the personal hearing, if any, a statement of the finding of the enquiry officer on the different charges and the grounds therefor.
Provided that the penalties specified in items (iv) and (vi) to (viii) in Regulation (5) shall be imposed by the competent authority with the concurrence of the Committees constituted as follows : ..........." The learned Counsel for the petitioner urges that Regulation 10(2)(a) does not empower Disciplinary Authority to direct de novo enquiry and relies on decisions in Calcutta Mun.
Corpn.
v. S Wajid Ali, Calcutta, 1993(3) SCT 449(Calcutta) and Bishnu Prasad Bohidar v. Chief GM SBI (Orissa),1994(1) SCT 67(Oirssa).
In Calcutta Municipal Corporation's case (supra), circular No. 6 of 1979-80 dated 14.6.1979 issued by the Commissioner of Municipal Corporation fell for consideration.
That circular reads as follows :  "If the Disciplinary Authority considers that there is any defect in the enquiry i.e. the Inquiry Authority had taken into consideration certain factors without giving the Civil Servant an opportunity to defend himself in that regard, the Disciplinary Authority may for reasons to be recorded by it in writing remit the case to the Inquiryingh Authority (sic) comes to the conclusion that the enquiry was not made in conformity with the principles of natural justice, it can quash the same and remit the case for fresh enquiry on all or some of the charges."
9.
Following the decision of the Supreme Court in KR Dev v. The Collector of Central Excise, AIR 1971 SC 1447, the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court held that the said circular enabled only ordering fresh enquiry if the enquiry conducted is vitiated by violation of principles of natural justice or if the employee is not given reasonable opportunity to defend himself and that if the employee is exonerated, the Disciplinary Authority cannot order de novo enquiry on the ground that certain witness was not examined.
In KR Dev v. The Collector of Central Excise (supra), Rule 15(1) of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules was considered.
That Rule reads as follows :  "Rule 15(1).
The Disciplinary Authority, if it is not itself the inquiring authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of Rule 14 as far as may be.
(2) The Disciplinary Authority shall, if it disagrees with the finding of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
Interpreting that Rule, the Supreme Court observed as follows : "It seems to us that Rule 15, on the face of it, really provides for one inquiry but it may be possible if in a particular case there has been no proper enquiry because some serious defect has crept into the inquiry or some important witnesses were not available at the time of the inquiry or were not examined for some other reason, the Disciplinary Authority may ask the Inquiry Officer to record further evidence.
But there is no provision in Rule 15 for completely setting aside previous inquiries on the ground that the report of the inquiring Officer or Officers does not appeal to the Disciplinary Authority.
The Disciplinary Authority has enough powers to reconsider the evidence itself and come to its own conclusion under Rule 9."
10.
In Bishnu Prasad Bohidar v. Chief GM, SBI (supra), Rule 50(3)(i) of State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules fell for interpretation.
That Rule empowers the Disciplinary Authority to remit the case to the Enquiry Authority for fresh or further enquiry and report, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Applying the decision of the Supreme Court in KR Dev.
v. The Collector of Central Excise (supra), the Division Bench held that the Rule does not give plenary power to the Disciplinary Authority to order de novo enquiry, the holding of second enquiry is normally discouraged and that de novo enquiry can be ordered only if the Disciplinary Authority comes to the conclusion that the enquiry is vitiated by serious defect and it is always open to Disciplinary Authority to differ from the Inquiring Authority and come to his own conclusion, on the evidence already recorded.
On the facts of that case, the Division Bench set aside the de novo enquiry directed by the Disciplinary Authority on the mere ground that required evidence was not properly presented in the enquiry.
11.
In W.P. No. 7506 of 1973 dated 341974, a case arising under Central Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, applying the decision of the Supreme Court in KR Dev.
v. The Collector of Central Excise (supra), Justice Sambasiva Rao, as he then was, held that the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority quashing the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer for reasons of "grave lacunae and procedural defects in the inquiry" and directing fresh enquiry is without jurisdiction.
12.
From the review of the above cases, it is clear that the Courts have held that normally second enquiry is discouraged and only in exceptional cases specified in relevant Rules, de novo enquiry can be ordered provided the conditions stated therein are satisfied.
13.
Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that in the present case Regulation 10(2)(a) does not contemplate any de novo enquiry and hence the principle decided in these cases applies with more force.
On the other hand, the learned standing Counsel for the Board, relies on a decision of this Court in Mohana Rao v. D.I.G.
of Policy, 1975(1) An.
W.R. 2890i interpreting analogous Rule 19(2) of Andhra Pradesh Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
It was held by Justice Chinnappa Reddy, as he then was, that Rule 19(2) does not impose any restriction on the power of punishing authority to order de novo enquiry in order to set right any irregularity or illegality committed by the Enquiry Officer.
The learned Judge distinguished the decisions of the Supreme Court in KR Dev.
v. The Collector of Central Excise (supra) and of Sri Sambasiva Rao, J in W.P. No. 7506 of 1993 on the ground that in those cases, the initiation of enquiry was not beset with a fatal defect.
The learned Judge held that if there is a fatal defect in the initiation of enquiry, the Disciplinary Authority must order fresh enquiry without waiting for the objection to be taken by the official and that the first enquiry is void followed by a valid enquiry.
In my opinion, this decision is distinguishable.
In that case, the Enquiry Officer prepared the report without examining the relevant records and without considering the explanation of the official.
This was held to be fatal defect vitiating the enquiry.
But in the instant case, the defect alleged is that official of Anti-Corruption Bureau has not been associated with the enquiry.
The Regulations which are statutory in nature do not lay down any such requirement and hence non- associating the official of Anti-Corruption Bureau as indicated in the Government memo No. 3265 SC E/86-2 dated 611987 and communicated to the Board on 2511987, to be followed as a guideline cannot be said to be illegal or fatal.
Whether such de novo enquiry can be ordered even in cases where charged person is exonerated in enquiry conducted with fatal defect is left open as it does not arise in this case.
14.
To sum up, Regulation 10(2)(a) of Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board Employees' Discipline and Appeal Regulations does not normally provide for de novo enquiry.
But where there is a fatal procedural defect committed in the first enquiry causing prejudice to the official, the Disciplinary Authority can order fresh enquiry even without waiting for the delinquent official to raise that objection.
Whether such a course is open to the Disciplinary Authority in cases where the charged official is exonerated in the first enquiry is left open.
But where an official is exonerated in the first enquiry not vitiated by serious fatal defect, the Disciplinary Authority cannot order de novo enquiry merely on the ground that certain witness was not examined or certain documents was not considered, etc.
It is always open to the Disciplinary Authority to come to a different conclusion on the evidence recorded by the Enquiring Authority.
What the Disciplinary Authority can do under Regulation 10(2)(a), the higher authority can also do acting under Regulation 7(c), (d) and (e).
As the defect pointed out by the Superintending Engineer in the instant case is not a fatal one, the de novo enquiry ordered is without jurisdiction.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed with costs.
Advocate's fee Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.