Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can the Government make recruitment in excess of the posts advertised by it ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in the present case.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The Haryana Public Service Commission advertised four posts of Labour- cum-Conciliation Officers.
One of these posts was reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes.
The candidates were required to submit their applications on or before April 18, 1994.
The Essential Qualifications including a Degree in Law or a Degree in Labour Welfare from a recognised University/Institution were prescribed.
The Commission made the selection.
The four selected candidates were appointed.
The petitioner who did not possess the prescribed qualifications by the last date for submission of applications but had acquired these qualifications in September 1994 apprehended that the Government was going to appoint two candidates viz. respondents 3 and 4 who were in the waiting list, to the posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers.
He alleges that this action of the Government is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as the candidates who have now become eligible would be deprived of their right to be considered for these posts.
He, consequently, prays that the Government should be directed to advertise the two posts and restrained from appointing respondents 3 and 4.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that prior to January 12, 1998 there were twelve posts of Labour Officers in the Department.
According to the rules, four were required to be filled up by direct recruitment.
At the relevant time, only two candidates viz. M/s Hoshiar Singh and Anupam Malik had been appointed by direct recruitment.
Requisition for advertisement of the remaining two posts was sent to the Commission on May 9, 1988.
The Government was advised to amend the qualifications.
While the case for amendment of the qualifications was in process, M/s Hoshiar Singh and Anupam Malik were promoted from the post of Labour Officer to that of Deputy Labour Commissioner on March 13, 1991 and January 29, 1993, respectively.
Thus, the number of posts which had to be filled up by direct recruitment had risen to four.
On January 12, 1988 the Haryana Labour Department (Group-B) Service Rules, 1987 were enforced.
The quota of direct recruits was raised to 50%.
Four more posts were created.
Out of these, two had to be filled up by direct recruitment.
Thus, the total number of posts which had to be filled up by direct recruitment had risen to six.
However, requisition for advertising only four posts was sent to the Commission in spite of the fact that six posts were available.
It was further stated that "no decision has yet been taken to appoint the persons as alleged by the petitioner......"  5.
This case had come up for hearing before the Motion Bench on August 8, 1995.
In view of the averments made in the written statement, the Bench directed the State Government to take a specific decision.
On September 5, 1995 learned counsel for the State of Haryana produced a letter, dated August 25, 1995 before the Court.
It was conveyed that the Government had decided to fill those posts which were in existence prior to the date of sending requisition to the Commission from the waiting list.
The Bench, inter alia, observed that "Prima facie, we are of the view that this cannot be done.
However, the matter requires consideration at greater length".
It has now come up for hearing.
6.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that the State Government is not entitled to fill up any post in excess of those which had been actually advertised by it.
On the other hand, it has been submitted by Mr. Surya Kant who has appeared on behalf of respondent No. 3, that the Government is entitled to fill up the existing vacancies out of the candidates in the waiting list.
The claim made on behalf of respondent No. 3 has further supported by the learned counsel for the State, the Commission as well as Mr. HS Hooda who appeared for respondent No. 4.
7.
It is in this situation that the question posed at the outset viz. "Can the Government make recruitment in excess of the posts advertised by it ?"
requires consideration.
8.
The Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matter of employment or appointment to any office under the State.
If this guarantee has to become a reality, it is essential to limit the exercise of discretion by the selection as well as the Appointing Authorities.
Grant of absolute discretion not only results in uncertainty but can lead to injustice or even negation of the guarantee embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is primarily with this object in view that the Courts have consistently insisted upon greater emphasis on marks allotted for the written test or the Academic Qualifications and reduction of marks for interview.
Even though initially the Courts had observed that the Government could fill up vacancies in excess of the advertised posts amongst the candidates who were on the waiting list, the time has come to stop it.
In case the Government is permitted to use the waiting list as a source of recruitment, there is an inherent danger that the guarantee of equality may become totally illusory.
It has repeatedly been noticed that the vacancies are not advertised periodically.
These are allowed to be manned by making ad hoc arrangements and ultimately the ad hoc appointees who have entered through the back door are made regular.
The eligible candidates who do not have the right contacts and are unable to get ad hoc appointment miss the bus.
They do not get a chance to compete and prove their merit.
Resultantly, there is denial of equality of opportunity.
In principle, it is essential to ensure that the Government is not able to fill up posts without complying with the basic requirements of Articles 14 and 16 the Constitution of India.
If the guarantee as enshrined in the Constitution has to become a reality, the discretion available to the Government has to be curtailed and the rules as well as the instructions that may be issued from time to time have to be strictly construed.
9.
Admittedly on the Government's own showing six posts of Labour-cum- Conciliation Officers were available prior to March, 1994.
Yet the Government chose to advertise only four.
Mr. Surya Kant submitted that this was manoeuvred by the officers who had been granted ad hoc promotion.
There is nothing on record to support this.
However even if it be so, one can only lament the failure of the Department to overcome the pressure or see through the trick.
The fact remains that only four posts were advertised.
To these, appointments were made.
It was thereafter that the move for appointment of more persons viz. respondents 3 and 4 was initiated.
When challenged, the Government pleaded that it had taken no final decision.
However, the Government was forced to state that factual position.
It admitted that the vacancies are going to be filled up.
If this is allowed to happen, the result would be that the candidates who were not amongst the most meritorious but were kept on the waiting list, would be appointed.
Still further, the persons who have become eligible after April 18, 1994 would be deprived of the chance to compete.
The petitioner is one of those persons.
His right to be considered for appointment as a Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer would be completely defeated.
This would surely result in denial of the equality of opportunity.
It would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Such a course cannot be permitted.
10.
Mr. Surya Kant submitted that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government from time to time, the vacancies can be filled up from amongst the persons on the waiting list.
He also submitted that if the vacancies were actually in existence but were not advertised on account of the manipulation by certain persons, the rights of the selected candidates viz. respondents 3 and 4 should not be jeopardised.
However, no such plea has been raised in the pleadings.
No factual basis for the contention has been laid.
It has nowhere been pointed out that the action of the Authorities in not advertising the two posts was based on some manipulations by the promoted candidates or that the instructions permit the Government to make recruitment against the already existing vacancies from the waiting list.
In the absence of specific pleadings in this behalf and the relevant factual data, the learned counsel cannot be permitted to raise the contention.
Furthermore, according to the settled position of law the Court has to find the case as pleaded by the parties.
In the absence of specific pleadings, the contention has to be rejected.
11.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Surya Kant referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Om Parkash v. The State of Haryana and another, 1995(4) SCT 331(P&H) : 1995(4) AIJ 305 to point out that a select list is valid for one year and that it is permissible to make appointments from the waiting list.
In Om Parkash's case (supra), the Bench noticed the Circulars issued by the Government from time to time.
The latest of these Circulars was issued on October 28, 1993.
By letter, dated January 20, 1988 the Chief Secretary had informed the Subordinate Services Selection Board that a waiting list of 25% shall be prepared in cases where the number of vacancies is up to 25.
Beyond that, the number of persons on the waiting list was reduced.
Vide Circular, dated October 28, 1993, it was clarified (as noticed by the Bench) that "the Commission shall also prepare a waiting list along with the main list and the validity of the main list shall be for six months and the waiting list shall also remain alive for six months".
It further appears that according to the Circular, the vacancies which had become available within the prescribed time after the selection by the Commission can be filled up from the waiting list.
However it has not been said that the persons whose names appeared in the waiting list can be appointed to the posts which were available on the date of the advertisement but were not actually advertised.
In fact, a Division Bench of this Court while deciding Review Application No. 107 of 1995 (Raj Kumar etc. v. State of Haryana etc.) has specifically held that the candidates on the waiting list could be appointed only against those vacancies/posts become available "within a period of six months after the receipt of the list".
The plea for appointment against the vacancies which were available prior to the receipt of the recommendations from the Commission, was declined.
Similar is the position in the present case.
The Government was aware of the availability of posts.
These were not advertised.
No instructions have been brought on record to show that such vacancies can be filled up from the waiting list.
The claim made on behalf of the respondents in this behalf cannot, thus, be accepted.
12.
Mr. Surya Kant then submitted that a strict construction would cause administrative hardship inasmuch as the Selection is a time-consuming process.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the fear appears to be imaginary.
The requisition appears to have been sent by the Government to the Commission in March 1994.
The candidates were selected and appointed in the first-half of the year 1995.
In fact, it appears that they were deputed for training vide order, dated June 20, 1995.
In the very nature of things, the Commission must have made the recommendation earlier.
Some time must have been consumed in medical examination and verification of antecedents through the Police.
Still further, it is not impossible to curtail time taken by the Authorities in the selection process.
In fact if the appropriate Authority makes an effort and a cadre review is conducted periodically, the vacancies can be easily anticipated and advertised.
If advance notice is given to the Commission, it can proceed to make the selection without any loss of time and the list of selected candidates can be available even before the vacancies actually occur or soon thereafter.
13.
Mr. Surya Kant referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dr. Uma Kant v. Dr. Bhika Lal Jain and others, 1991(3) SCT 256(SC) : 1991(5) S.L.R.
624 and Gujarat State Dy.
Executive Engineers' Association v. The State of Gujarat and others, JT 1994(3) SC 559 : 1994(3) SCT 325(SC), to contend that the Government can make recruitment in excess of the posts advertised by it.
In Dr. Uma Kant's case (supra), their Lordships on a consideration of the provisions of the Rajasthan University Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) Act, 1974, held that the Selection Committee while making its recommendations to the Syndicate has to "prepare a list of candidates selected by it in order of merit and shall further prepare a reserve list in the same order and to the extent of 50% of the vacancies for the post of teachers or officers".
They further held that "a reading of section 5 with section 6(4) makes it quite clear that the Selection Committee constituted shall recommend not only the candidates selected by it in order of merit but shall further prepare a reserve list to the extent of 50% of the vacancies and persons kept in the reserve list will be considered as having been selected for the concerned post and shall be entitled for appointment if vacancy is caused during the validity period of the reserve list".
No such provision, or that a vacancy had occurred subsequently has been pointed out in the present case.
In the latter case viz. Gujarat State Dy.
Executive Engineers' Association (supra), it was specifically ruled that :-  "A waiting list prepared in an examination conducted by the Commission does not furnish a source of recruitment.
It is operative only for the contingency that if any of the selected candidates does not join then the persons from the waiting list may be pushed up and be appointed in the vacancy so caused or if there is some extreme exigency the Government may as a matter of policy decision pick up persons in order of merit from the waiting list........... if the waiting list in one examination was to operate as an infinite stock for appointments, there is a danger that the State Government may resort to the device of not holding an examination for years together and pick up candidates from the waiting list as and when required..........
Although the Circular was issued in 1983 but it only attempted to clarify what was implied purpose of a waiting list.
Even without it, the operation of a waiting list should be confined to the vacancies notified for that examination and for any vacancy arising in future unless a policy decision is taken by the Government to that effect."
(emphasis supplied).
14.
A perusal of these observations clearly shows that a waiting list cannot be used for appointment to a vacancy unless it was advertised and a "selection was held for it".
It "does not furnish a source of recruitment".
It is operative only for the contingency that "if any of the selected candidates does not join then the person from the waiting list may be pushed up and be appointed in the vacancy so caused."
Furthermore, it deserves notice that the "view taken by the High Court that since the vacancies have not been worked out properly, therefore, the candidates from the waiting list were liable to be appointed" was clearly found to be unsound.
This is exactly the position in the present case.
The decision, consequently, does not support the plea raised by the learned counsel.
Their Lordships clearly observed that "The constitutional discipline requires that this Court should not permit such improper exercise of power which may result in creating a vested interest and perpetrate waiting list for the candidates of one examination at the cost of entire set of fresh candidates either from the open or even from service.".
15.
Nearer home, a Full Bench of this Court in Bijender Singh etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., 1994(4) SCT 382 (P&H) : (1994-3) 108 P.L.R.
1, has held that the Selection Board cannot make the selection in excess of the number of posts for which requisition has been placed before it.
It was further held that a small percentage of candidates or as may be desired by the Government can be kept on the waiting list so that in the event of some candidates not joining the posts or being found unsuitable on verification of their antecedents or on physical examination, the next in order of merit may be made available".
This rule is clearly applicable in the present case.
16.
Lastly, a vain attempt was also made to suggest that even according to the advertisement the number of the posts was subject to variation to any extent.
It has not been shown that the Government had given such an indication to the Commission.
On the contrary, the petitioner had confronted the Government with a written statement filed in an earlier case viz. Civil Writ Petition No. 14073 of 1994 (Anil Kumar Sardana v. State of Haryana).
This written statement clearly showed that "in all, total four posts out of 16 posts fall within the share of direct recruits".
It was claimed that "the answering respondent has rightly sent the requisition for filling the four post of Labour of Officers to respondent No. 2".
Faced with this situation, the respondent-State submitted that it had filed an application for amendment of the written statement.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the decision of the Government was to fill up four posts by direct recruitment.
It has not been shown that the Commission was advised to indicate that there would be a variation of vacancies.
In any event, it has not been shown that the Commission was ever informed about the existence of more posts or that the Commission had given such a notice to the candidates or invited additional applications.
A mere stipulation in the advertisement that the number of posts is subject to variation does not give the respondents any right to vary the number.
A specific number having been indicated and no information regarding the variation having been notified, the respondents cannot be permitted to make recruitment to the posts which had not been advertised.
17.
Counsel for the parties had referred to certain other decisions as well.
These are clearly distinguishable on facts and a reference thereto shall serve no useful purpose.
18.
No other point was urged.
19.
In view of the above, the question posed at the outset is answered in the negative.
It is held that the Government is not competent to make appointments to the posts which were not duly advertised.
Accordingly, the decision of the Government to fill up the two vacancies by appointment of respondents 3 and 4 or anyone else cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly quashed.
20.
The Writ Petition is allowed and it is held that the respondents shall not fill up the available vacancies falling to the share of direct recruits without issuing a fresh advertisement.
Unless the Government decides not to fill up these vacancies, it shall proceed to advertise these posts immediately and the Commission shall make the selection without any loss of time.
In the circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.