Ashok Bhan and NK Sodhi, JJ.
- Petitioner, who was BA, BEd.
and was appointed as J.B.T.
Teacher on 30121980, has filed this writ for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant her pay of master grade from the date of her acquiring higher qualifications in terms of the circular dated 23.7.1957, issued by the State of Punjab (which is applicable to the State of Haryana as well).
2.
Notice of motion was issued in response to which written statement has been filed.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner had not acquired the High qualifications of BA, BEd.
after joining the service and that she already had these qualifications at the time of joining service for the first time in the year 1980.
It has been denied that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the circular issued by the State of Punjab dated 23.7.1957.
4.
The contention raised by the respondents has no force in view of a Division Bench judgment of this Court, reported as Rattan Singh v. State of Haryana 1995(1) SCT 711, wherein it was held as under :-  "In Jetha Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another's case (supra) and Nasib Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and another's case (supra), this Court followed the Supreme Court judgments and upheld the claim of the petitioners to the grant of higher pay scale.
The same has been reiterated in the unreported judgments given in Megh Raj and others v. State of Haryana and another's case (supra), Ram Parkash v. State of Haryana's case (supra) and Mohindu Kathuria v. State of Haryana (supra).
Circular dated 931990 issued by the Government of Haryana, in our opinion, cannot be used to deny relief to the petitioners.
A careful perusal of that circular shows that the issue of the same is nothing but an attempt to frustrate the rights of the existing teachers to get higher pay from the date they acquired higher qualifications.
Distinction sought to be made out between the persons appointed as Masters with higher qualifications and those acquiring higher qualification while in service is illusory and unwarranted.
A similar situation was considered by the Supreme Court in PK Ramachandra Iyer and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 541 : (1983(3) SLR 495 (SC).
In that case petitioners, who were holding the posts of Professors were denied higher pay scale because they did not possess a particular qualification.
While upholding their claim for grant of higher pay scale according to the principle of equal pay for equal work, the Supreme Court observed : "The principle 'equal pay for equal work' is deductible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) and may be properly applied to the case of unequal scales of pay based on classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.
AIR 1982 SC 879.
Even though the three petitioners were respectively holding the post of Professor in Animal Pathology, Animal Genetics and Veterinary Parasitology all attached to Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) from 1963, 1970 and 1970 respectively, when the pay scale for the post of Professor on the recommendation of the University Grants Commission under went an upward revision to Rs. 1100-1600, the ICAR instead of straightaway granting the scale to the petitioners, the holders of the posts of Professor, proceeded to issue an advertisement on May 21, 1974 inviting fresh applications for the post of Professor in the three subjects in which the petitioners were already holding the post of Professor and simultaneously appointed some others in different subjects and disciplines as Professors and gave them the revised scale while the petitioners were left to languish in the old scale.
This was a glaring example of discriminatory treatment accorded to old, experienced and highly qualified hands with an evil eye and unequal hand and the guarantee of equality in all its pervasive character must enable Supreme Court to remove discrimination and to restore fair play in action.
The classification of existing incumbents as being distinct and separate from newly recruited hands with flimsy change in essential qualification would be wholly irrational and arbitrary."
In view of the law laid down by the Division Bench referred to above, this writ petition has to be allowed.
5.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant to the petitioner the higher pay scale with effect from the date she joined the service in terms of the Government instructions dated 23.7.1957.
Arrears of pay in terms of this judgment be given to the petitioner within six months from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.