NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus, certiorari or any other suitable writ direction or order quashing the order dated 2241992 by which the petitioner has been reverted from the post of Executive Engineer in the Class I Service to the post of Assistant Electrical Inspector (Assistant Engineer Class II) whereas respondent No. 3 Nirmal Singh has been promoted with retrospective effect from 2281991.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was recruited as Assistant Engineer in the respondent-department by the method of direct recruitment and joined on 1121976.
Petitioner was confirmed as Assistant Engineer Class II w.e.f.
1741976 vide order dated 261979 (Annexure P-1).
According to the case of the petitioner, respondent No. 3 was appointed as a Line Superintendent in Class III services on 24.6.1968 and was promoted as Assistant Engineer vide order dated 24121979 and thereafter confirmed as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
the year 1981.
According to the petitioner, prior to the year 1979 Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) Recruitment Rules, 1939 and the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch Conditions of Service) Rules, 1939 were applicable in respect of Class II and Class I services.
As per these rules, no person can be appointed to Class II services unless he had obtained a degree/diploma or a certificate mentioned in appendix 'A' attached to the Recruitment Rules.
According to the case of the petitioner, respondent No. 3, Nirmal Singh, did not possess the requisite qualification.
Thus, at the time when petitioner was recruited to the post of Assistant Engineer, respondent No. 3 being not eligible was rightly not considered.
In fact, in the Civil Writ Petition No. 4752 of 1975 the State of Punjab in its written statement took up a specified stand that respondent No. 3 did not possess the requisite qualification.
Copy of the written statement is Annexure P-2.
It is further case of the petitioner, that in the year 1984 a post of Executive Engineer fell vacant as incumbent Shri DS Uppal went on indefinite leave and so in view of the resultant vacancy to the post of Executive Engineer the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis vide order dated 7111984 (Annexure P-3) and in April, 1985 as Shri DS Uppal came back as Executive Engineer, the petitioner was reverted back as Assistant Engineer Class II.
It is in February, 1987 that Shri Uppal was promoted as Chief Electrical Inspector.
Since the petitioner was the senior-most Engineer Class II, he filed a representation claiming that he be promoted to the vacancy so accrued and so vide order dated 751987 the petitioner was given additional charge of Executive Engineer till the post was filled up by a regular incumbent (Annexure P-4).
It is on 22.1.1988 that petitioner was promoted as Executive Engineer on ad hoc basis, Annexure P-5 at which post he continued to work till he was regularised on 21.3.1990 Annexure P-6.
It is further case of the petitioner that no seniority list was circulated by the Department till today.
Petitioner lay claim to be promoted to the post of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
the year 1984 and so filed a representation, Annexure P-7.
Reliance was placed upon Rule 7(1)(b) of the Recruitment Rules and it was urged that since the petitioner in pursuance to his selection by the Punjab Public Service Commission joined as Assistant Engineer on 1121976 whereas Shri TN Sharma, Amarjit Singh Sidhu and Hardev Singh Sidhu joined subsequently.
As the petitioner was senior and so was entitled to be promoted from the year 1984.
Respondent No. 3, however, laid his claim to the post of Executive Engineer on the ground that the same fell to the quota of the members of Scheduled Caste and so prayed for an opportunity of hearing .
It is on the basis of the representation given by respondent No. 3 that petitioner was reverted to the post of Assistant Engineer vide order dated 2281991 and in his place respondent No. 3 was promoted as Executive Engineer.
Documents are Annexures P-8 and P-9.
3.
Petitioner feeling aggrieved by the orders Annexures P-8 and P-9 filed a civil writ petition No. 13599 of 1991 wherein the Court while issuing notice of motion to the respondents stayed the petitioners' revision.
Subsequently, on receipt of the replies filed by the respondent-State as well as the private respondents, the matter was remitted back to the respondent- State to decide afresh after affording the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 an opportunity of hearing and to dispose of the matter by passing a speaking order.
It was further directed by the Division Bench that matter be finalised within two months from the filing of the representation by the petitioner.
Since, the petitioner could not file the representation within the stipulated time, a civil miscellaneous was filed and so a detailed representation was allowed to be filed by the Court which has been considered and disposed of by the impugned orders Annexures P-13 and P-14.
4.
Vide Annexure P-13, earlier dated 2281991 was withdrawn as per directions of the Court and order Annexure P-14 dated 2241992 respondent No. 3 has been promoted to the post of Executive Engineer thus reverting the petitioner.
5.
Pursuance to notice of motion issued by the Court, respondent-State as well as the contesting respondent have filed separate statement.
Respondents 1 and 2 in their written statement besides controverting the various material averments made in the writ petition have also taken some preliminary objections with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition i.e. the present writ petition is pre-mature as the petitioner has not exhausted all the departmental remedies available to him under the Rules.
Secondly, the petitioner has not disclosed the order of his reversion passed on 2241992 which was duly delivered to him on 2341992 prior to the filing of the present writ petition.
Justifying the respondent No. 3's promotion, it was stated that the post earmarked for a member of Scheduled Caste fell vacant prior to the promulgation of new service rules in the year 1992 and so this particular post was to be filled up under the old rules.
Since, respondent No. 3 possessed the requisite qualification as per Rule 7 of the Rules of 1939, respondent No. 3 was rightly promoted.
Replying on merit, respondents No. 1 and 2 highlighted that respondent No. 3 stood promoted under Rule 7 of the Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1939 prior to the notification of the present rules on 1421992.
Thus, the reference to Electrical Inspector Class I Rules, 1992 which came into existence after the notification on 12.2.1992 could not be applied in the present case.
Dealing with the objection of the petitioner that no seniority list was maintained in the cadre of Executive Engineer nor the same was circulated, it was explained that the merit determined by the Punjab Public Service Commission was accepted.
As per the merit determined by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Shri TN Sharma, HS Sidhu, Amarjit Singh Walia, Ajit Singh Walia and Amarjit Singh Sidhu were shown in the same order.
In fact, on the receipt of representation of respondent No. 3 that he be promoted against a post reserved for members of Scheduled Caste, that the Department of Personnel and Legal Rememberancer was requested to give clarification as to how the reservation is to be given in Class I where the cadre is 5 or less than 5.
Department of Personnel advised vide letter No.21/12/91-3-PPI, dated 2521991 that in such a cadre the second point should be filled upon by promoting a member belonging to Scheduled Caste to the rank of Executive Engineer and petitioner being at the tail was consequently reverted.
It was thus prayed that order staying the operation of order dated 2241992 be vacated and writ petitioner be dismissed.
6.
Respondent No. 3 in his written statement took up the following preliminary objections :-  (i) That he was inducted into service of respondent No. 1 against the post of Line Superintendent on June 24, 1968.
At that time this post fell in the category of Engineering Subordinates.
Answering respondent was confirmed against the post of Line Superintendent in the year 1972.
(ii) That the promotion of the petitioner was to be regulated by the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1939 i.e. from Engineering Subordinates to Assistant Engineer and thereafter to the post of Chief Engineer.
Similarly, under Rules framed in 1979 respondent No. 3 was holding the post of Line Superintendent and became eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer on completion of 10 years of service.
This way, even the 1979 rules did not curtail the right of the respondent for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
It is after considering the claim of the respondent that he was promoted to the rank of Assistant Engineer vide order dated 24121979.
This promotion of the respondent No. 3 was against a substantive vacancy which had become available prior to the appointment by promotion of the answering respondent to the post of Assistant Engineer.
Thus, after the coming into enforcement of 1979 Rules the case of the answering respondent was to be examined in the light of these rules.
Since respondent No. 3 was denied promotion when respondent No. 1 considered the claims of the eligible Assistant Engineers for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer so the answering respondent represented and same was considered by the respondent-State and necessary relief was granted.
(iii) That Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (Class I) Service Rules, 1992 which were notified on February 12, 1992 are inapplicable as these rules will apply on prospectively i.e. to the vacancy which arise after the notification of 1992 Rules.
Since, in the instant case, the vacancy had admittedly accrued earlier, the old rules will be applicable to the matter under enquiry.
7.
Replying on merit, respondent No. 3 specifically denied the averment made by the petitioner or the effect that respondent No. 3 did not possess the requisite qualification and so was not eligible for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer in Class I services.
According to the respondent, in fact, the possession of a degree or diploma qualification is not a pre-requisite for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer.
It has been stated there were three cadre posts in the rank of Executive Engineer.
Appointment by reservation has never been made to the rank of Executive Engineer for want of a qualified Assistant Engineer.
Since, respondent No. 3 has acquired the eligibility to be promoted to the post of Executive Engineer, he has been duly considered by the authorities and so allowed promotion on the carried forward vacancy meant for the category of Scheduled Caste.
Thus, the plea of the petitioner that at the time of the promotion of the answering respondent, vacancy in the rank of Executive Engineer was a solitary vacancy is of no consequence.
A carried forward vacancy in the cadre of less than 5 can be filled up even when the same exist for a solitary vacancy.
In fact, the promotion of the answering respondent is in conformity with the instructions Annexure R-3/3 dated 11101994.
This way writ petition is devoid of any merit and deserves to be dismissed.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner after highlighting the factual aspects of the case, which have been briefly noticed in the earlier part of the judgment, assailed the order of promotion of respondent No. 3, Annexure P-14 on a number of grounds, namely, (i) that respondent No3 does not possess the requisite qualification to the post; (ii) that in case of a single vacancy plea of reservation of seat could not be invoked; (iii) that reservation in promotion amounts to treating equals as un-equals; and (iv) that petitioner having worked as an Executive Engineer for almost four and a half years, his reversion after such a long gap is not only unjustified but violates also the principle of natural justice.
9.
Elaborating, the counsel urged that petitioner was recruited as Assistant Engineer way back in the year 1976 through the agency of Punjab Public Service Commission whereas respondent No. 3 joined as a Line Superintendent in Class III service sometime in the year 1968.
Petitioner was confirmed as Assistant Engineer Class II w.e.f.
1741976 vide order dated 261979 whereas respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant Engineer on 24121979.
This way, respondent No. 3 is junior to the petitioner.
Dilating upon the plea that respondent No. 3 did not possess the requisite qualification, reference was made to the relevant rules of 1939 and to the qualification possessed by respondent No. 3.
Reference has also been made to the written statement filed by the respondent-State in Civil Writ Petition No. 4752 of 1975.
This objection of the petitioner is wholly misplaced.
In the present case, respondent No. 3 has been promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer on his completion of 10 years service.
Earlier, the parties were governed by the Rules of 1939 and subsequently on formulation of new rules called Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (Class II) Rules, 1979 governed the parties.
Section 4 of Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1939 reads as under :-  "(1) No person will be appointed to the service unless he :-  (a) is a British subject as defined in Section 1 of the British nationality and Status of Aliens Act, 1914, or has been made eligible under sub-section (2) of Section 262 of the Government of India Act, 1935; (b) Satisfies Government that his character and antecedents are such as to qualify him for appointment to the service; decision regarding dismissal must be made by Government and not by the Commission; (c) has passed the Examination making him eligible for obtaining a decree/diploma or a certificate mentioned in Appendix A, or is a Corporate Member either of Institution of Mechanical Engineers or of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, or has passed Parts A and B of the Associate Membership Examination of the Institute of Engineers (India) or possesses qualification which exempt him from passing A and B of the Associate Membership Examination of the Institute of Engineers (India) or has passed the Graduateship Examination of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (London) and has obtained practical training for at least two years after passing the above Examination in some reputed Electrical Engineering Firm, Government Hydro-Electric Works, etc; (d) has obtained from the Standing Medical Board at Lahore or from such medical authority in England as the High Commissioner may deem fit, a certificate of mental and physical fitness as prescribed by the regulations in Appendix B, and is considered by the medical authority to be fit in all respects for active outdoor duty.
(2) Permanent Engineering Subordinates in the Electricity Branch of outstanding merits and with not less than 10 years service in the Branch will also be eligible for appointment to the service, on the recommendation of the Chief Engineer.
Clauses (c) and (d) of the sub-rule (1) will not be applicable in their case.
The number of such appointments shall not exceed 10 per cent of the total number of posts of Assistant Engineers Class II, provided that this percentage may be increased in exceptional cases, on the recommendation of the Chief Engineer, for employment on construction works."
10.
Under Section 4 sub-clause (2) Permanent Engineering Subordinates in the Electricity Branch of outstanding merits and with not less than 10 years service in the Branch are also eligible for appointment to the service on the recommendation of Chief Engineer.
There is no qualitative difference with regard to the qualification to be possessed by a person under Rules of 1939 or of 1979.
Keeping this in view, on respondent No. 3 completing 10 years of service as an Engineering Subordinates, he was promoted on June 24, 1978.
11.
The plea of the petitioner that it is a case of single vacancy and so the respondent No. 3 could not be promoted on account of reservation quota is also misplaced.
In fact, one post of Executive Engineer was sanctioned on 131980.
Shri DS Uppal being the senior-most was thus promoted to the post of Executive Engineer.
Subsequently, two more posts were sanctioned on 2261983 to which Shri TN Sharma, and HS Sidhu were promoted; that in the year 1984, the post of Executive Engineer fell vacant as Shri DS Uppal proceeded on indefinite leave.
Resultantly, in respect of this vacancy the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis vide order dated 7111984.
It so happened that Shri Uppal was reverted back as Executive Engineer in April, 1985 and so petitioner was reverted back as Assistant Engineer Class II.
Finally, in February, 1987 Shri DS Uppal was promoted as Chief Electrical Inspector and so.
The post of Executive Engineer held by him fell vacant.
Petitioner laid claim to it on the ground that he had worked on the post of Executive Engineer for a long time and otherwise too he was senior-most Engineer Class II and so be promoted.
It is on the representation of the petitioner that petitioner was promoted as Executive Engineer on 22.1.1988 on ad hoc basis.
Respondent No. 3 also filed a representation to be promoted as Executive Engineer on the ground that he belongs to a Scheduled Caste and amongst quota reserved for Scheduled Caste this vacancy falls to its share.
The respondent-State sought the necessary clarification from the Department of Personnel and Legal Remembrancer as to how such a vacancy is to be filled.
It is after having received the necessary clarification vide letter No. 21/12/91-3-PPI dated 2521991 that respondent-state chose to fill up this vacancy by promoting a member belonging to Scheduled Caste.
The Department of Personnel specifically clarified that where Class I cadre is of 5 or less than 5 the second vacancy is to be filled by way of reservation.
12.
The plea of the petitioner that reservation in promotion amounts to treating the equals as un-equals is in fact not attracted in the instant case.
Respondent No. 3 belongs to Scheduled Caste and has laid claim to this vacancy which fell to the share of Scheduled Caste.
Though as per instructions second vacancy was to be filled up amongst the Scheduled Caste persons and since none was available the same was utilised by filling up the vacancy from amongst the unreserved category.
As there was some ambiguity as to how such a vacancy is to be filled up, the matter was referred by various departments who were facing difficulty in implementing it and so was finally resolved as per communication dated 11101974(R-3/3) operative part of which reads as :-  "According to these instructions, in a cadre of less than five posts, if there be only one vacancy, it should be treated as 'UNRESERVED', but if on this account a reserved point is treated as unpreserved, the reservation is to be carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In view, however, of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India, it has not been decided that the reservation with respect to the solitary vacancy so un- reserved and carried forward must be given effect to on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the same cadre.
The aforementioned instructions may be considered as having been modified to the extent indicated above.
The receipt of this communication may kindly be acknowledged."
13.
Respondent No3 has been promoted in the light of communication Annexure R3/3 and the clarification given by the Department of Personnel and Legal Remembrancer by communication dated 2521991.
Thus, this objection of the petitioner is also devoid of any substance.
14.
Relying upon Indra Sawhney v. Union of India and others etc. etc 1993(1) SCT 448(SC) : AIR 1993 SC 477 counsel argued that there can be no more reservation in promotions.
Earlier government instructions have become unenforceable since respondent No. 3 has been promoted on the basis of reservation of seat; since an order is unsustainable in law.
15.
This point has been examined by the Apex Court in para No. 107 of the judgment.
The Court after noticing that the decision in Rangachari (AIR 1962 SC 36) has been the law for more than 30 years and also the fact that attempts to re-open the issue were repelled in Karamchari Sangh (AIR 1981 SC 298), directed that the decision shall only operate prospectively and shall not affect promotions already made whether on temporary, officiating or regular/permanent basis.
It further directed that wherever reservations are already provided in the matter of promotion be it Central Services or State Services or for that matter services under any Corporation, authority or body falling under the definition of 'State' in Article 12 such reservation shall continue in operation for a period of 5 years from day.
It further directed that the authorities may revise or modify or re-issue the relevant Rules to ensure the achievement of the objective of Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment the vacancy fell vacant in the year 1987.
Thus, the judgment also does not help the case of the petitioner in any manner.
Resultantly, finding no merit in the writ petition the same is ordered to be dismissed.
16.
There is no denying the fact that petitioner worked at this post and that too without any blemish for almost four and a half years and so reversion of such a man to a lower post indeed cause heart burning.
Had there been one more post of Executive Engineer, Shri Amarjit Singh Walia would have escaped his reversion.
Respondent-State is thus directed to examine the case of Shri Walia independently and to accommodate him to the post he had been holding for such a long time even if in the process another post is to be created.
Petition dismissed.