AP Mishra, J - All these writ petitions raise common question and were heard earlier by a Division Bench resulting into conflicting opinions leading to reference to the third Judge for opinion under Ch.
VIII, Rule 3, Rules of Court and the third Judge referring the decision in the case of Birendra Kumar Rai v. Union of India, 1993(1) RCR(Crl.)
561 (Allahabad) : AIR 1992 All 151, where in a similar situations relying on earlier decision, referred the matter to be placed before a Full Bench, accordingly this Full Bench has been constituted by order of Hon'ble Chief Justice.
Thus, no point has been referred but whole case has been sent for decision.
This petition has not yet been admitted, but in view of Rules of Court as parties have exchanged affidavits and as also agreed, these petitions are being disposed of finally at the stage of admission.
2.
We have heard Sri Sudhir Chandra assisted by S/Sri AK Singh and APN Giri, learned counsel for the petitioners, Sri VM Sahai, learned counsel for the respondent-Commission, and learned Standing Counsel for the State.
3.
Petitioners have challenged the declaration of select list who only are entitled to appear in the main examination of the Combined State/Upper Subordinate Service (Preliminary) Examination, 1991 on the ground that the principle and the criteria fixed by the UP Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) of 1:20 ratio for permitting the candidates to appear in the main examination not correlating the category of posts but to the total vacancy is violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and is also against the statutory rules.
4.
All the petitioners appeared for the said examination but failed to qualify to appear in the main examination.
The Commission advertised for holding the aforesaid examination on 26th January, 1st February, 1991 for 41 services, 1,28,000 candidates submitted their application forms, but 85745 including the petitioners appeared in the preliminary examination held on 13th October, 1991 of which result was declared on 20th May, 1991.
A select list of 4767 candidates was published according to merit.
All the petitioners did not qualify, hence have challenged the said select list published by the Commission.
To all the services except 5 the minimum prescribed educational qualification was Bachelor's Degree and special qualifications were prescribed for the following remaining five services :  1.
UP Educational Service Junior Scale (Men's and Women's Branch)/District Inspector of Schools/District Savings Officer - Post Graduate Degree.
2.
Labour Conciliation Officer/Assistant Labour Officer - Bachelor's Degree in Commercial Law or Arts with Economics or Sociology as one of the subjects.
3.
UP Agriculture Service Class-II, Section B/Cane Service Class- II/Sr.
Cane Development Inspector-Bachelor of Science Degree in Agriculture.
4.
Assistant Controller, Weights and Measures Grades-I and II Bachelor of Science Degree with Physics/Degree in Mechanical Engineering.
5.
Sub-Registrar - Bachelor's Degree in law.
In these petitions, we are only concerned with the vacancy falling under the services referred at serial No. 3, viz. UP Agriculture Service Class-II, Section-B.
All the petitioners hold degree of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture.
The advertisement gave 400 as the approximate vacancy in all the aforesaid services which was subject to reduction or increase.
Before the result of select list could be declared the Commission was informed that there were 237 vacancies in 14 departments.
The Commission following the Kodhari Committee report on the recruitment policy and selection method for civil services examination fixed the ratio 1:20 against total vacancies for admitting to the main examination.
Out of 14 departments, 9 were of general category and 5 with the different minimum qualification.
It is admitted case of the petitioners that they appeared in the preliminary examination for all the services except three services, viz. (1) Labour Conciliation Officer/Assistant Labour Officer (2) Assistant Controller Weights and Measures Grades-I and II, (3) Sub-Registrar.
Thus out of 41 services which were in 14 departments they appeared for 38 services except the said three services, but the claim of petitioners for inclusion of the names of petitioners in the select list for appearing in the main examination is confined to the service UP Agriculture Service Class-II, Section B  5.
The contention is that since they are graduate in Agriculture and are making a claim for being appointed in UP Agriculture Service and Commission after fixing 1:20 ratio should not have implemented for the total vacancy but should have fixed qua post-wise to the different category of service, viz. for posts of 9 departments falling under general category and to the posts of each of the remaining five departments, which belong to the special class.
In this case, total vacancy intimated was 237, hence declaration of select list was made on the principle of 1:20 viz. 237X20 : 4740.
In the select list 4767 names are mentioned.
It seems the remaining number are of those who secured equal such marks fixed by the Commission to make the increase in number as 4767.
The argument is, it affects the candidates seeking selection to the UP Agriculture Service as the ratio of 1:20 is not qua posts in that service.
Admittedly, there are 20 vacancies to this service and 1:20 ratio would mean 20x20 = 400 but the impugned select list contained only 76 such candidates having the minimum qualifications to these posts.
The further argument is, on the one hand, the ratio to these posts is reduced but conversely there is proportionate increase to the other class of posts for which combined tests were taken.
The argument is, either there should not have been a combined examination to all the various category of posts or a separate select list for each of the specialised post should have been prepared maintaining the ratio 1:20.
In other words, the policy decision in the said combined examination of the Commission of maintaining 1:20 ratio should not have been for the total vacancy but for the posts of each of the five specialised classes, and general category separately.
This, according to the petitioners, has resulted into injustice to the candidates applying to the post of the specialised category.
This is violation of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution being discriminatory and arbitrary.
Secondly, fixation of this ratio is in conflict with Rule 2(viii) of the U.P.
Direct Recruitment through Public Service Commission Preliminary Examination Rules, 1986 as under it the Commission could only fix minimum number of marks at preliminary examination for finding out suitable candidates but not the ratio of 1:20 as fixed by the Commission.
6.
At the outset counsel for the petitioners stated that he is not challenging the combined holding of the said examination but seeking mandamus for preparing a separate select list out of candidates who appeared in the said examination at the ratio of 1:20 for the post of UP Agriculture Service.
The petitioners did appear in the main examination provisionally by an interim order of this Court but their results have not been declared.
7.
It is significant the said advertisement provided that the competitive examination comprises of three successive stages, viz :-  1.
Preliminary Examination (Objective type)  2.
Main Examination (Conventional type)  3.
Viva voce (personality test) for final selection of the candidates.
In paragraph 15 of the said advertisement it was said, only those candidates will be called for interview (personality test) who obtain such minimum marks in the main examination as may be fixed by the Commission.
Paragraph 16 provides, candidates who qualify in preliminary test will have to appear for main examination and personality test (viva voce).
They will be required to indicate their preference for service at that stage.
It is also significant to refer to note as published in the said advertisement, which is also quoted hereunder :  "(1) Note :- Preference for the various posts shall be obtained from the successful candidates in the Main Written Examination on the day of the interview.
The number of vacancies of the various posts will be declared with the result of written Examination.
(2) Applications at this stage are being invited for the Preliminary Examination only.
Candidates declared qualified for admission in the main examination, will have to apply again in the detailed application form which will be supplied to them by the Commission.
Candidates should note that they will appear for the Main Examination against the same roll numbers as allotted for the Preliminary Examination."
The said advertisement reveals that though the Commission is holding a combined State/Upper Subordinate Service (Preliminary) Examination, 1991, but at that stage no indication or preference of any post is to be given which would be required at a later stage.
The second note clearly spells out that the applicant for the preliminary examination for the combined test is only for screening and to declare candidates for admission to the main examination and before appearing in that a candidate again has to fill a detailed application form to be supplied by the Commission and the first note indicates that the preference for the various posts will be obtained from the successful candidates in the main written examination on the day of the interview, thereby meaning even at the stage of main written examination a candidate has not to indicate preference for any post.
The same is also spelt out from the various forms filled up by the candidates.
The Commission has placed along with the written argument these various forms.
A candidate while appearing in the preliminary examination has to fill the prescribed form in which there is no requirement to give any preference to any service or post.
When one qualifies for the main examination he has to fill another detail form against, even in this candidate has not to indicate the preference of post or service.
However, candidates before going for interview has to fill up a form in which for the first time he has to give preference of the post.
This indicates in the combined examination the preliminary examination is to screen out large number of candidates in order to find suitable candidates for permitting them to appear in the main examination.
8.
It is now well known that very large number of applications now apply to any post for which examinations are held.
The authorities resolve this through a preliminary examination in order to screen out large number of candidates by fixing any mark to permit such number of candidates to appear in the main examination, so as to keep such suitable candidates only which they deem fit and proper in a given case as per their discretion.
It is significant as per rule 3(3) marks obtained at this preliminary examination is not to be counted for determining the final select list or to the marks of the main examination.
This screening at the state of preliminary examination is not a stage of testing any specialised knowledge for any post nor candidate applies for any post but is to test his general knowledge and aptitude for his suitability to admit him for the main examination.
This is overall test and general in nature than to any post.
It is significant the said advertisement gives plan of examination.
It shows that preliminary examination will consist of two objective type papers, Paper-I General Studies and Paper II in any of the following subjects, which specifies 18 subjects.
For the main examination a candidate has to appear in compulsory subjects, viz. General Hindi 100 marks, Essay 200 Marks, General Studies 200 Marks.
In the optional subjects a candidate has to choose among 36 subjects, listed therein, 2 optional subjects and 2 papers in each of the optional subjects carried 200 marks.
The very fibre of the two examinations clearly reveals preliminary examination being of objective in nature.
If he so desires he may not choose any of the required subjects for the aforesaid five specialized categories.
It seems the preliminary test, as observed above, is to test a candidate's general aptitude.
It is only when he qualifies for the main examination he is more thoroughly tested in the various subjects.
It is after this when a candidate is to be interviewed, that he has to fill a form specifying the preference of post or service.
Thus, at the stage of testing a candidate at the preliminary examination there is no indication that any screening is done keeping in mind the additional/specialized degree to the five specialized categories of posts.
It is significant in view of rising number of candidates the Commission in consultation with the State Government decided to hold preliminary examination for selection of suitable candidates for admission to the main examination for selecting candidates for provincial, civil and other allied services, for which it framed the aforesaid Rules of 1986.
Rule 2 (vi) and (viii) are quoted hereunder :-  "(vi) 'Preliminary examination' means screening test to be conducted by the Commission with the purpose of finding out suitable candidates of admission to the main examination or interview :  (iii) 'suitable candidates' means candidate securing minimum number of marks as may be fixed by Commission in its discretion at Preliminary Examination thereby enabling him to appear in the main examination, or interview as the case may be."
Definition of preliminary examination shows that it is a screening test for the purpose of finding out suitable candidates for admitting to main examination or interview.
A suitable candidate is defined as a candidate securing minimum number of marks as fixed by the Commission for enabling him to appear in the main examination or interview.
Under Rule 3(2) only candidates who qualify in the preliminary examination will be entitled for admission to the main examination and under Rule 3(3) marks obtained in the preliminary examination is not to be counted for determining the final order of merit.
This sub-rule (3) re-enforces the policy of the Commission that preliminary examination is only to find suitable candidates and to screen out others but has no correlation with the merit for the purpose of being selected to the service or post as the marks obtained is not to be counted in the final selection.
9.
We find the aforesaid rules, policy decision of the Commission, the advertisement and the various forms which a candidate has to fill, all in one stream indicates that the preliminary examination is only to screen out large number of candidates to find suitable candidates for the main examination but there is no consideration or a test of candidate for a particular specific service or post.
Thus, question of testing policy decision of Commission 1:20 being illegal if not post-wise does not rise as at that stage no test is taken to test the acumen of a candidate or relating to a post.
Thus, contention of the petitioner that the policy of the Commission 1:20 should not have been vacancy-wise but post-wise is not sustainable.
10.
Next, it is argued that there is discrimination to the class of post to which the petitioner is claiming as against other class of post, as the ratio 1:20 does not conform to the post of which the petitioner is claiming, viz. UP Agricultural Service where number is decreased with proportionate increase to their posts.
After declaration of the select list for appearing in the main examination since only 76 persons qualified having the requisite qualification for UP Agriculture Service and there being twenty posts under it the said ratio is grossly reduced and amount of reduction of ratio is proportionately increased to other categories of posts.
This argument is misconceived.
This cannot be construed as discriminatory or violative of equal opportunity, or the policy of the Commission being arbitrary.
When once the Commission as a policy decided to screen out candidates to bring to the desired number to be suitable candidate under Rule 2 (viii) is to make competition inter se such suitable candidates who are selected at standard gauge fixed by the examining body may be as high as it deems fit depending on the availability of candidates by fixing a minimum mark to bring forth the proportionate ratio it desires to send the candidate to the main examination.
At this stage only candidates having good general knowledge with overall good general ability is tested.
At this stage not even remotest consideration of any special post is made hence question of maintaining 1:20 ratio post-wise does not arise and thus it cannot be said to be violative of Art. 14, nor could it be said to be violative of Art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
In a combined test all the candidates applied to all the general category post even if had in mind any particular specialized service.
Petitioners also appeared for all the posts of general categories, even though may have had in mind for UP Agriculture Service and having not been selected even for the main examination cannot turn round and urge that either Commission should not have held combined examination or a separate select list should have been prepared for UP Agriculture Service.
The argument is, if a separate select list was prepared larger number would have qualified for the UP Agriculture Service as then the Commission would have lowered the marks among the candidates who desired to appear for any specialized service.
As we have found, at the preliminary examination neither the form, nor rules, nor even the examination indicates that candidate is being tested for a particular service, nor that being the object of the Commission, the question of applying the policy of 1:20 qua the post has no legs to stand.
It is true in the select list availability of candidates for UP Agriculture Service there are 76 candidates only but that by itself could not make the combined examination as discriminatory or arbitrary.
If the Commission laid a policy of maintaining a prerequisite standard before testing a candidate for any particular post or service and even if fewer candidates succeeding would not make such policy decision violative of either Art. 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, if petitioners argument is accepted it would amount to lowering the mark fixed by the Commission under Rule 2 (viii) which would amount sub- standardization of initial criteria as laid down by the Commission.
To this neither petitioners can seek nor court would interfere.
At the most in a given case it may be said to be more desirable or it would have brought better candidates, but by no stretch of imagination as violative of Art. 14.
The courts would not enter in the realm of Commission to correct or modify the policy of the Commission.
It is an expert body in the field of selecting candidates and thus always it is open to it to lay down its own policy and standard at which it wants to test candidates.
If higher standard is laid down the courts would not reduce or modify even if it could not in a given case be said to be more desirable.
Even otherwise the discrimination as contended could at best be only circumstantial which may be different from examination to examination under the same policy.
It may be in a given case, in the next examination larger candidates for any specialized service qualify in the preliminary examination, viz. instead of 76 more than 400 qualify.
The discrimination which is spoken of under Art. 14 of the Constitution has to be read as a conscious act of the authorities either by order, direction or rules but not as a resultant of a circumstantial situation.
Even a discrimination whatsoever out of oversight in a given situation would not constitute discrimination.
To the same effect is the decision in Ramnath Verma v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 603 (608), which is quoted below :  " .....
Discrimination envisaged under Art. 14 is conscious discrimination and a discrimination arising out of oversight is no discrimination at all."
It is also well settled that the policy decision of Commission or any authority for selecting a candidate cannot be challenged except as we have observed on the ground of constitutionality, illegality, or violative of any statutory rule.
To the same effect are the decisions in Babban Singh v. State of UP, 1981 UPLBEC 478, AK Yadav v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 454 and Asif Hameed v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR 1989 SC 1899.
11.
When the Commission makes an endeavour to bring best suitable candidates and for that keeps a particular standard against the court should not interfere on the ground that it would be more reasonable by diluting the said standard.
Similar view has been taken in Liladhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777 and Karnataka PSC v. BM Vijaya Shanker, 1992(2) SCT 299 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 952.
12.
Finally, counsel for the petitioners vehemently urged that the Commission ought to have fixed minimum number of marks for finding suitable candidates and in the absence of such fixation the criteria of 1:20 is contrary to rule 2 (viii) and is liable to be struck down.
The contention is when rules specifically desire the Commission to fix the minimum number of marks it should have done that and in not doing so it has acted contrary to the said rule and should be struck down as violation of the statutory rules.
This argument is misconceived.
This rule no doubt gave discretion on the Commission for fixation of minimum number of marks at the preliminary examination for finding suitable candidates for the main examination.
In fixing minimum marks it can take into consideration various factors including at what ratio it wants to test candidates in the main examination.
As in the previous year for this examination ratio was 1:25 now fixed at 1:20.
This ratio is no doubt brought out by fixing minimum number of marks in that examination.
In this examination a minimum number of marks at 339 which is at 75 per cent.
This is a fixed number.
This is consonance with Rule 2 (viii) There is no contravention of this rule.
In the present case, applying the said policy of ratio 1:20 was fixed at 339 marks which comes to about 75% that is to say implementing the said policy of ratio 1:20 they found 339 marks would be the proper marks to bring into effect the said policy.
Hence, even this contention of the petitioner fails.
Thus, the impugned select list is not in contravention of any statutory rule.
We accordingly do not find any illegality in holding of the preliminary examination by the Commission or declaration of select list.
13.
However, we would like to observe that the Commission should invariably keep in mind while holding any combined examination when it includes posts at special qualifications it is always desirable as far as possible not to combine it with the general category of services.
Even in holding examination for such specialized post even preliminary examination the objective test could be of different standard.
14.
In the result, all the writ petitions are dismissed.
Interim orders are vacated.
Costs on parties.
Petitions dismissed.