Ashok Bhan and KS Kumaran, JJ.
- Petitioner was selected for the Lower School Course in the test for selection held by the Departmental Promotion Committee at Yamunanagar on 141991.
The Committee had prepared a merit list of 53 candidates, which was then submitted for perusal and approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, on the basis of certain verbal complaints made to him called for the answer sheets of this examination and proceeded, thereafter to re-evaluate the answer sheets himself, purporting to exercise this power as the approving authority of the list.
A fresh merit list in accordance with the marks given by him on re-evaluation was then prepared.
Petitioner was one of those who were rendered ineligible for this Course whah led him to file CWP 7949 of 1991 in this Court.
This writ petition was dismissed against which Letters Patent Appeal No. 17 of 1992 was filed.
This Letter Patent Appeal was accepted and the decision was rendered on 1111994.
It was held that the petitioner was entitled to be sent to the Lower School Course.
Since the Course to which the petitioner was to be sent had already been completed, a direction was issued that he be now sent to the next Course which was to start from 141994.
Further direction issued was that he would get the seniority of 1991 batch.
The direction issued was in the following terms :-  " Turning now to the relief to be granted, we are informed that during the pendency of these matters in this Court, some writ petitioners had qualified for the Lower School Course in the subsequent tests held by the Departmental Promotion Committee for the purpose.
Be that as it may, we hereby direct that if they have not already been sent to the Lower School Course all the writ petitioners and the appellants be deputed to the next Lower School Course.
As further promotion is dependent upon the merit of the constables in the Loweer School Course, it would be fair and just that their merit be fixed in the Course that they would have gone to on the basis of their selection in January 1991, by taking the marks obtained by them in the Lower School Course that they may now go to or had gone to during the pendency of those matters in this Court, as having been obtained by them in the Course they were originally selected for.
In other words, whatever marks they earn in the Lower School Course they go to in pursuance of the orders of this Court now, or that they may have already gone to by virtue of being selected in any subsequent test during the pendency of these matters in this Court, the marks obtained by them in such course  "be deemed to be the marks they obtained in the Course to which they would have gone to, on their selection for it in January 1991 and further that they be deemed to have passed the Lower School Course at that time."
As per judgment rendered in the aforesaid Letters Patent Appeal, the petitioner should have been sent to the next Course which was to start from 141994., Unfortunately, petitioner's case was recommended on 1841994 by the authorities for joining the Lower School Course and he jointed the Course from 19.4.1994.
Out-door examinations started from 191994 and the petitioner was allowed to take the examination upto 1491994.
On 15.9.1994, when the written examination was to start, the petitioner was stopped from taking the examination on the ground that he had not attended 75% of the lectures delivered and, therefore, was not eligible to take the examination.
Petitioner filed the present writ petition with a prayer that he be allowed to take the written examination.
2.
On facts, it has been stated that the petitioner had attended 75% of the lectures delivered.
In the alternative, it was argued that even if it was assumed that the petitioner did not attend 75% of the lectures delivered, even then the percentage of 75 is to be taken of the lectures which were delivered after 19.4.1994 as the petitioner was not at fault and the fault lay with the respondent authorities in recommending the case of the petitioner for joining the Course late.
It was also argued that the petitioner be given the benefit of lectures which were delivered from 141994 till 1841994 as he was denied detailment to the Lower School Course by the respondents in violation of the directions issued by this Court in the above referred to L.P.A.  3.
We find substance in the submissions made by the counsel for the petitioner.
Without going into the actual calculation as to whether the petitioner had attended 75% of the delivered lectures, we are in agreement with the counsel for the petitioner that either the petitioner should be given the benefit of lectures delivered from 141994 to 1841994, the period for which the candidature of the petitioner was withheld by the respondents in spite of a clear direction issued by the Letters Patent Appeal Bench or in the alternative, the percentage of 75 be taken of the lectures delivered after 19.4.1994 (so far as the petitioner is concerned), i.e. after the detailment of the petitioner to the Course.
4.
We have been informed that examination which the petitioner took is already over.
Under the circumstances, we are left with no other option but to issue a direction to the respondents to permit the petitioner to take the next examination with the current batch undergoing training, whenever it is held.
Petitioner shall be allowed to sit in the papers which he had missed because of the orders passed by the respondents not permitting him to take the examination.
Result of the petitioner be declared with the other candidates of the current batch.
It is made clear that the petitioner, if successful, shall be entitled to the seniority of 1991 batch as was directed by the Letters Patent Appeal Bench.
Since the petitioner has been forced to come to this Court second time inspite of the clear directions issued by the High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 17 of 1992, which was allowed with costs of Rs. 1,000/-, this writ petition is also allowed subject to payment of Rs3,000/- as costs.