VK Gupta, J - This petition by 5 Schools in Jammu town and in Ranbir Singh Pura deals with and pertains to the claims of the petitioners for receiving grant-in-aid for running their schools from the respondents.
Prior to the filing of this petition, the five petitioners had filed separate petitions for similar relief in this court.
While disposing of these earlier petitions, the Court on 26th February 1991, passed the following operative order :-  "4.
The main grievance of the petitioner is that his case for grant-in-aid has not been finalised and is hanging fire with respondent No. 2.
He also asserted that persons similarly situated have been granted the said aid and as such the petitioner has been put to discrimination, while arguing the case, the learned counsel for the petitioner has to argue Rules 9 and 13 of the Jammu and Kashmir Private Educational Institutions Grant-in-aid Rules, 1975.
This petition is disposed of at this stage with a direction that respondents 2 and 3 will consider the case of petitioner for sanction of Grant-in-aid in accordance with the provisions of the rules on the subject, in case the petitioner is eligible.
The said respondents will finalise the petitioner's case within this financial year positively.
It also disposes of CMP No. 258 and 259 of 1991."
In consequence of the aforesaid directions issued by the court on 26th February 1991, the impugned order No. Education-W/P-466-172 dated 29 March 1991 was passed by the respondents, whereby the grant-in-aid to the petitioners was not released.
The operative part of the order dated 29 March 1991 runs as under :-  "In compliance with the directions given by Hon'ble High Court in the above mentioned writ petitions on February 26th, 1991 which reads as under, "The said respondents will finalise the petitioners case within this financial year positively."
In cases of all the petitioners mentioned above were thoroughly considered and examined by the Department and it has transpired from the records that all the seven institutions have been accorded recognition from time to time for academic purposes only.
At no stage any of these institutions have been granted permission or recognition for grant-in-aid purposes.
There are separate rules governing the grant of recognition for academic purposes which are provided for in the Private Educational Institutions Act, 1967 and the grant is governed under Grant-in-Aid Rules 1975.
The permission for academic purposes does not automatically render the institution eligible for securing the grant-in-aid.
There are specified rules regulating the sanction of the grant-in-aid for which an application has to be made by the institution.
Besides, it has to furnish the audited statements of income and expenditure to justify their claim for grant-in-aid.
None of your having fulfilled the above required conditions and are therefore, not eligible for grant-in-aid at this state.
2.
You are, therefore, informed that your institution having not been recognised for grant-in-aid purposes as such the question of releasing grant during the current financial year does not arise."
3.
The petitioners are aggrieved of the aforesaid impugned order and inter- alia seek the quashing of the same as also a mandamus directing the respondents to release the grant-in-aid in favour of the petitioners.
4.
The Jammu and Kashmir Private Educational Institutions Grant-in-Aid Rules, 1975 (1975 Rules for short) prescribe and provide for the machinery and mechanism and related procedures for according grant-in-aid to Private Educational Institutions.
"Institution" has been defined to mean a private educational institution which has been permitted to function under the Private Educational Institutions (Regulation and Control) Act, 1967.
As per Rule 5 of the 1975 Rules, no private educational institution shall be permitted to function so long as it is not recognised by the competent authority.
Rule 9 is most relevant for the purposes of present petition.
Clause (A) of Rule 9 which pertains to the subject matter of this petition, as amended by Govt. order No. 121/78 dated 16 January 1978 reads thus :-  "An institution may apply to the competent authority for payment of grant-in-aid under these rules on the prescribed proforma, after the close of the financial year to which the grant relates.
Applications for adhoc grant- in-aid may also be made during the year in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 13."
Rule 10 lays down certain terms and conditions for being eligible for receipt of grant-in-aid and Rule 12 provides that the institutions shall be open to inspections by the inspecting authorities.
Rule 13 lays down that application for grant-in-aid received from an Institution shall be forwarded by the Receiving Officer to the inspecting authority and the inspecting authority after its inspection will give its detailed recommendation about the release of grant.
5.
The points involved in this petition are indeed very straight and simple.
Mr. HR Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners failed to refer to any part of 1975 Rules or any other law, rules or regulations or even the applicable Govt. orders whereby an institution.
Like that of the petitioners has a guaranteed right to receive grant-in-aid.
If such a law does in fact exist, there would have been no difficulty in enforcing this right of the petitioners and issuing directions to the respondents to provide grant-in-aid in favour of the petitioners.
The difficulty, however, has arisen because of total absence of such a guaranteed right to a private educational institution.
The only provision relating to the grant-in-aid as already noticed is in Rule 9(A) of 1975 Rules which merely gives the right to a private educational institution to apply for grant-in-aid.
The right to apply at best give rise in turn to a further right of consideration which correspondingly causes an obligation upon the competent authority to examine process and consider the cases of the persons so applying.
At this stage, therefore, if a person is discriminated against, meaning thereby that he is being denied the benefit of grant-in-aid even though another person similarly situated has been given this benefit, Article 14 immediately gets attracted and the court does not have any hesitation in coming down heavily and in striking down such an unconstitutional act as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In the present case, the petitioners have not established with reference to either the pleadings or any material on record, that any one else similarly situated as the petitioners were, was favoured by the release of grant-in-aid and that the petitioners were denied this benefit, thus discriminated against.
In fact, on the other hand, the clear case of the respondents has been spelt out in their counter-affidavit that because of the mounting liabilities for the payment of grant-in-aid to the institutions already receiving it in the past, it had not been possible for the Govt. broad base this activity to cover fresh cases.
There are as many as 600/- private educational institutions which are in the process of being considered for recognition for academic purposes.
In case the Govt. decides to include fresh cases for grant-in-aid, sufficient funds for this purpose are required and because the funds are not available, it is not only difficulty but also impossible to cater to the demands of these institutions.
There is no doubt that in the counter-affidavit, instances of some institutions have been quoted which had been granted grant-in-aid in the past by way of exception.
In the total absence of any averments by the petitioners, that these institutions were similarly situated as the petitioners or that they had applied for grant-in-aid after the petitioners had claimed consideration, this court cannot adjudicate upon the legality or otherwise of these institutions receiving grant-in-aid.
This is more so when they are not parties in the present petition.
For the foregoing reasons, therefore, this petition is dismissed.
It is, however, observed and directed that, if and when the respondent State does accord and release grant-in-aid in future to any private educational institutions a fresh case, it shall be under an obligation to consider the cases of the petitioners as well along with other such eligible institutions and release and provide grant-in-aid in accordance with the applicable law, rules and regulations.
No order as to costs.
It also disposes of CMP Mr. No. 5016/91.
Petition dismissed.