RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 1720, 2445 and 2638 of 1993, as common questions of law and fact arise in all these cases.
2.
According to the Ordinances of the Punjabi University, Patiala, for getting admission in BA Part I, B-Com Part I, B.Sc.
Part I (Three years course), a candidate is required to have passed the plus 2 examination of Punjab School Education Board or any other examination recognised as equivalent thereto.
On 28th July, 1992, the Assistant Registrar (Colleges) of the University is sued a letter to all the Principals of Arts and Science Colleges, which are affiliated to the Punjabi University, Patiala, intimating that the Vice-Chancellor of the University in anticipation of the approval of the Academic Council Syndicate, had directed that those candidates who had got re-appear/compartment in the 10+2 examination of the Punjab School Education board or its equivalent may be admitted provisionally to BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I, subject to such candidates clearing 10+2 examination by September, 1992, failing which their admission to BA/B.Sc./B.Com Part I, as the case may be, would stand cancelled.
This decision of the Vice-Chancellor was to be made applicable for the Session 1992-93.
3.
The petitioners in all these cases had got compartment reappear in one paper of 10+2 examination and by virtue of the decision of the Vice-Chancellor, they were provisionally admitted in various Colleges in BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I.
It may be observed here that the decision of the Vice Chancellor, referred to above, was approved by the Syndicate in its meeting held on 31st August, 1992.
It is not disputed that all the petitioners failed to clear their compartment/reappear paper of 10+2 in the supplementary examination held by the Punjab School Education Board somewhere in September, 1992.
The University held the petitioners to be ineligible for appearing in BA/B.Sc./B.Com, Part-I examination, which was to be held in March/April, 1992.
This led the petitioners to file the present writ petition.
4.
The Motion Bench while admitting the writ petitions on March 12, 1993, ordered that the petitioners be permitted to take the Practical Examination, which was to be held on 14th of March, 1993, which was, however, subject to the decision of the writ petition.
It was further ordered that the writ petitions be listed for final hearing on 22nd March, 1993.
This case was listed before me, but on 31st March, 1993, I had observed that it may not be possible for this Court to decide the main case itself before 8th April, 1993 as between 31st March and 8th April, 1993 there were only three working days.
The examination was to commence on 8th April, 1993.
Consequently, this Court had directed the University to allow the petitioners to take BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part I examination, provisionally subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
5.
The argument of the learned counsel of the petitioner is that the Punjab School Education Board gives two chances to clear re-appear/Compartment Paper, and, therefore, the University should not cancel provisional admission of the petitioners of BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I, till the petitioners have exhausted two chances to clear re-appear/compartment paper of 10+2 examination.
It has further been argued that the petitioners have been allowed by the College Authorities to complete their entire course of 1st Year and it will be too harsh if at the fag end of the course of the 1st Year, their admissions of BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I examination are cancelled.
According to the learned counsel, the Authorities ae estopped from cancelling the admissions at this stage, especially when by virtue of the interim order of this Court all the petitioners have appeared provisionally in BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I examination.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the University submitted that strictly in accordance with the Ordinances of the University, provisional admission to BA/B.Sc./B.Com Part-I was not possible of those students who had got re-appear/compartment in the 10 + 2 examination.
According to the University Ordinances, only a candidate who had passed 10 + 2 examination, was entitled to seek admission in Part I of BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
According to the learned counsel, it was a concession shown by the University to the candidates who had got re-appear/compartment in the 10+2 examination to get provisional admission subject to their passing the re-appear/compartment paper of the said examination to be held by the Punjab School Education Board.
According to him the concession shown by the University has to be strictly construed and its scope cannot be widened by this Court.
If the concession was to the extent that provisional admission would last only till September, 1992, subject to the candidate's clearing the re-appear/compartment of 10+2, the petitioners cannot now claim that they should be allowed to continue in BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I till the chances allowed by the Punjab School Education Board are exhausted by the candidates.
He further went on to submit that the University is not concerned as to how many chances the other examining body (Punjab School Education Board in this case) gives to the candidate to clear the particular reappear/compartment paper.
The candidates are to be governed only by the University Ordinances/Instructions issued by it.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I do not find any merit in these writ petitions.
The petitioners have not shown me any right in them to continue their studies in BA/BSc/BCom.
Part-I after they had failed to clear the compartment paper of 10+2 till September, 1992.
As observed earlier, in fact, according to the University Ordinances, such candidates had no right to seek admission in BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
part-I Classes.
It was only by virtue of the decision of the Vice-Chancellor/Syndicate that the candidates who had got reappear/compartment in 10+2, were given the concession of seeking provisional admission to BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I and their admission was liable to be cancelled if they failed to clear the reappear/compartment paper by September, 1992.
If there is no Ordinance/Instruction of the University to extend the provisional admissions till the candidate exhausts all the chances granted by the Punjab School Education Board or other examining authority to clear the reappear/compartment paper, to my mind, this Court cannot extend the concession granted by the University to a limited extent.
The concession has to be strictly construed and implemented in the terms the same is given.
8.
I am not oblivious of the fact that the petitioners have appeared in BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I examination provisionally by virtue of the interim orders of this Court, but that was all provisional and subject to the decision of the writ petition.
This Court cannot legislate for the University and lay down that the University should not cancel the result of BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
examination till the chances allowed by the Punjab School Education Board to clear the re-appear/compartment are exhausted by the University, the petitioners very well knew that their admissions were liable to be cancelled if they failed to clear the re-appear/compartment examination of BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Part-I.
They took admission on that understanding.
Consequently, they cannot make any grievance of the fact as to why their admissions are being cancelled.
9.
A special mention be made of the petitioner Sandeep Kumar Singla in C.W.P.
No. 2638 of 1993.
In this case, the petitioner had appeared in the re- appear/compartment paper of 10+2 examination under Roll No. 372004, held by the Punjab School Education Board in September, 1992, but had failed to clear the same.
In this case the petitioner had applied for re-checking.
Needless to mention that if on re-checking, the petitioner is declared pass, then his admission of BA Part I, would not stand cancelled and his result of the said examination would be declared by the Punjabi University.
It would be in the interest of justice that the re-valuated result of the petitioner is declared by the Punjab School Education Board within four weeks from the receipt of the copy of the order.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, these writ petitions are dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.