Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was appointed as a Chemist in scale of Rs. 200-10-300 on October 14, 1960, challenges the order dated January 17, 1989 (Annexure P-12).
This order disposes of a representation by which the petitioner had claimed promotion to the post of Analyst with effect from August 20,1966, when respondent No. 3, SK Anand, had been promoted as Analyst from the post of Senior Analytical Assistant.
The petitioner claims that he had a right to be considered along with Mr. SK Anand and that the action of the respondents in not considering of him was violative of Articles 14 and 16 the Constitution.
By the impugned order the Government has held as under :  "After going through the record of the case, I have come to the conclusion that upto 13111967 when the State Govt. approved the mode of recruitment/ qualifications to the post of Analyst, the cadres of Chemists and Junior/ Senior Analytical Assistants were separate and promotion to the post of Analyst was to be made out of Senior Analytical Assistants.
On 13111967, Shri Anand already stood promoted w.e.f.
20.8.1966 in the scale of Rs. 200-450 and had thus become senior to Shri Harnal who carried the scale of Rs. 200- 300 as Chemist.
Therefore, Shri Anand can legitimately claim his seniority in subsequent promotion over Shri Harnal and others on the basis of seniority in the rank based on pay scale.
However, action of Director, Health Services, in promoting Shri Rohilla, a Chemist who was admittedly junior to Shri Harnal and also was an ad hoc appointee, by ignoring the claim of Shri Harnal, was improper and unjustified.
Shri Harnal could not be ignored except after due consideration on basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Unfortunately, he was never considered for promotion and an ad hoc junior official of the same speciality was promoted by ignoring the claim of Shri Harnal.
Therefore, it would meet the ends of justice if Shri Harnal is promoted to the post of Analyst/Deputy Public Analyst subject to his record being good from the date which his junior Shri Rohilla Chemist belonging to the same speciality was given promotion i.e. as analyst on 71066 (F.N.)
and Deputy Public Analyst on 6121979 (F.N.)
order accordingly.
Since he has not worked against the post of Analyst/Deputy Public Analyst, he shall not get any arrears of pay but he can claim benefits in terms of seniority and pay fixation.
The representation of Shri VP Harnal is accepted to this extent."
2.
A perusal of the above order shows that respondent No. 3 had been promoted from the post of Senior Analytical Assistant to that of Analyst w.e.f.
August 20, 1966.
It is also not disputed before me that subsequent to this promotion, respondent No. 3 had been further promoted as Deputy Public Analyst on April 30, 1976 and as a Public Analyst on August 3, 1979.
The petitioner did not challenge the promotion of respondent No. 3.
He moved for the first time in the year 1980 when he submitted a representation dated April 10, 1980.
Even in this representation, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.8 with the writ petition, no challenge has been made to the promotion of respondent No. 3.
It was for the first time in the representation dated July 9, 1980, that a reference to the appointment of respondent No. 3 as Analyst was made.
A perusal of the representation further shows that the primary challenged was to the promotion of Mr. Rohilla.
In the background of this factual position, the Government has found that the petitioner did not have a right to be promoted to the post of Analyst w.e.f.
August 20,1966.
However, his claim for promotion w.e.f.
October 7, 1966 when Mr. Rohilla was promoted has been upheld.
The petitioner has been further promoted to the post of Deputy Public Analyst w.e.f.
December 6, 1979.
Still further, the arrears of salary have been denied to the petitioner on the ground that he had not actually worked on the posts of Analyst and Deputy Public Analyst.
3.
A two-fold grievance has been made on behalf of the petitioner.
Firstly, it is claimed that he had a right to be considered for promotion to the post of Analyst w.e.f.
August 20, 1966 when SK Anand was promoted to this post.
Secondly, it is contended that the action of the Government in declining the benefit of arrears of salary to the petitioner is totally arbitrary.
The petitioner was not permitted by the Government to work on the posts of Analyst and Deputy Public Analyst.
The Government cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong and deny arrears of salary to the petitioner.
On behalf of the respondents, it is inter alia pointed out that the petitioner's claim deserves to be declined on account of the inordinately long delay for which no explanation whatsoever has been offered.
It is further submitted that the petitioner had continued to work on the post of Chemist till June 25, 1979 when he was promoted as Junior Scientific Officer.
During this interval, respondent No. 3 had been further promoted from the post of Analyst to that of Public Analyst.
He had also been promoted to the post of Public Analst on August 3, 1979.
The acceptance the petitioner's claim after a lapse of more than 20 years would completely unsettle the settled position and no ground in equity or law is made out for the grant of the relief claimed in the petition.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and examination of the record, I find that the petitioner did not challenge the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Analyst for 14 long years till the year 1980.
Even in the replication filed by the petitioner, no explanation for the inordinately long delay has been furnished.
It has only been stated that "omissions and commissions caused by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 at the instance of respondent No. 3 kept the petitioner in the dark till 1980 when another Chemist Sh. GR Aggarwal working in Excise Lab at Karnal was promoted.
On his promotion petitioner submitted representation for promotion on 10.4.1980 and 7980.
This does not explain the delay of 14 years.
In fact, even at the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to point out the reason for his silence from August 1966 when respondent No. 3 was promoted till the submission of a representation in the year 1980.
On the ground of delay alone the claim made by the petitioner in this petition deserves to be declined.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the cause of action has really accrued to the petitioner on January 17, 1989, when his representation was decided.
He points out that even this decision was arrived at by the Government only after the issue of a direction by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 5625 of 1988.
Accordingly, it is contended that the claim of the petitioner with regard to promotion w.e.f.
August 20, 1966 when respondent No. 3 had been promoted, deserves to be accepted.
6.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner after having submitted the representation in the year 1980 has filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 5625 of 1988 and sought a mandamus regarding the decision of his representation.
Appropriate directions had been issued by this Court vide orders dated July 28, 1988.
In pursuance to these directions the Government has considered and decided the claim of the petitioner.
In spite of this the long and unexplained silence on the part of the petitioner cannot be condoned.
The directions were given by this Court without any notice to the State.
The fact that the promotion had been made in August 1966 and the fact that no representation had been submitted for 14 years may not have actually come to the notice of this Court.
Still further the issue of directions does not preclude this Court from now taking into account the delay and the other facts while considering claim of the petitioner.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the petitioner has not been able to explain the delay and on the account alone, the petition deserves to be dismissed.
7.
Even otherwise, nothing has been produced on record to show that the Government was bound to consider the claim of the petitioner before promoting respondent No. 3 in August 1966.
A copy of the letter dated June 9, 1966, by which six posts of Analysts had been created in the Food Laboratory has been produced before me.
By this letter, sanction of the Governor for the creation of posts upto Feb 28, 1967 has been communicated.
The posts were meant for the Food Laboratory and there is nothing on record to indicate that the persons working as Chemists in the Chemical Examiner's Laboratory were even eligible to be considered for the posts of Analysts in the Food Laboratory.
On the contrary, it is categorically stated in the written statement filed on behalf of the State Government that the staff working in the Food Laboratory and the Chemical Examiner's Laboratory constitute separate cadres controlled by different officers.
It has been further pointed out that Chemists were eligible for promotion to the post of Junior Scientific Officer and Senior Analytical Assistants were eligible for promotion to the post of Analysts.
In this situation and more particularly the fact that the petitioner has produced nothing to show that he had a right to be considered for promotion in the Food Laboratory, I am unable to find any fatal infirmity in the orders of the Government.
8.
Mr. CM Chopra points out that a perusal of the impugned order itself shows that Mr. Rohilla Chemist was actually promoted as an Analyst vide orders dated October 7, 1966.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R. 1 with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Learned counsel concedes that Mr. Rohilla was not working in the Laboratory in which the petitioner was working.
However, even by the impugned order, as reproduced above, the petitioner has, in fact, been granted promotion w.e.f.
October 7, 1966.
Consequently, it is apparent that the petitioner has been granted promotion with effect from the date a person junior to him in the cadre of Chemist was promoted.
In this situation, I am unable to find any infirmity in the order dated January 17, 1989 by which the Government has declined the claim of the petitioner for promotion with effect from the date respondent No. 3 had been promoted.
9.
The petitioner then claims that he is entitled to the grant of pay scale of the post of Analyst as also the arrears of pay and that the action of respondent No. 1 in holding that the petitioner "shall not get any arrears of pay .... cannot be sustained.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in Charan Dass v. State of Punjab, 1980(3) SLR 702, Asha Rani v. State of Haryana, 1983(1) SLR 400; DP Singla v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 649.
He has further pointed out that these decisions have been following by a Division Bench while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 15847 of 1989, decided on July 13, 1989.
Prima facie these decisions do help the petitioner.
However, in none of these cases, any objection of delay had been raised.
In a case, where an official does not challenge the promotion for a long period of time and does so only after the lapse of almost 14 years, it would not be a fair exercise of the writ jurisdiction if the State is burdened with the responsibility to pay the arrears of salary the order passed by the Government granting the benefit of fixation of pay and seniority is in the circumstances of the case absolutely just and fair.
Even otherwise, the judgments do not lay down any unexceptionable rule of law that retrospective promotion must result in payment of arrears of salary also.
In fact, the Courts have exercised discretion in these matters according to the facts of the cases.
The pronouncement of the Madhya Pradesh High Court holding that the financial benefits shall not be given to a person during the period for which he did not perform the duties of a higher post was approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paluru Ramkrishnaiah v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 166.
10.
Accordingly, I find no ground to interfere.
As a result the writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.