HS Bedi, J - The petitioner joined service with the respondent University w.e.f.
April 27, 1971 as a Cartographer in Geography after due selection by a competent committee in the basic scale of pay of Rs. 300-25-600 which was equivalent to the grade of a Lecturer.
On revision of pay scales of lecturers, the petitioner too, though working against the post of Cartographer, was granted the benefit of the revised scale.
The revision of pay scale of the petitioner was apparently made at his request as would be apparent from Annexure P3 dated May 17, 1977 by which the case of the petitioner was forwarded by the Head of the Department to the Registrar of the University for favourable consideration.
It would be apparent from Annexure P3 itself that as far back as in the year 1977, it had been recorded by the Head of the Department that the post of Cartographer was academic in nature and that the petitioner had been covering about 16 hours teaching workload in the department for 4 years prior to 1977.
The petitioner thereafter made another representation to the University Authorities requesting that the designation of the post he was holding be changed from that of Cartographer to a Lecturer in Cartography as he was getting the same scale of pay as Lecturer and performing similar duties.
A committee duly appointed by the Vice Chancellor to examine the matter, opined vide report dated July 23, 1983, Annexure P2 to the petition that the request be acceded to (though with effect from the decision of the Executive Council) as the petitioner was already in the pay scale of a Lecturer and also doing some teaching work.
It was also suggested that the petitioner would continue working as per his present duties and in addition to practical classes, he be given teaching work of more than 6 hours a week by the department, if necessary.
The matter was, thereafter, put before the Executive Council on October 10, 1983 which accepted the recommendation with the condition that the redesignated post would be an ex-cadre one.
The petitioner thereafter made another request to the authorities praying that he be allowed all the benefits that were available to lecturers in the University teaching departments and on an appraisal, the Executive Council in its meeting held on 381987 (minutes whereof are appended as Annexure P4 to the petition), resolved that the request of the petitioner be accepted.
One of the considerations that weighed with the Executive Council was that similar facilities had previously been granted to other Persons similarly situated.
It has been averred by the petitioner that in 1983 a scheme known as the Personal Promotion Scheme (hereinafter called the old scheme) was introduced by the respondent University in accordance with the directions of the University Grants Commission with the object of checking stagnation and to encourage academic pursuits and excellence in the University.
A copy of the scheme has been appended as Annexure P5 to the petition.
The petitioner thereafter approached the Vice Chancellor of the University and requested that the period of his service from 1971 to 1983 be treated for consideration for purpose of promotion under the old scheme.
The Vice Chancellor accordingly made a recommendation to the Executive Council suggesting that the request of the petitioner be accepted as he had continued to perform duties similar to those of regular Lecturers.
The matter was put before the Executive Council in its meeting held on 2671989, vide agenda appended as Annexure P8 to the petition.
The relevant extract from the aforesaid annexure which is illustrative of the way the case had been dealt with, is quoted below :-  "The ex-Vice-Chancellor, after considering the case, was of the view that Dr. RL Sharma whose designation was changed from that of Cartographer to a Lecturer (Cartography) in the same pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 (UGC) vide E.C Res.
No. 209 dated 10101983, cannot be denied the benefits attached to the post of a Lecturer.
It has further been opined that since his joining as Cartographer in 1971 in the same pay scale as that of a Lecturer and having been required to impart instruction and teaching like an other Lecturer in the Department, Dr. RL Sharma should also be given the benefit of this experience for purpose of consideration for personal promotion scheme.
Since 1971 to 1983 he has continued to perform the same duties as that of lecturer which became the basis for redesignation of his post as lecturer (Cartography)."
Despite the office note strongly in favour of the petitioner, the Executive Council vide a cryptic resolution dated 2671989 (annexure P9) declined to accord approval to the aforequoted proposal.
Annexure P9 has been impugned before me.
The petitioner has averred that he is entitled to promotion as Reader under the old Scheme, but the same is being denied to him on the ground that he did not have the requisite experience of 12 years as lecturer.
The case of the petitioner is that he was entitled to promotion in view of the fact that he had been doing teaching work since 1971 as per the records of the University and as such his period of experience of teaching work should count from that date and not from 10 10 1983 (as per the respondents) when the post of Cartographer held by the petitioner was redesignated as lecturer in Cartography as per the decision of the Executive Council.
2.
It is to be highlighted that during the pendency of this writ petition, Civil Misc. No. 5798 of 1990 was moved by the petitioner that if any person was sought to be promoted as Reader, his case should also be considered taking into account the period of service rendered by him from April 27, 1971 to October 10, 1983.
Vide order dated June 8, 1990, the respondents were directed to consider the name of the petitioner also for promotion to the post of Reader, if any promotion was made during the pendency of the petition by taking into consideration the service rendered by the petitioner with effect from April 27, 1971.
It was directed that any order passed by the respondents would be subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
This order was made absolute on July 25, 1990 in the presence of the counsel for the respondents.
Thereafter, the petitioner moved Civil Misc. No. 6269/1990 in which it was prayed that a new Scheme called the Career Advancement Scheme (hereinafter called the new scheme) had been formulated by the respondents in 1989 and his case for promotion should be considered under this scheme as well.
The respondents were again directed vide interim orders dated 25.7.1990 of this Court to consider the name of the petitioner for the post of Reader under the new scheme although it was again clarified that any order passed by the respondents would be subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
Thereafter, the respondents took a number of dates to file a reply and on their failure to do so, the interim order aforesaid was made absolute by this Court on September 12, 1990.
The respondent University thereafter filed CM No. 8823 of 1990 in CM No. 6269 of 1990 praying that the reply could not be filed in the CM earlier due to a mistake and as the reply was now being filed, CM No. 6269 of 1990 be listed again for hearing.
Vide order dated January 11, 1991 this Court declined to make any modification in the order dated 25th July, 1990, but a direction was given that the case be listed for hearing in the month of February, 1991.
It will be apparent from a reading of the aforesaid orders that the respondents were directed to consider the case of the petitioner under the old and the new schemes, but despite the directions having been emphatically given, it is admitted before me by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents that no further decision has been taken in the matter.
He attributes the inaction on the part of the respondents to the fact that as the present writ petition was pending before this Court, the University Authorities thought it prudent to await its decision.
3.
In the reply to CM No. 6269/1990 in which the petitioner had claimed that his case for promotion be considered under the new scheme, the respondents have taken the stand that the present writ petition had become infructuous as the petitioner had sought consideration for promotion under the new scheme as per his option exercised by the petitioner vide Annexure R8.
It has been admitted that the case of the petitioner under the old scheme had not been considered by the Screening Committee in its meeting dated May 11, 1990 as the present writ petition was pending.
It has also been stated that the case of the petitioner would be considered under the old scheme after the decision rendered by the High Court on this writ petition.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner has taken me through the various Annexures filed by the petitioner which indicate that from the year 1971 onwards, the petitioner was in fact involved in teaching classes in addition to his work as Cartographer.
Annexure P-1 is the table showing the workload shouldered by the petitioner as a teacher.
Even the report of the Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor to consider the case of the petitioner for the change in his designation, Annexure P-2 to the petition, positively states that he had been doing some teaching work which entitled him to the teaching work right from his initial appointment and the only difference between the parties appears to be that whereas the respondents claim that prior to 1983 the petitioner was taking only practical classes, the petitioner claims to be involved in regular teaching work since 1971.
5.
Considering the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, I am of the view that the petitioner was in fact doing regular teaching work right from the year 1971 and as far as promotion to the post of Reader is concerned, the entire period from the year 1971 onwards must be counted towards experience gained by the petitioner as the distinction sought to be made between practical and other classes is belied by the record of the University itself referred to above.
Even the argument of the respondents that the practical teaching work could not be considered for the purpose of experience, is also of no avail as the teaching work assigned to a teacher may be taking practical or theory classes.
As per the eligibility criteria laid down in paragraph 11(ii) of Annexure P5, the requirement is of 12 years experience of teaching and no distinction has been made between those lecturers who teach regular and those who take practical classes.
Mr. Gupta has in fact tried to draw a distinction where none exists.
Mr. Gupta's argument that as the petitioner had vide Annexure R8 filed by the respondents in reply to CM No. 6269/1990 given his option to be considered for promotion under the new scheme, renders the writ petition infructuous, is also of no avail.
It is significant that the above said option was given while the present writ petition was pending and despite the said Annexure having been filed in reply to the Civil Misc. referred to above this court did not modify the order dated 25.7.1990 directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion under the old scheme.
As already indicated, the respondents have not done so on the spacious plea that the present petition was pending.
It is also significant that in the reply filed to Civil Misc. No. 6269/1990, the respondents have nowhere stated that the petitioner fulfilled the eligibility norms to be considered for promotion under the new scheme.
An evasive denial has been made by giving details of the new scheme without identifying the facts which should indicate as to whether the petitioner was eligible to be considered for promotion under the scheme.
Even on persistent questioning Mr. Gupta was unable to give a categorical reply on this point.
The argument that as the petitioner had exercised his option to be considered for promotion under the new scheme renders the petition infructuous is, therefore, of no avail.
It is worth highlighting that despite two orders of this Court to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion the authorities have not done so, creates a doubt about the bona fides of the University Authorities in the matter.
The effort seems to be to keep the petitioner and the Court guessing and to defeat the petition at all costs.
6.
Mr. Gupta has argued that as the petitioner had not been appointed as a teaching staff and had received certain benefits on the non-teaching side, he could not claim promotional benefit on the teaching side.
He has also urged that on the redesignation of the post held by the petitioner, it was specifically ordered that it would be an ex cadre post, also disentitled him to promotion on the regular teaching side.
These arguments too have no force as the respondents have admitted that the petitioner would be entitled to count his service as a lecturer w.e.f.
10101983 and as such the initial appointment of the petitioner being irregular, if at all, becomes meaningless.
It is also to be noted that the petitioner is not being denied the benefit of promotion on the ground that he is holding an ex cadre post, but solely on the ground that he does not fulfil the requisite requirement of 12 years teaching experience as Lecturer which is essential for promotion to the post of Reader, as the respondents claimed that the teaching experience is to be counted w.e.f.
10101983 and not from 1971 onwards.
It is significant that vide resolution dated 10101983, the post held by the petitioner was redesignated as Lecturer in Cartography.
It was not a fresh appointment, as is sought to be made out by the respondents in their arguments.
7.
Mr. Gupta has next argued that as the post of Cartographer was at par with that of the Junior Lecturers as per Annexure P3, this experience could not be counted for the purpose of promotion to the post of Reader.
This argument is also without substance.
It will be seen that on redesignation, the post held by the petitioner was identified as Lecturer in Cartography.
Moreover, the argument of Mr. Gupta is even otherwise demolished by Annexure P5/A which is a clarification issued by the University stating that the services rendered by a person as Assistant Lecturer in the service of the University would also be counted towards the minimum service of twelve years, required for promotion to the post of Reader.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition succeeds with costs which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
The resolution Annexure P9 being non-speaking and cryptic is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for the grant of promotion to the post of Reader under the old scheme, keeping in view the fact that his service from 1971 to 1983 was also to be counted for the purpose of determining his teaching experience.
The consideration will be with regard to all the promotions to the post of Reader made after the petitioner became eligible as per this judgment and he will be adjusted wherever found suitable, if necessary by the creation of an additional post.
The entire exercise will be completed by the respondents in the light of the observations made above within a period of 4 months from today and all consequential benefits that accrue to the petitioner in terms of status or money with interest at 12% per annum from the date it fell due to the date of payment would be released to him within a period of 2 months thereafter.
Ordered accordingly.
Order accordingly.