Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present petition is to the order dated 06.03.2006 passed by the Chandigarh Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred as "the Tribunal") whereby the preliminary objection raised by the petitioner that the Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to entertain the Original Application filed by respondent No. 1 before the Tribunal, was declined.
2.
The applicant-respondent No. 1 herein, hereinafter to be referred as `the respondent') is a member of the all India Police Service and borne on Haryana Cadre.
Vide order dated 1211989, Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Home Department, placed the services of the respondent at the disposal of Government of India on deputation basis for appointment as Director (Security) in the Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh (for short "BBMB") for a period of three years.
In terms of the said order, the respondent joined BBMB and continued to work from 20.01.1989 to 06.02.1991.
3.
The respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal challenging the action of the petitioner herein whereby a sum of Rs. 27,367.55 is found to be outstanding and recoverable from the respondent.
In the said application, present petitioner has raised the objection regarding maintainability of the application before the Tribunal primarily on the ground that the petitioner is a separate juristic entity and the period spent by the respondent on deputation with the petitioner does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as the said period was not a period spent on civil post under the Central Government.
Reliance was placed upon an order passed by the Tribunal in the case of Varinder Kumar Sharma v. Union of India and others, OA No. 487/HP of 1991 decided on 4.9.1991.
4.
In the present petition, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon judgements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as SS Dhanoa v. Municipal Corporation, AIR 1981 SC 1395 and NK Sharma v. Abhimanyu, AIR 2005 SC 4303.
Reliance is also placed upon a Division Bench of Delhi High Court reported as Ram Gopal Verma v. Union of India, 2002(1) Service Cases Today 796.
5.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner for some time, we do not find any merit in the writ petition.
Before we proceed further, it would be appropriate to reproduce hereunder the relevant extract from Section 14 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter to be referred as "the Act").
It reads as under :-  "14.
Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court ) in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All- India Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian;  (b) all service matters concerning - (i) a member of any All-India Service; or  (ii) xx xxx xxx xxx  (iii) .............. and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government;  (c) xx xx xx xx xx  (2) and (3) xx xx xx xx xxx"  6.
BBMB has been constituted under Section 79 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter to be referred as "the Reorganisation Act").
Initially, the Beas Project was commenced in the year 1960 as a joint venture of the erstwhile State of Punjab and the State of Rajasthan by mutual agreement between the two States.
All the decisions on policy and administrative matters were taken by a Board known as Beas Control Board, which was constituted by the Central Government in consultation with the two States.
Subsequently, with the passing of the Reorganisation Act, which came into force on November 1, 1966, the new State of Haryana and Union Territory of Chandigarh were carved out of Punjab and a part of the Punjab territory was also transferred to what was then the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh.
With effect from November 01, 1966, by virtue of Section 79(l) of the Reorganisation Act, BBMB was constituted by the Central Government for administration, management and operation of the Bhakra Nangal Project.
In terms of sub-section (6) of Section 79 of the Reorganisation Act, BBMB is under the control of the Central Government and has to comply with such directions, as may from time to time be given to it by that Government.
Vide sub-section (9) of Section 79 of the Reorganisation Act, BBMB has been given the power to frame regulations, including appointments and conditions of service of the officers and other staff of the BBN4B with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1980 SC 115 did not find substance in the contention of learned counsel for Government of India that the petitioners are employees of the Beas Construction Board and not of the Central Government.
It was found that the constitution of the Beas Construction Board is a matter of administrative expediency provided for by section 80(2), in order to enable the Central Government to act through a statutory agency for the purpose of discharging its functions and obligations under Section 80(1) of the Reorganisation Act.
In the aforesaid case, it was found that the petitioners are the employees of the Central Government.
7.
Undisputedly, the respondent is a member of the All India Police Service.
He was sent on deputation to Government of India for appointment as Director (Security) in the BBMB.
The order of deputation reads as under :  "The services of Shri SPS Rathore, IPS (HAR-65) Deputy Commandant General, Home Guards and Deputy Director Civil Defence, Haryana, Chandigarh (in the rank of Deputy Inspector General of Police) are placed at the disposal of Government of India on deputation basis for appointment as Director (Security) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh, with immediate effect, for a period of three years from the date he assumes charge of the said post.
2.
He should report for duty to the said Board for taking up his new assignment.
Dated, Chandigarh  The 12th Jan 1989 GV Gupta  Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana Home Department"  A perusal of the above order would show that the respondent has been placed at the disposal of Government of India for appointment in BBMB.
In terms of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act, the Administrative Tribunal shall exercise all the jurisdiction, powers and authority in relation to all service matters concerning the members of All India Service and pertaining to the service of such member in connection the affairs of the Union or of any State or any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any Corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government.
8.
May be the petitioner is a creation of the statute, but the fact remains that it is a creation of the statute to discharge the functions of the Central Government and an authority controlled by Government of India.
The deputation of the respondent is with an authority, corporation or society controlled by the Government of India.
9.
The judgment in SS Dhanoa's case (supra) is of no help to the petitioner.
In the said case, Shri Dhanoa, a member of All India Service, was on deputation with Super Bazar.
It was found that Super Bazar is not an authority controlled by the Central Government, whereas in the present case, BBMB is an authority established by the Government of India, which is apparent from the order of deputation as well.
The judgment of the Tribunal in Varinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra), referred to by learned counsel for the petitioner, is clearly distinguishable.
Firstly, the applicant before the Tribunal in the said case was appointed as Store Attendant with BBMB.
The Tribunal in the said circumstance found that though the BBMB is a statutory body created under the statute but cannot be regarded as an employee of the Central Government.
Since the applicant before the Tribunal was appointed by the BBMB itself, therefore, the said judgement is clearly not applicable to the facts of the present case where the respondent is a member of an All India Service.
10.
In Ram Gopal Verma's case (supra), the challenge before the Tribunal was the action of suspension by Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (for short "MTNL").
A Division Bench of Delhi High Court found that since no action has been taken against the applicant in respect of his substantive appointment, therefore, the action taken on the deputation post by the authority under whom the applicant is working on deputation would not confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal.
However, in the present case, not only the respondent is a Member of All India Service but is also sent on deputation to an authority controlled and established by the Government of India.
In terms of provisions of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act, the respondent is working for an authority which is under the control of Government of India.
Thus, the Tribunal has the jurisdiction to entertain the application filed by the respondent.
In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
Therefore, while allowing the application, the writ petition is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.