JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner applied for selection to the post of J.B.T.
teacher in response to an advertisement dated 242000.
Finding the petitioner eligible, she was issued Roll No. 154486 and was required to appear for interview on 2522001.
She could not make the grade in the process of selection.
The grievance of the petitioner before this Court is that she has not been granted the benefit of weightage on account of the service rendered by her with the Sant Inder Dass Public High School, Anand Nagar-B, Seiona Road, Patiala and that had she been given the benefit of teaching experience in the aforesaid institution, where she allegedly taught from 141977 to 3132000, she would have obtained more marks than the last candidate selected for the appointment for the post of J.B.T.
teacher.
2.
On the issuance of notice of motion, the respondents have filed written statement.
Our attention has been invited to the advertisement dated 242000 wherein at Sr. No. 14 it is expressly indicated that weightage would only be allowed for experience in recognised school.
In the preliminary objection No. 1 in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has emphatically been pointed out that although the school in which the petitioner was engaged was an affiliated school yet the school was not recognised by the State Government and as such the petitioner is not entitled to weightage for the service rendered by her in the said institution.
3.
Insofar as recognition of the institution by the respondents is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner has invited our attention to the Experience Certificate dated 26.4.2000 placed on the record of this writ petition as Annexure P.6.
On account of the fact that the aforesaid Experience Certificate has been countersigned by the District Education Officer, Patiala it is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that such countersign could only be possible in a school which has been recognised by the State Government.
Such an inference may have been possible but for the express stand adopted by the respondents in the written statement, namely, that the Sant Inder Dass Public High School, Anand Nagar-B, Seiona Road, Patiala where the petitioner has allegedly gained her teaching experience has not been recognised by the State Government.
In such a situation it was imperative for the petitioner to place on the record of this case material authenticating that the aforesaid school had actually been recognised by the State Government.
In the absence of such material it is not possible for us to draw such inference as has been suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
Finding himself in the aforesaid situation, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgement rendered by this court in Saroj Anand & Anr. v. State of Punjab and others, 1999(4) R.S.J.
588, wherein according to the petitioner experience gained by a candidate in an affiliated school has been accepted as sufficient for weightage in the process of selection.
We have perused the judgment rendered by this Court.
In the aforesaid judgment benefit of teaching experience gained by some candidates in affiliated schools was accepted although the said schools were not recognised schools.
In the background of the aforesaid factual position this Court in terms of the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India expressly arrived at the conclusion that the petitioners in the aforesaid case had been discriminated against for the benefit of weightage towards the experience.
So far as the instant case is concerned our attention has not been invited to a single instance wherein the selecting body granted weightage to a candidate merely on account of the fact that the candidate had experience in an affiliated institution (affiliated either to CBSE or P.S.E.B.)
despite the fact that it was not recognised by the State Government.
In view of above, is evident that the proposition of law canvassed and determined by this Court in Saroj Anand's case (supra) is not applicable to the controversy in hand.
For the reasons recorded above, we are satisfied that the petitioner is not entitled to weightage on account of the experience gained by her in an affiliated institution which was not recognised by the State Government.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.