Viney Mittal, J - Making a grievance against the order dated July 8, 2002 (Annexure P6) passed by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana respondent No. 2 and the order dated July 31, 2002 (Annexure P.5) passed by the Head Master, Government High School, Kankrola respondent No. 4, the petitioner Gopi Chand has approached this Court through the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer made in the petition is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the aforesaid orders which have been appended as Annexures P6 and P.5 respectively.
2.
Facts :  The petitioner is an ex-serviceman.
Vide order dated August 25, 1994 he was appointed by the District Education Officer, Gurgaon respondent No. 3 as Social Studies Master on adhoc basis through Zila Sainik Board, Gurgaon against a vacancy meant for ex-serviceman.
Accordingly, the petitioner joined his duties with effect from September 1, 1994.
A copy of the appointment letter issued to the petitioner has been appended as Annexure P2 with the petition.
It was stipulated in the petition that the services of the petitioner were liable to be continued till the end of "Current Academic Session", namely, 1994-95 or till the regular candidate selected through the Subordinate Selection Board Haryana/Departmental Selection Committee/Promotee candidate was available.
After the aforesaid academic session was over the services of the petitioner was sought to be dispensed with.
The petitioner and some other similarly situated incumbents approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 3997 of 1995.
A direction was sought against the respondents to permit them to continue in service till their services were replaced by the regularly selected candidates.
Vide judgment dated May 31, 1995 a Division Bench of this Court directed the respondents' department to permit the petitioners to continue in service and till the time they were replaced by regular incumbents or their posts were abolished or till anyone of them was involved in disciplinary proceedings.
A copy of the aforesaid judgment dated May 31, 1995 has been appended as Annexure P.3 with the petition.
The petitioner maintains that thereafter an advertisement for regular selection was made but no steps to fill the vacancies were taken by the department with the result that the petitioner continued to serve on the aforesaid posts.
On July 31, 2002, the petitioner received a communication from the Head Master of the Government High School, Kankrola respondent No. 4 informing the petitioner that since he had attained 55 years of age and was working on adhoc basis, therefore, he was relieved of his duties on the evening of the aforesaid date i.e. July 31, 2002.
It was informed by the Head Master that the Director Secondary Education, Haryana had issued order dated July 8, 2002 to the District Education Officer, Gurgaon in this regard.
A copy of the aforesaid communication received by the petitioner from the Head Master is appended as Annexure P.5 with the petition.
The petitioner has also appended the copy of the order dated July 8, 2002 issued by the Director Secondary Education, Haryana respondent No. 2 to District Education Officer, Gurgaon respondent No. 3 as Annexure P6 with the petition.
The orders Annexures P.5 and P6 have been challenged by the petitioner on various grounds.
It is stated by the petitioner that no notice or opportunity of hearing was ever provided to the petitioner before passing the aforesaid orders Annexures P.5 and P6.
A further grievance is made that the petitioner had been working in the department of the respondent Government since September 1, 1994 and, therefore, he was entitled to continue in service till the age of superannuation.
It was further maintained by the petitioner that all his ACRs from 1994-95 till 2001-02 were good and, therefore, there was no cause to retire the petitioner on attaining the age of 55 years.
3.
Upon a notice, the respondents have put in appearance.
A joint written statement has been filed by the respondents No. 1 to 4.
Passing of the orders Annexures P.5 and P6 has been defended.
The defence put up by the respondents is that since the petitioner was working on adhoc basis, therefore, there was no provision for the grant of extension to adhoc employees beyond the age of 55 years which was only available to regular Government employees.
On that basis, it is maintained by the respondents that he was rightly relieved from service vide order dated July 8, 2002 (Annexure P6).
The respondents have further maintained that the provisions of Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) are not applicable to the adhoc employees.
4.
We have heard Shri Ravi Verma, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Raghubir Chaudhary, the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record.
5.
Shri Ravi Verma, the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner had joined the service of the respondents department with effect from September 1, 1994 in pursuance to the appointment order Annexure P2.
Subsequently, in view of the directions dated May 31, 1995, the petitioner was to continue in service till the decision of a regular incumbent or till an action was taken against him for some disciplinary proceedings or still the post in question was abolished.
According to Shri Verma, none of these three eventualities had happened and, therefore, the petitioner was rightly continuing in service.
According to Shri Verma, the retirement age as provided in Rule 326 of the Rules (as applicable to the Haryana) provides that every government employee shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of fifty-eight years.
On that basis, it is maintained by Shri Verma that the petitioner was also entitled to serve till he had attained the age of fifty-eight years.
According to Shri Verma, the only eventuality envisaged under the Rules in which a person could be retired at the age of 55 years was when "the appointing authority was of the opinion that it is in the public interest so to do".
Since no such opinion had been expressed by the appointing authority/any competent authority, therefore, the services of the petitioner could not have been dispensed with on his attaining the age of 55 years.
6.
On the other hand, Shri Raghubir Chaudhary, the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that the petitioner was admittedly an adhoc employee and, therefore, there was no provision regarding the grant of extension to adhoc employees in terms of the Rules.
On that basis, it is maintained by Shri Raghubir Chaudhary that there was a criteria for granting the extension of service to employees beyond the age of 55 years but the aforesaid criteria was not applicable in the adhoc employees such as the petitioner.
Thus, Shri Chaudhary has submitted that the claim made by the petitioner was not supported under the Rules.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and in our opinion, the present petition deserves to succeed.
8.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner has been in continuous service with effect from September 1, 1994.
Although he was appointed in terms of the appointment order Annexure P2 but subsequently because of the directions issued by this Court vide judgment dated May 31, 1995 his services could only be terminated on his replacement by regular incumbents or abolition of the post or in case of his involvement in disciplinary proceedings.
Since the services of the petitioner have not been dispensed with in any manner on account of the aforesaid eventualities therefore, he was to continue in service till the date of superannuation meant for regular government employees.
9.
We have noticed that under the provisions of Rule 326 of the Rules, every Government employee shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of fifty-eight years.
Under the provisions of clause (d) of the aforesaid Rule 326, an appointing authority has the discretion to retire a government employee at the age of 55 years by serving a notice of not less than three months to him, if it is of the opinion that it is in the public interest, to do so.
Thus, we find that the normal tenure of an employee shall be upto to the date of his attaining 58 years of age.
However, a discretion has been provided to the appointing authority to curtail the aforesaid period if the aforesaid appointing authority was of the opinion that it was in public interest to do so.
In such a situation, the employee could be retired at the age of 55 years by giving him a notice of not less than three months.
Even if we accept the stand adopted by the respondents that the Rules are not applicable to the case of an adhoc employee.
Still, the normal Rule would be to treat an adhoc employee at par with a regular Government employee as far as the date of superannuation is concerned.
10.
Nothing has been pointed out by Shri Chaudhary that the appointing authority of the petitioner had taken any decision under clause (d) of Rule 326 of the Rules to the effect that it was not in public interest to retain the petitioner beyond the age of 55 years.
In the absence of any such decision the petitioner is entitled to continue till the age of superannuation which is the date on which he attains the age of fifty-eight years.
11.
In this view of the matter, we do not find that the action of the respondents in retiring the petitioner at the age of 55 years was supported by any rule or was in any manner justified.
Accordingly, we quash the order dated July 8, 2002 (Annexure P6) passed by respondent No. 2 and the second order dated July 31, 2002 (Annexure P.5) passed by respondent No. 4 and declare that the petitioner would be entitled to continue in the service of the Government till he attains the age of 58 years.
Of course, the respondents would be at liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioner earlier also in terms of the judgment dated May 31, 1995 passed by a Division Bench of this Court earlier, in case any of aforesaid eventuality arises.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.