RL Anand, J - Shri Sarmukh Singh, Ex-Assistantt Grade-I (Depot), Food Corporation of India, Food Storage Depot, Ladhowali Road, Jalandhar, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the quashment of order Annexure P-2 vide which the petitioner was compulsorily retired from service.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he has been retired by the incompetent authority under Regulation 22 sub-clause (2) by paying three months salary in lieu of notice at the age of 51 years, though the superannuation age is 58 years.
It is alleged by the petitioner that while passing the order of compulsory retirement, the department has not applied its mind while forming the requisite opinion.
The order appears to be based solely on the adverse entries in the annual confidential report pertaining to the years 1980 and 1984.
The petitioner filed representation against the adverse remarks which were with the department.
The whole record of the petitioner was unblemished, except these two reports.
Moreover, the report of 1984 has been spoiled with a mala fide intention by Mr. AS Bhodwal, Assistant Manager (D) with whom the petitioner was working.
Mr. Bhodwal was junior in the seniority list of AGI (D) and the purpose of Mr. Bhodwal was to debar the petitioner on promotion to the rank of Assistant Manager (D).
There was no material with the department to retire the petitioner at the age of 51 years though the integrity of the petitioner has never been doubted at any stage.
The department could take into consideration the adverse entries only after deciding the representation.
The annual confidential report could not constitute any material formation of opinion with regard to compulsory retirement in public interest.
The impugned order is penal in nature and cannot be sustained.
It was also submitted that in the year 1985 the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Manager (Depot) as he was due for this promotion since long.
The promotion order was withheld by the Department.
It was also the case of the petitioner that the impugned order has been passed by the authority which was competent to do so.
According to the petitioner, the Zonal Manager had the jurisdiction to pass the order of compulsory retirement.
With this background and averments, the petitioner has made a prayer for the quashment of the order Annexure P-2 and he has further prayed for the release of consequential benefits such as, Seniority, Salary along with interest etc.  3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It was contested by the Corporation.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that the petitioner was retired by the competent authority after he had completed the age of 50 years in terms of Regulation 22(2) of the FCI Staff Regulations, 1971.
The order was passed by the competent authority after it was satisfied that it was in the interest of the Corporation to do so.
The service record of the petitioner was blemished.
The order was not passed by mala fide intention.
Moreover, the petition is liable to be dismissed as Mr. Bhodwal has not been impleaded a party.
The competent authority passed the order of compulsory retirement after considering all the facts and circumstances of the case.
The competent authority found that the petitioner had shown utmost laxity in haphazard undertaking of depot operations resulting in altogether confusion because of negligent conduct.
The petitioner had been awarded various punishments during his past period for his negligent work and conduct.
A penalty of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect was passed by the competent authority on 1711981.
The petitioner filed on appeal against the said order and the same was dismissed by order dated 1621984.
The petitioner further filed a revision petition under the Staff Regulations to the Managing Director and the said review petition was also rejected by order dated 26111984.
The petitioner was also served with a list of charges on 2041979 and these charges were enquired into and again the punishing authority vide order dated 20111980 ordered withholding of one increment.
This time also, the charge against the petitioner was that he failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty while working as incharge of Food Storage Depot at Malout.
He did not exercise proper check over the staff posted under him and he failed to exercise proper supervision.
The petitioner was further involved in an enquiry and was punished by the competent authority by order dated 2741976 and two increments with cumulative effect were stopped.
During the years 1976 to 1981, seven increments of the petitioner were stopped on account of various charges.
All these factors were taken note of by the punishing authority before passing the order or compulsory retirement.
The retirement of the petitioner is in public interest and in terms of the Staff Regulations.
With this broad defence, the respondents pray for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
I have heard Shri C.M.
Chopra, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Hemant Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Corporation and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
5.
Before, I deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, it will be appropriate for me to incorporate in verbatim the order dated 5th April, 1986, which run as under :  "Whereas the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Punjab Region, Chandigarh is of the opinion that it is in the public interest to do so.
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred in clause (2) of Regulation 22 of the Food Corporation of India Staff Regulations, 1971, the Senior Regional Manager hereby retired Shri Sarmukh Singh, Asstt.
Grade I (Depot) with immediate effect, he having already attained the age of 50/55 years, by giving him 90 days pay in lieu of the notice after deduction of Income-tax dues.
Shri Sarmukh Singh, Asstt.
Grade I (Depot) is being paid a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for a period of three months calculated at the same rate at which he was drawing them immediately before his retirement.
An account payee cheque bearing No. 02-734391 dated 741986 for a sum of Rs. 392310 (Rs. Three thousand nine hundred twenty three paise ten only (drawn on State Bank of India Jalandhar in favour of Shri Sarmukh Singh is accordingly enclosed.
Sd/- (Bikramjit Singh) Sr.
Regional Manager"  The submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner was two fold.
Firstly that the Senior Regional Manager had no jurisdiction to pass this order.
Secondly, only the Zonal Manager had the jurisdiction to do so.
This submission according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, is totally devoid of merit.
I have to see the decision of the Staff Regulations as on 541986.
These regulations were amended in the month of October i.e. w.e.f.
16th October, 1987.
Before amending of the rules, the Senior Regional Manager was competent to pass the order of compulsory retirement with regard to Category III employee, like the petitioner.
In these circumstances, I do not see any illegality of jurisdiction so far as the order Annexure P-2 is concerned.
6.
It was then submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned order has not been passed in public interest.
It is a mala fide, arbitrary and vindictive order which has been passed by Shri Bikramjit Singh, Senior Regional Manager at the behest of Shri Bhodwal.
After examining his previous record and that after the authorities became inimical and biased against the petitioner, an arbitrary decision Annexure P-2 has been taken.
I do not find any merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The petitioner has not made Mr. AS Bhodwal as a party.
In the absence of non-joining of Mr. Bhodwal as party, I cannot hold that the impugned order had been passed in a mala fide manner at the behest of Shri Bhodwal.
Even otherwise, I do not approve the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Senior Regional Manager Shri Bikramjit Singh was under the influence of Shri Bhodwal.
Even the promotion given to the petitioner in the year 1985 does not debar the competent authority to examine the past service record of the employee.
There were many punishments to the discredit of the petitioner.
The order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
Though the impugned order has been passed in public interest and it is not vindictive, arbitrary or mala fide, but this court cannot sit as a Court of appeal over the judgment of the authority, which alone has the jurisdiction to examine the record of the employee.
Of course, the action of the punishing authority is subject to judicial review, which power can only be exercised by the High Court if it is established, that the impugned order is mala fide, arbitrary, vindictive or biased in nature, but nothing is discernible from the impugned order or from the record.
In these circumstances, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.