M Katju, J - This writ petition has been filed against the impugned order dated 2889 (*) Correction made vide court order dated 952001 Sd.
Hon.
MKJ, Sd.
Hon.
RB Misra, J Annexure 8 to the petition dismissing the petitioner from service and the appellate order dated 30189 passed by the DIG Agra and the revisional under order dated 24391 passed by the DGP, UP as well as the judgment dated 1695, Annexure 10 to the writ petition passed by the UP Public Service Tribunal.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The petitioner was a lady constable in the UP Police.
After due selection in 1982 she was appointed and in 1986 she was posted at Firozabad, district Agra.
In para 2 of the petition it is alleged that her work and conduct was good and she was awarded good entries.
In para 3 it is alleged that in 1983 in the All India Police Meet the petitioner was awarded First Prize in the Dance Competition and she won other prizes.
3.
In para 4 it is alleged that when the petitioner was posted at Firozabad her younger sister Anjali developed some serious medical trouble hence her mother took a room on rent in Agra and brought Km.
Anjali for treatment at Agra and both started living there together.
The petitioner often visited them.
Various facts have been alleged in the petition but it would not be necessary to go into the same.
All that is necessary to mention is that the petitioner has alleged that due to some enmity the Dy.
S.P.
- the respondent No. 5 raided her residence on 30.12.87 at about 1130 PM and arrested the petitioner and one Jagdish Saran Joshi a guest of the petitioner's mother in order to defame the petitioner and get her removed from service.
They were medically examined and the petitioner was suspended on 2188 by order of the S.S.P.
Agra.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted on 311088 vide Annexure 6 to the petition.
In this charge-sheet it is alleged that on the night on 30/31.12.87 the petitioner was found at her residence under influence of liquor and sleeping with Jagdish Saran Joshi in the same bed.
Bottles of liquor and some rifle, guns and cartridges were also recovered.
On the basis of the said charge-sheet an enquiry was held against the petitioner.
True copy of the enquiry report dated 28289 is Annexure 7 to the petition.
Thereafter vide order dated 2889 the petitioner was dismissed from service.
Her appeal before the D.I.G.
was also dismissed and the revision before D.G.P.
vide Annexure 9 also failed.
The petitioner then approached the UP Public Services Tribunal but her petition was dismissed vide Annexure 10 to the writ petition.
Hence this writ petition.
4.
There are no allegations against the petitioner that her conduct in any way affected her official functions.
There is also no allegation that she was on duty at the relevant time.
In our opinion unless an employee does some act which interferes with his/her official function then ordinarily whatever he/she does in his/her private life cannot be regarded as misconduct.
In the case of In re Rabindra Nath Ghosh, 1985(1) Serv LR 598, this was the view taken by the Calcutta High Court and this was also the view taken by a Division Bench of this Court in State of UP v. BN Singh, AIR 1989 All 359 (sic).
The position may have been different if the petitioner was doing the aforesaid acts while on duty, but in the present case she was at her residence late in the night, and there is no allegation that she was on duty at that time.
As held by this Court in the case of State of UP v. BN Singh (supra), in order to bring a case of a government servant within the definition of personal immorality on the ground of habit of sex, it must be shown that this habit of the government servant has reduced his utility as a public servant so as to damage the government or official generally in public esteem.
In Sukhdev Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(2) Serv LR 645, the Punjab High Court held that a constable under influence of alcohol while not on duty cannot he held to be guilty of misconduct.
In the present case the petitioner was not having sex in a public place but at her residence.
Hence it cannot be said that she has committed any misconduct for which she can be departmentally proceeded against.
5.
We cannot help observing that if the petitioner had been a male employee perhaps the authorities would have done nothing about it but since she was a female she has been proceeded against.
Thus this is a case which smacks of sexual discrimination.
6.
In view of the above the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders are quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service within a month of production of certified copy of this order before the S.S.P.
Agra.
She will also get all back wages and other benefits treating her service not to have been terminated with 12% interest from the date of termination to the date of reinstatement, and these will be paid to her within 2 months.
She will also get continuity of service, increment, etc.
Petition allowed.