RL Anand, J - PRTC (hereinafter called the Corporation) has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 24121998 passed by Additional District Judge, Bathinda who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 14.10.1996 passed by Civil Judge, Junior Division decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-respondent for declaration to the effect that the order dated 431994 was illegal, null and void and that the plaintiff was entitled to his regular increments alongwith interest at the rate of 12% on each month due.
2.
Shri Darshan Singh conductor was charge-sheeted by the department.
It is the case of department that Darshan Singh accepted his guilt and fault and made confession before the punishing authority.
The punishing authority issued show cause notice upon the employee.
Impugned order Annexure P.1 reveals that the plaintiff was awarded punishment of stoppage of five annual grade increments and it was further ordered that the plaintiff will not be paid anything over and above the subsistence allowance already drawn by him during the suspension period.
3.
Both the Courts below held that the impugned order Annexure P.1 is hit by the principle of double jeopardy because as per Regulation 20 of the Corporation withholding of increments and withholding of wages for the suspension period are two independent punishments which cannot be awarded to the delinquent employee when he has not been issued any show cause notice.
4.
Learned Appellate Court while affirming the judgment and decree of the Trial Court held in para No. 7 of the judgment as followed :-  "However, the impugned order (Ex.P.1) cannot be sustained as it may amount to double jeopardy as it has been made without serving upon the respondent a show cause notice separately as to why he be not paid any thing over and above the subsistence allowance already received by him during the period of suspension.
From the above, said Rule 20 it is clear that withholding of increments and withholding of wages for the suspension period are two separate penalties detailed through sub-rules (iii) and (v) of the said Rule 20.
Therefore, to impose the penalty of withholding of wages for the suspension period on the respondent, the appellants were bound to serve him a separate show cause notice.
But they have failed to do so.
Our Hon'ble High Court, through an authority reported in 1991(1) SLR 700 : 1991(1) SCT 412 (P&H), Kulbir Singh Mehta v. State of Haryana and others under the similar circumstances also held the order whereby the pay and allowances of an employee for the suspension period over and above the subsistence allowance already paid was directed to be withheld to be illegal, null and void and set-aside the same.
The law laid down through the said authority is attracted to the facts of the present case.
As such, with due regard to the same, the impugned order Ex.P.1 whereby the respondent was awarded the said two punishments is clearly violative of the said law and as such, the same is to be held illegal and ineffective against the respondent.
Consequently his suit was liable to succeed, which has been correctly and properly decreed against the appellants by the learned lower Court.
This view could not be resisted by the learned counsel for the appellants on any cogent ground.
As such the appeal fails."
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that if it is assumed for the sake of arguments, that there was some defect in the enquiry and that the defect is separable, then in these circumstances, it was obligatory on the part of the Courts below to remit the case back to the punishing authority to reconsider the matter in the light of the explanation of the delinquent official as to whether two punishments can be awarded or not.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon JT 1996(5) SC 403.
I do not subscribe to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
The point for determination for both the Courts below and before the High Court is whether the order Annexure P.1 which is hit by the principle of double jeopardy and can be sustained in the eyes of law ?
A reading of Regulation 20 of the PRTC Rules prima facie indicates withholding of increments and withholding of wages for the suspension period are two separate punishments which could not be awarded to the delinquent official.
In these circumstances, order Annexure P.1 has to be struck down and which has been rightly struck down by the Courts below.
No substantial question of law is involved in this case.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.