RL Anand, J. - Ms. Nafeesa Khandpur has filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and she has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus seeking direction of this Court against the respondents to release her Roll Number to enable her to appear in the Annual Examination for MA Part-I English being held for the academic year 1998-99, as a private candidate.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
The petitioner got admission in MA Part-I, English in S.C.D.
Government College for Boys, Ludhiana.
She continued her studies.
She became short of her lectures, as a result of which she could not appear as a regular candidate for the examination.
According to the rules of the calendar of the University, the petitioner was eligible to appear in the examination as a private candidate being a woman.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the date-sheet for the examination was published on 2141999 and as per the rules she could apply as private candidate not later than six days prior to the commencement of the examination which commenced on 2641999.
She applied on 2341999.
Her case was forwarded to the University on 2441999.
On 2641999, the Superintendent of the Centre allowed her to appear in one paper but for the remaining papers, she was not allowed to appear because she was not issued a Roll Number by the University as a result of which the petitioner approached the High Court and under the directions of this Court, the petitioner was allowed to undertake the examination.
With these broad allegations the petitioner has prayed for the issuance of the directions as stated above.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Two sets of written-statements; one by respondents No. 1 to 3 and the other by the Government Collage, respondent No. 5, were filed, in which they have denied the allegations of the petitioner and the stand taken by the University was that the petitioner did not become eligible to undertake the examination because recommendation made by the college authority was received late in the University.
4.
I have heard Shri KS Sidhu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anupam Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and Ms. Gurveen H Singh, learned AAG, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 5 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is a common case of the parties that the examination started on 2641999.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner could appear as a private candidate being a woman.
In this case there was no fault which can be attributed to the petitioner.
The date-sheet was pronounced on 2141999.
The petitioner made a request to the college authorities on 2341999.
Her request was forwarded to the University on 2441999.
6.
In these circumstances, the petitioner was eligible to appear in the examination.
Moreover, the equity also lies in favour of the petitioner.
She had already undertaken the examination under the orders of the Court.
7.
In this view of the matter, the present writ petition is allowed and directions are given to the University to recognise her candidature for MA Part-I English as a private candidate (Woman) and to declare her result.
If the petitioner is successful in the examination she will also be entitled to appear in MA Part-II English, subject to other conditions as envisaged in the calendar of the University.
The University shall declare the result of the petitioner within fifteen days from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.