TS Doabia, J - The appointment of private respondents as Lecturers in Environmental Sciences in the University of Jammu was the subject matter of challenge in a writ petition preferred in this Court.
This writ petition stands dismissed.
The appellant has come in appeal.
2.
Applications for two posts of Lecturers in Environmental Sciences were invited by the Jammu University constituted under the Universities of Kashmir and Jammu Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
An advertisement notice was issued on 2411995.
The selection committee came to be constituted under Section 36 of the Act.
3.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties we are of the opinion that the view expressed by the learned Single Judge calls for no interference.
The reasons for this are given below :  4.
In the case University of Mysore v. CD Govinda Ram and another, AIR 1965 SC 491 the Supreme Court of India observed that normally the Courts should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by the experts and due regard should be given to the opinion expressed by the selection committee.
5.
In the present case the University invited two experts from outside.
The selection was based upon their advice.
If this be the position then merely because one of the Members of the Committee happens to be related to one of the candidates in the manner indicated above cannot be said to have vitiated the proceedings.
As a matter of fact in case Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 434, the argument advanced was that one of the Members of the Committee was a guide of one of the candidates.
The association of such a person was held to be of no consequence.
Again in Utkal University case, 1999(2) SCC 193 one of the experts was a member of an organisation which was bringing out a magazine in which one of the candidate was associated.
The association of such an expert with the process of selection was held to be of no consequence.
The fact that the appellant had appeared in the selection and the fact that he did not object to the presence of one of the members who was said to be related is a factor which cannot be ignored.
As a matter of fact in Utkal University's case (supra) this aspect of the matter was also considered.
What was said in para 9 of the judgment is being quoted below :  "The last contention of the first respondent which has been accepted by the High Court is that of bias on the part of one of the members of the selection committee.
The so-called bias, as set out in the original petition, is that one of the experts was a member of an organisation which brought out a magazine of which the selected candidate was the Editor while one of the members of the Selection Committee was on the Editorial Board.
Both the University as well as the selected candidate have pointed out that this fact was known to the first respondent throughout.
He did not, at any time, object to the composition of the selection committee.
He objected only after the selection was over and he was not selected.
This would amount to waiver of such objection on the part of the first respondent".
Similar view has been expressed in an earlier decision reported as Madan Lal v. State, AIR 1995 SC 1088 : 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC).
What was said in the said decision was quoted in the judgment of the learned Single Judge and this is being quoted again :  "In case the case of Om Parkash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla, AIR 1986 SC 1043, it has been clearly laid down by a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court that when the petitioner appeared at the examination without protest and when he found that he would not succeed in examination he filed a petition challenging the said examination, the High Court should not have granted any relief to such a petitioner.
Therefore, the result of the interview test on merits cannot be successfully challenged by a candidate who takes a chance to get selected at the said interview and who ultimately finds himself to be unsuccessful."
In view of the above the argument that the selection was vitiated because there was no proper committee constituted or that one of the members was related to one of the candidates, cannot be accepted.
The appellant should have raised this point at the outset.
He having not done so was not within his right to raise this plea belatedly and this was rightly rejected by the learned Single Judge.
We do not find any ground to interfere with the view expressed by the learned Single Judge.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter which requires adjudication.
Section 47 of the Universities Act of 1969 clearly lays down that the proceedings of the University Authorities and Bodies are not invalidated on account of a vacancy or on account of the presence of some persons who should not have been permitted to take part in the proceedings.
Section 47 reads as under :  "47.
Proceedings of University authorities and bodies not invalidated by vacancies - No act or proceedings of any authority or other body or committee of a University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members or by reason of some person having taken part in the proceedings who is subsequently found not to have been entitled to do so."
Therefore, the defect as sought to be projected by the appellant in the constitution or non-constitution of the selection committee would be protected by Section 47 of the Universities Act, 1969.
Thus looking from any point of angle, this appeal cannot succeed and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.