GS Singhvi, J - These appeals are directed against the judgment dated 25.1.1994 passed by the learned single Judge vide which he dismissed the Writ Petitions of the appellants.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the issue raised in the appeals, we may briefly notice the relevant facts.
LPA No. 229 of 1994  Appellant No. 1 Gurdial Singh was appointed as General Science Master in the Education Department, Punjab in 1961 in the pay scale of Rs. 110-250/-.
Appellant No. 2-Prem Singh joined service in GNP High School, Majitha (private school), District Amritsar in 1961.
He became goverment employee in 1962 when the school was taken over by the State Government.
He was absorbed as General Science Master in 1963.
By an order dated 881988 the Director Public Instructions (Schools) (respondent No. 2), appointed them as Head Masters by promotion for a period of six months against the vacancies earmarked for direct recruits.
After about three years, respondent No. 2 issued notice like Annexure P6 dated 5/1071991 to the appellants to show cause against the proposed withdrawal of the orders of their promotion.
However, instead of filing reply to the show cause notices, they challenged the same by filing C.W.P.
No. 12730 of 1991 inter-alia on the following grounds :-  (a) At the time of issuance of order dated 881988 they were eligible to be promoted as Head Master in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Educational Services, Class-III, School Cadre, Rules, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1955 Rules') and the provisions contained in the Punjab State Education Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1978 (for short, `the 1978 Rules') cannot be applied to their cases because before framing those rules, the approval of the Central Government was not obtained as required by Section 115(7) of the State Re-Organisation Act, 1956 (`the 1956 Act') and Section 88(6) of the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966 (`the 1966 Act').
(b) The qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules for promotion on the post of Head Master will be deemed to have been relaxed by the government under rule 19 of those Rules.
(c) The show cause notices are violative of their right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it was averred that although the petitioners (appellants herein) were not eligible to be appointed General Science Masters, the requirement of academic qualification was relaxed in their cases because at the relevant time sufficient number of eligible candidates were not available.
The respondents further averred that the appellants did not possess the qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules for appointment as Head Master and, therefore, they have no right to be continued on that post.
LPA No. 436 of 1994  3.
Appellant-Amarjit Sharma joined service as Science Master in 1962.
He filed C.W.P.
No. 15067 of 1990 for issuance of a direction to the respondents to promote him as Head Master.
The same was disposed of by this Court on 26.9.1990 with the direction that his representation be decided within a period of three months.
In compliance of the Court's order, respondent No. 2 examined the claim of the appellant and rejected the same vide memo no. 12/1- 91-SA-1(4) dated 1811991.
He challenged that decision by filing C.W.P.
No. 4490 of 1991 in which he again prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to promote him as Head Master.
The respondents contested that writ petition by contending that he does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, learned Single Judge held as under :-  (i) The writ petitioners were not eligible to hold the post of Master on the date of coming into force the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966 i.e. 1111966 and, therefore, they cannot challenge the decision of the respondents on the ground of violation of the provisions of S. 82(6) of the 1966.
(ii) As on 1111966, the writ petitioners did not possess the qualifications prescribed for the post of Head Master and, therefore, they were not entitled to challenge the higher qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules.
(iii) The State Government cannot be directed to relax the 1978 Rules for facilitating the promotion of the petitioners because Rule 19 of those Rules does not empower the government to relax the requirement of educational qualifications and experience.
Learned Single Judge also rejected the additional point urged on behalf of Amarjit Sharma that the training qualification of F.Sc.
should be treated equivalent to B.Ed.
5.
Shri GS Bal who appeared on behalf of the appellants in LPA No. 229 of 1994 raised the following contentions :-  (1) The appellants possessed the qualifications prescribed under the 1955 rules for promotion to the post of Head Master and, therefore, they should be treated eligible for promotion even after coming into force of the 1978 Rules and the higher qualifications prescribed in those Rules cannot be applied to their cases in the matter of promotion as Head Master because the previous approval of the competent authority was not obtained in terms of by Section 82(6) of the 1966 Act.
(2) The government should have exercised the power under Rule 19 of the 1978 Rules for relaxing the requirement of educational qualifications so as to facilitate the promotion of the appellants.
(3) Even if the Division Bench declined to upset the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge, the State Government should be restrained from making recovery of the excess amount, if any, paid to the appellants in the form of salary and allowance payable to the persons holding the post of Head Master.
Shri Rupinder Khosla controverted the submissions of Shri GS Bal and argued that the appellants cannot derive any benefit from the order dated 881988 because they were not qualified for promotion as Head Master either under the 1955 Rules or the 1978 Rules.
He further argued that the purely fortuitous promotion accorded to the appellants against the vacancies earmarked for direct recruitment cannot entitle them to hold the post of Head Master and, therefore, no illegality can be said to have been committed by the learned Single Judge when he dismissed the writ petitions.
6.
We have thoughtfully considered the contentions urged by the learned counsel for the parties and we do not find any merit in the appellants claim for promotion as Head Masters.
Admittedly, they were promoted as Head Masters against the vacancies earmarked for the quota of direct recruits and not against the vacancies of promotion quota.
This is clearly borne out from a bare reading of the order of promotion, Annexure P4, dated 881988, the extract of which is reproduced below :-  "At present about 350 posts of Headmasters/Headmistresses are lying vacant in 350 Govt. High Schools.
Out of which 200 posts are meant for direct recruitment regarding which a demand notice has already been sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala.
The selection of these 200 Headmasters/Headmistresses by the Punjab Public Service Commission by way of direct recruitment is likely to take a minimum of six months.
To keep these posts unfilled for such a long time is neither in administrative interest nor in the interest of the studies of the students.
Out of these 200 posts, 120 posts are for Headmasters and 80 posts are for Headmistresses respectively.
Against the reserved posts, the candidates will have to be selected from Scheduled Castes by the Punjab Public Service Commission for direct appointment.
Therefore, the under-mentioned Masters are hereby appointed as Headmasters for a period of six months or uptil the direct recruitment made by Punjab Public Service Commission, whichever is earlier at the schools mentioned against their names against vacant posts on purely ad hoc basis."
In the writ petitions, it was not averred that promotion quota vacancies had become available after 881988 and, therefore, the petitioners (appellants herein) should be treated as regularly promoted as Head Masters.
Even in the memos of appeals such an averment has not been made.
Moreover, no tangible evidence has been produced before the Court to prove the availability of promotion quota vacancies on or after 881988.
Therefore, the promotion of the appellants will have to be treated as purely fortuitous and on the basis of such promotion they can claim to have acquired legal right to hold the posts of Head Masters.
As a logical corollary to this conclusion, it must be held that the show cause notices issued by respondent No. 2 did not suffer from any legal infirmity and the learned Single Judge has rightly refused to quash the same.
7.
In view of the abovementioned conclusion, the question as to whether the appellants were eligible to be promoted under the 1955 Rules or 1978 Rules will have to be regarded purely academic and determination thereof is inconsequential.
Otherwise also, we do not find any merit in the contention of Shri Bal that the provisions of the 1978 Rules could not have been invoked for the purpose of considering the cases of the appellants for promotion as Head Masters.
Learned Single Judge has made reference to the instructions issued by the Government of India in the context of Section 115(7) of the 1956 Act and Section 82(6) of the 1966 Act and held as under :-  "Assuming that the 1978 Rules had altered the conditions of services of the petitioners to their prejudice by prescribing qualifications which they do not possess, I am of the opinion that no specific prior approval of the Central Government was necessary in view of the memorandum dated March 27, 1957 received by the State Government from the Deputy Secretary to Government of India granting approval, the relevant part of which has been reproduced above.
The Central Government pointed out in this memorandum that the question of protection to be afforded in the matter of various service conditions to personnel affected by the reorganisation was discussed with the State Representatives at conference held in December, 1956 and after a careful consideration of the views expressed at those conferences the Government of India had decided that the conditions of service applicable to personnel affected by reorganisation should be protected.
It was also stated that in respect of such conditions of service has have been specially dealt with in the memorandum it will be open to the State Governments to take action in accordance with the decisions conveyed therein and so long as the State Government's action is in conformity to those decisions, they may assume the Central Government's approval in terms of the proviso to sub-section (7) of Section 115 of the States Reorganisation Act.
A bare perusal of the relevant part of the memorandum reproduced above makes it clear that in the matter of promotions it was decided that no protection was to be provided.
It is true that this memorandum pertains to the approval granted under sub-section (7) of section 115 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 and cannot possibly refer to the corresponding provisions contained in the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Act.
However, by a subsequent letter of February, 1968 the Central Government communicated to the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab the decision of the Central Government in the following words :- "Subject :- Reorganisation of Punjab - Protection of service conditions to be afforded to State Service Personnel.
I am directed to refer to the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act which lays down that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section, shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
The question of protection to be afforded in the matter of various service conditions to personnel affected by the Punjab Reorganisation Act has been considered and it has been decided that the protection of service conditions as laid down in this Ministry's letter No. 5/6/57/SR(S) dated the 28th March, 1957 in connection with the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 (copy enclosed) should be made available to the personnel affected by the Punjab Reorganisation Act also.
I am to request that appropriate instructions may be issued accordingly to all concerned.
3.
The receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged."
In view of this letter from the Central Government, there is no basis to contend that earlier approval granted by the Central Government could not be treated as approval under the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 82 of the Act.
Neither of the parties has placed these letters on the record and they have been taken from the record of L.P.A. 319 of 1974 copies of which are being placed on the record of these cases as Annexures C1 and C2.
For the reasons stated above I hold that no specific prior approval was necessary to be obtained from the Central Government for promulgating the 1978 Rules.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Proviso to sub-section (6) of the section 82 of the Act reads as under :-  "82.
(1) to (5) xx xx xx xx (6) xx xx xx xx xx Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government."
It envisages that the conditions of service which were applicable immediately before the appointed day i.e. November 1, 1966 to any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 82 of the Act could not be varied to his disadvantage without previous approval of the Central Government.
Before the petitioners can take advantage of the proviso they have to show that they were eligible to hold the promotional posts immediately before the appointed day.
Admittedly, they were not eligible to hold even the post of a Master on the said date as they all passed their BA examination after November 1, 1966.
It may be observed that BA was an essential requirement for the post of a Master and a Head Master under the 1955 Rules and the only qualification which the petitioners possessed on that day was F.Sc.
and Diploma in Teaching of General Science (D.G.Sc.).
When the petitioners were not eligible for the promotional post immediately before November 1, 1966 how can they complain that the 1955 Rules were amended to their disadvantage in the year 1978 as under the 1978 Rules also they are ineligible to hold the promotional post.
This is what their Lordships of the Supreme Court said in an almost similar situation arising in Amar Chand v. State of Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 729 - "The question that had to be considered first was whether the appellant possessed the qualification prescribed for promotion to the post of Vaidya on 1111966 the date of coming into force of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
If he did not possess the prescribed qualification on that date he could not complain against the prescription of a different qualification in 1972 under which also he was not eligible to be considered for promotion."
For this reason as well, the petitioners cannot challenge the higher qualifications prescribed in the 1978 Rules to contend that their conditions of service had been varied to their disadvantage."
We record our concurrence with the view taken by the learned Single Judge and hold that the appellants were rightly not treated eligible for promotion as Head Masters because it is an admitted position that they did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules.
8.
The argument of Shri Bal that the government must be deemed to have relaxed the requirement of academic and training qualifications in terms of Rule 19 of the 1978 Rules is clearly misconceived and deserves to be rejected because Rule 19 of the 1978 Rules does not empower the government to relax the requirement of the academic qualifications and experience and in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, the Court cannot issue a mandamus directing the government to grant relaxation in the 1978 rules ignoring rule 19.
9.
The prayer made by appellant-Amarjit Singh for directing the respondents to promote him as Head Master cannot be granted because it is an admitted position that he too does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed under the 1978 Rules for promotion on the post of Head Master.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the order passed by the learned Single Judge does not suffer from any legal error justifying interference under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
Hence, the appeals are dismissed.
However, keeping in view the fact that the appellants have retired from service, we direct that the respondents shall not recover the amount of salary paid to them in the grade of the Head Master till the date of their retirement.
We also give liberty to the appellants to make representation(s) to the government for not withdrawing the pensionary benefits on the basis of the pay drawn by them at the time of retirement.
Appeals dismissed.