VS Aggarwal, J - The present writ petition is directed against the award of the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat dated February 28, 1996.
The learned Tribunal held that the termination orders pertaining to the petitioner were in order and he was not entitled to any relief.
2.
The question in controversy before the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal was that as to whether termination of his services was justified in accordance with law or not.
Learned counsel for the petitioner assails the order only on the ground that the learned Tribunal did not exercise the jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act in a proper manner.
According to him, there was a mistake in calculation of the fare that was charged and in that view of the said fact in all fairness, the petitioner should not have been removed from service and that the petitioner, if allowed to join service, will not claim the back wages.
3.
The assertions against the petitioner were that on November 4, 1974 he was working as a conductor on Bus No. 4670 on Meerut-Ghauranda route.
It was checked and it was found that he has charged Rs. 139-30 from 13 passengers instead of Rs. 87-15 and in that process he defamed the Department.
4.
Interestingly, it is not the charge against the petitioner that he had embezzled the amount.
The only assertion against him is that for the excess amount, he has defamed the Department.
On behalf of the respondents, instructions of the Haryana Roadways had been produced.
In the last paragraph, it has been pointed :  "In this behalf it is submitted that the department cannot suo-moto reinstate the petitioner.
However, the answering respondents will comply with the orders of the Hon'ble High Court regarding reinstatement of the petitioner without back wages, whenever so ordered by the Hon'ble High Court."
In the present case the learned Tribunal has not exercised the jurisdiction and considered as to whether the punishment is commensurate with the nature of the act of the petitioner.
Since, it is not a case of embezzlement of any amount, but it is only confined to the fact that the Department Haryana Roadways did not get a good name for the alleged mistake, it is a fit case where the petitioner should not have been removed from service.
Instead, it is directed that he be taken back in the service forthwith.
He will get no back wages.
There would be continuity of service.
Order accordingly.