NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by Sat Parkash under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order dated 30th August, 1993 whereby his request for voluntary retirement was allowed by his employer.
He filed a representation but that also was dismissed.
He has now challenged both the orders with the pleas that his request for voluntary retirement was made under coercion and due to harassment and he had, therefore, a right to withdraw his request subsequently.
His request for withdrawal has been rejected.
2.
Petitioner's case is that he joined the National Seeds Corporation Limited (for short "the Corporation") in the year 1972 as a Lower Division Clerk.
He was promoted to the post of Upper Division Clerk in the year 1980.
The Central Government, vide office memorandum dated 5th of October, 1988 (Annexure P-1) issued by the Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Industries, New Delhi, took a decision on voluntary retirement of the employees of Public Enterprises.
Under the scheme, employees who had completed ten years of service or had attained the age of 40 years could seek voluntary retirement on a written request.
However, the employer had the right not to allow the voluntary retirement for the reasons to be recorded in writing.
3.
The Board of Directors of the Corporation, in its meeting held on 3031993, approved the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (V.R.S.)
Phase II.
4.
The petitioner has challenged his voluntary retirement with the plea that the officers of the Corporation at Chandigarh were annoyed with him.
The petitioner, in the capacity of the Regional Secretary of the employees' union had earlier filed a writ petition (C.W.P.
No. 1693 of 1991) challenging the instructions dated 18th September, 1990.
The Corporation had to withdraw the said instructions.
The writ petition has then dismissed as withdrawn.
Mr. DS Marwaha, the then Regional Manager of the Corporation, did not like it.
He and other officers of the Corporations started victimising the petitioner.
Demand for bonus was also raised by the petitioner in the capacity of the Secretary of the employees' union.
His activities as a union leader were not liked by the Officers of the Corporation.
5.
The petitioner's case is based on certain instances of harassment.
He has stated that a memorandum dated 23rd April, 1993 (Annexure P/3 A) was issued to him stating that he had not submitted the medical certificate in connection with the medical leave for two days (11th and 12th February, 1993) but had only submitted a fitness certificate.
It was, further, pointed out in the memorandum that he has submitted a medical certificate for illness issued by Dr. KR Dhawan though the fitness certificate has been issued by Dr. Vinod Gupta.
THe petitioner has stated that the said memorandum was issued to him by way of harassment.
His explanation was demanded.
He filed his reply explaining the correct position.
Thereafter, another memorandum dated 14th June, 1993 was issued to him and he was asked to submit his application for earned leave for four days.
A reminder memo.
was also issued.
He submitted his explanation but that was rejected.
He was treated to be unathorizedly absent for four days.
Yet another memorandum dated 4th August, 1993 was issued to him asking him to apply for one day's leave for 4th August, 1993.
He had actually applied for half days's leave.
It was alleged that he had left the office at 12 noon without permission and, therefore, he had to seek leave for one fully day.
The petitioner, in his reply, denied the allegation and asserted that he was on leave for the second half of the day from 130 pm onwards.
6.
The petitioner has further alleged that he was given duties in the office in excess of those allocated to his seat.
He was, thus, victimised in many ways and was forced to seek voluntary retirement on 13th August, 1993, the last date under the V.R.S.
He filed his application on the prescribed proforma seeking voluntary retirement.
He added clause 4 as under :-  "4.
I am applying the V.R.S.
due to harassment/under pressure and misusing the power on me by the OE Chandigarh."
7.
Sh. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the petitioner was actually compelled to submit his application for voluntary retirement.
His request for voluntary retirement was accepted vide memorandum dated 30th August, 1993 (Annexure P-15).
Two cheques for Rs. 1,17,91170 were handed over to the petitioner in lieu of three months' pay, Ex-gratia payment and leave encashment but the petitioner returned the money after withdrawing his application.
Payment of gratuity money and Provident Fund was to be made separately.
It is argued that actually order dated 30th August, 1993 accepting the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement was never handed over to the petitioner nor any charge of the office work was taken from him.
The petitioner submitted a representation dated 7th September, 1993 (Annexure P-16) alongwith two cheques which had been given to him earlier by the office.
The petitioner mentioned in his representation that he had no intention to seek voluntary retirement.
His mother had expired and his minor daughter was a patient of a blood disease.
Since he was too much harassed by the Officers of the Corporation he submitted his application seeking voluntary retirement on account of such harassment.
The petitioner thereafter filed a writ petition (CWP No. 7095 of 1994) challenging the order dated 30th August, 1993.
A Division Bench of this Court, vide order dated 30th May, 1994 directed the Managing Director of the Corporation to dispose of the petitioner's representation.
The Managing Director, however, rejected the petitioner's representation, vide order dated 20th September, 1994 (Annexure P-20).
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner was virtually compelled to apply for the voluntary retirement.
The petitioner had specifically mentioned in his application that he was seeking voluntary retirement due to harassment and under pressure.
The orders dated 30th August, 1993 and 20th September, 1994 are, therefore, liable to be set aside.
The retirement of the petitioner does not fall within the ambit of VRS Further, no effective date of retirement from service was conveyed to the petitioner though it was necessary to do so for determining the petitioner's entitlement to all the benefits under the Scheme.
No opportunity of hearing was also given to the petitioner by the Managing Director while rejecting the petitioner's representation.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a decision of the Delhi High Court in Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking v. Tara Chand, 1978(2) SLR 425.
It has been held therein that letter of grievance sent by the employee should have been read as a whole so as to construe correctly its purport and tenor.
The letter was in fact a representation of certain grievances against the management and it could not be treated as a resignation letter.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued on the strength of the said decision that the petitioner by making a mention of harassment and pressure in his option letter dated 13th August, 1998 has tried to raise a grievance against the management and it was actually not a voluntary option for retirement.
He has also relied upon a decision of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Mast Ram Bhatti v. Union of India and another, 1993(8) SLR 236.
In that case, it was noticed that the tendering of resignation in a mental state of distress caused due to a disease and also on account of repeated threats from the authorities was not to be treated as a voluntary resignation.
Sh. Patwalia has submitted that in the case of the petitioner herein, the situation was almost similar.
He was under a great mental agony and he, therefore, submitted his application for voluntary retirement without really intending to do so.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondents has, on the other hand, argued that the petitioner's application was allowed as it contained an un-conditional request for voluntary retirement.
He had filed application on 13th August, 1993.
Order to retire him from 30th August, 1993 was passed and the petitioner had not withdrawn his offer or option before the date of the order.
He filed an application only on 7th September, 1993.
He had no right to withdraw his option after it had been accepted.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondents had also argued that the petitioner never made any complaint against the local Officers to the higher authorities of the Corporation regarding any harassment.
Further, after receipt of the petitioner's representation dated 7th September, 1993, Joint Manager (Administration and Vigilance) was deputed to ascertain the veracity of the allegations made by the petitioner.
The said Officer reported that no inference could be drawn that the authorities of the Corporation had forced the petitioner to seek voluntary retirement.
12.
With reference to order passed in connection with the medical leave, it is pointed out that the petitioner was only asked to produce the medical certificate for two days (11th and 12th February, 1993).
Since the petitioner had sought medical leave, it was necessary for him to produce a proper medical certificate.
He had submitted medical certificate from one doctor and fitness certificate from another.
It was, therefore, appropriate to ask him to explain as to how he had filed certificates from two different doctors.
Similarly, the petitioner had sought leave for half day on 4th August, 1993 but he had left the office at 12 noon.
It was, in these circumstances, that a memorandum was issued to him.
These orders cannot be termed to be the instances of any victimisation.
13.
It is further explained by the respondents that the petitioner had joined the Corporation as a Peon on 2nd November, 1970.
He was, thereafter, promoted as Lower Division Clerk and Upper Division Clerk.
The filing of a writ petition by the petitioner earlier as the Regional Secretary of the Union regarding the demand for bonus has nothing to do with the controversy.
There was no question of getting annoyed on the said demand.
Further, the petitioner never made any complaint against any officer posted at Chandigarh to any higher authority of the Corporation.
It is also explained that no additional work was ever assigned to the petitioner as alleged.
Rather, the duties of the accounts section assigned to him were withdrawn from him as there were complaints that certain TA bills were not being cleared by him.
It is also stated by the respondents that no departmental action was ever taken or initiated against the petitioner except that he was only asked to submit proper medical certificate in connection with the medical leave and to file application for one full day's leave instead of half day leave.
14.
Learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Devi Krishan Goyal v. District Inspector of Schools, Ghaziabad, 1988(2) SLR 2.
It has been held that the employee had an option to withdraw his prayer for voluntary retirement before it is accepted.
Learned counsel has, on the strength of the said decision, submitted that, in the case of the present petitioner, request has been withdrawn much after it had been accepted.
Reliance has also been placed on a decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Vedpathi Dinesh Kumar v. North Zone Cultural Centre, 1991(3) RSJ 328 : 1991(2) SCT 322 (P&H).
It has been held therein that the resignation becomes effective when it is accepted and the government servant is relieved of his duties.
Learned counsel for the responders has argued that the application of the petitioner dated 13th August, 1993, after having been accepted w.e.f.
30th August, 1993, could not be withdrawn by him as it was an unconditional application made by the petitioner.
15.
On a consideration of the matter, it is found that the petitioner had filed his application on the prescribed proforma on 13th August, 1993.
He had added a clause in that application mentioning that he was seeking voluntary retirement due to harassment and under pressure.
This may be a reason for seeking voluntary retirement but it cannot be said that he had been coerced to file an application for voluntary retirement.
He did not put any condition in his application nor did the withdraw it before its acceptance.
He filed an application withdrawing his application on 7th September, 1993.
It is found that the petitioner's application dated 13th August, 1993 contained an un-conditional request for voluntary retirement.
Clause 4 added by him did not make out a case that he had not chosen to retire voluntarily.
The instances given by the petitioner regarding harassment do not at all show that the memoranda issued to him regarding medical leave and half day leave were in any way in the nature of harassment.
Nothing has been shown that any further action was taken against him with regard to the two leave periods in question.
The petitioner has not brought on record any other instance of any other departmental action which might have been taken against him.
The two instances given by him regarding leave do not make out a case of harassment.
The allegation that additional work was allotted to him is also found to have no substance.
There is no material to show that any additional work was given to him by way of harassment.
16.
Since the option exercised by the petitioner by way of an application dated 13th August, 1993 was unconditional and it was accepted before it was withdrawn by him, the petitioner is found to have no case in his favour.
He accepted the two cheques though he returned them subsequently while withdrawing his option.
The cheques were sent to him through the registered post but were received back un-delivered.
Those cheques were thereafter deposited in his Savings Bank Account.
He was relieved of his duty on 30th August, 1993 after his option for the voluntary retirement was accepted.
There was nothing on record to show that any coercion or undue influence was exerted on him.
The petitioner has failed to prove a case of harassment.
The option exercised by him was voluntary.
The mere mention of harassment and pressure in his application does not make his request a conditional one.
Further, he did not withdraw his option before it was accepted.
It was not a conditional option given by him.
In the result, the writ petition is found to have no merit.
It is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.