GS Singhvi, J - This petition can appropriately be termed as the second round of litigation by the petitioner, who has prayed for quashing the order Annexure P4 dated 2531998 issued by the District Education Officer, Jind terminating his service.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that order dated 24.2.1997 passed by the District Education Officer, Jind terminating the petitioner's service was quashed by this Court on 7.4.1997 while allowing Civil Writ Petition No. 4140 of 1997, Baljit Singh v. State of Haryana and others.
Some of the observations made in that order are extracted below :  "A careful reading of the two orders shows that the Director, Employment, Haryana got some enquiry made into the allegation that the petitioner got his name registered with the Employment Exchange, Jind against the scheme of one job one family by furnishing a false affidavit.
The petitioner was not associated with the enquiry conducted at the instance of the Director.
No notice was given to the petitioner and he did not have the opportunity to put forward his case on the issue of registration of his name in the Employment Exchange, Jind.
The District Education Officer also did not issue any notice requiring the petitioner to show cause against the proposal of termination of his service on the ground of filing a wrong affidavit in the Employment Exchange.
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner has been condemned unheard.
The requirement of giving notice and opportunity of hearing to a person who is affected by an order passed by the competent authority is implicit in the exercise of power by the competent authority in such like matters because on a bare perusal of Annexures P.5 and P6, it becomes clear that the respondents have punished the petitioner on the allegation of having secured employment by deceitful means.
Before recording a conclusion that the petitioner got himself registered with the Employment Exchange on the basis of false affidavit and before terminating his service on that ground, it was imperative for the respondents to have given an opportunity of hearing to him.
Since that has not been done, we have no hesitation to quash the orders Annexures P.5 and P6.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition and quash the orders Annexures P.5 and P6.
We also direct the respondent No. 2 to take fresh proceedings and pass appropriate order after hearing the petitioner.
This shall be done by the respondents within 3 months from today.
The petitioner is directed to appear before the Director, Employment, Haryana on 3041997 and file his return/representation with reference to the allegation that he submitted a false affidavit in order to secure registration with the District Employment Exchange, Jind.
If the report of the Director is adverse to the petitioner, then the District Education Officer shall pass appropriate order on the basis of such report after hearing the petitioner."
3.
In compliance of the order of the Court, the respondent No. 3 gave notice to the petitioner and made an enquiry into the allegation that the petitioner had filed a false affidavit for the purpose of his registration with the employment Exchange.
On the basis of the finding recorded at such enquiry, the District Education Officer issued notice Annexure P2 requiring the petitioner to appear and show cause as to why action be not taken against him.
In reply, the petitioner submitted representation Annexure P.3 dated 2721998, hereafter, the respondent No. 3 issued the impugned order terminating the petitioner's service.
4.
Shri Gurcharan Dass argued that the impugned order should be invalidated on the ground that it is a non-speaking order and is, therefore, violative of the principles of natural justice.
The learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that the impugned order does not contain reasons, but at the same time he stoutly defended the action taken by the District Education Officer by urging that wholesome opportunity was given to the petitioner to submit his defence.
The order impugned in this petition as under :-  "Office of Distt.
Education Officer, Jind.
Order No. E-T/98-5503-07 dated 25398.
The services of Sh. Baljit Singh SS Master, Govt. High School, Poli (Jind) are hereby terminated with immediate effect.
Sd/- Distt.
Education Officer, Jind".
5.
A bare reading of the order, reproduced above, shows that it does not make reference to the allegation levelled against the petitioner, the enquiry held by the respondents, the findings recorded by the enquiring authority, the reply submitted by the petitioner to the show cause notice and the reasons for terminating his service.
Therefore, we have no option but to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned order is violative of the principles of natural justice.
In our opinion, the failure of the District Education Officer, Jind to record reasons and communicate the same to the petitioner has caused prejudice to him inasmuch as, he has been deprived of the opportunity of effectively challenging the termination of his service.
6.
The principles of natural justice are multi-dimensional and the Courts have applied different facets of these principles in different cases.
In the recent past, a new dimension has been added to the principles of natural justice, namely, that every quasi-judicial authority/Tribunal must not only record reasons in support of the orders they make but such reasons should also be communicated to the affected party.
The requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof has been read as an integral part of the concept of fair procedure.
The necessity of giving reasons flows from the concept of rule of law which constitutes one of the corner-stones of our constitutional set up.
The administrative authorities charged with the duty to act judicially cannot decide the matters on considerations of policy or expediency.
The requirement of recording of reasons by such authorities is an important safeguard to ensure observance of the rule of law.
It introduces clarity, checks the introduction of extraneous or irrelevant considerations and minimises arbitrariness in the decision-making process.
Another reason which makes it imperative for the quasi-judicial authorities to give reasons is that their orders are not only subject to the right of the aggrieved person to challenge the same by filing statutory appeal and revision, but also by filing writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Such decisions can also be challenged by way of appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
The High Courts have the power to issue writ of certiorari to quash the orders passed by a quasi-judicial authority/Tribunal.
Likewise, in appeal the Apex Court can nullify such order/decision.
These powers can be effectively exercised by the superior Courts only if the order under challenge contains reasons.
If such order is cryptic and devoid of reasons, the Courts cannot effectively exercise the power of judicial review and we cannot countenance a situation in which the administrative authorities vested with the power to decide the rights of the parties may stultify the powers of the Court simply by not recording reasons in support of their decisions and/or by refraining from communicating such reasons to the affected person.
This is the reason why the Courts have insisted on rigorous compliance of the requirement of recording of reasons and communication thereof by every quasi-judicial authority.
Some of the judicial precedents, which can appropriately be cited to support the above-mentioned proposition are :-  i) Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd v. Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1961 SC 1669; ii) Bhaghat Raja v. Union of India, 1992(3) SCT 456 : AIR 1967 SC 1606; iii) Travancore Rayon Ltd v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 862; iv) Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of UP, AIR 1970 SC 1302; v) Woolcombers of India Limited v. Woolcombers Workers Union, AIR 1973 SC 2758; vi) M/s Ajantha Industries and others v. Central Board of Direct Taxes, New Delhi and others, AIR 1976 SC 437; vii) Siemens Engineering and Manufacturing Company of India Limited v. Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1785; viii) SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984; ix) Shanti Prasad Agarwalla v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 814; x) Krishna Swami v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1407; and  xi)M.L.
Jaggi v. Mahanagar Telephones Nigam Ltd, 1996(1) RRR 646 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2476.
7.
Applying the ratio of the above mentioned decisions to the facts of this case, we hold that the impugned order deserves to be quashed on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
8.
The argument of Shri Jaswant Singh that the reasons available in other documents filed along with the reply should be treated as part of the impugned order merits rejection in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR (39) 1952 SC 16 and Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is quashed.
The petitioner shall get consequential benefits.
However, the competent authority shall be free to pass a fresh order giving reasons for terminating the petitioners service.
Petition allowed.