TS Doabia, J - Such is the keen competition that even for entry into an educational institution at school level, the minor children are to take resort to writ jurisdiction of this court.
Would it be just and proper to throw out the petitioner in the midst of session when she is herself not at fault and the fault, if any may lie with the respondent school's administrative staff ?
Her father a class-IV employee in Military Engineering Service is also being blamed by the respondents.
Unable to himself attain school education, he made a sincere and all out effort to see that his female child (writ petitioner) does get those facilities which he was unable to get.
The petitioner was granted admission in April, 1996.
After 18 months of her stay in the school, the petitioner through her parents was informed that her admission has been cancelled.
By that time, the petitioner stood promoted to 10th class also.
When this action was taken by the respondent authorities, she approached this court.
The minor writ petitioner applied for admission in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathani, Udhampur.
It was for 9th class.
She was granted admission.
She deposited the admission fee and other dues.
Respondents have filed objections.
The stand taken by them is that the petitioner had not attached documents with the admission forms from which it could be ascertained and established that she had passed 8th standard examination from Kinder Caten Academy, Udhampur in April, 1996.
It is also submitted that as soon as the admission form is submitted, the matter is examined by the office.
After all the formalities are completed, the admission is granted.
It is submitted that the clerk who was dealing with the matter was remiss in the matter of examining the requisite documents submitted by the petitioner.
On account of his lapse, the petitioner was able to get admission in disregard of the Rules.
It is submitted that the petitioner obtained the admission by fraudulent means.
The petitioner was asked to make available the transfer certificate.
The stand taken by the petitioner was that the requisite documents had been made available.
As the father of the petitioner was unable to give the requisite information, therefore, steps were taken with a view to cancel the admission of the petitioner.
In nutshell, the case of the respondents is that on scrutiny of the admission record and while completing the admission forms which were to be sent to the Central Board of Secondary Examination for 10th class, it transpired that the transfer certificate and the marks certificate is respect of the petitioner, who was at that time studying in 10th class, was not available.
The parents of the petitioner were accordingly requested to make available the requisite documents.
A letter was written on 22nd Sept 1997.
This was followed by the reply given by the petitioner's father.
This is dated 25th Sept 1997.
Another letter was written by the respondents.
This is 29th September 1997.
As there was alleged failure on the part of the petitioner to furnish the requisite information, her candidature was cancelled.
This happened on 3rd Oct 1997.
The petitioner submits that the requisite certificate in proof of the fact that the petitioner had passed middle class examination is in existence.
This has been placed on record as Annexure-A.
The relevant rule under which action is sought to be taken is as under:  "Admission secured on the submission of a wrong certificate of Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe or of transfer or any other wrong information shall be cancelled by the Principal forthwith and no appeal against such action of the Principal shall be entitled."
I am of the opinion that the respondent Institution should have been vigilant at the time when admission was granted to the petitioner.
The petitioner had completed her course of study for 18 months.
After 18 months, to throw out the petitioner out of the school for a fault which strictly speaking is not her's, would definitely amount to causing grave injustice to the minor petitioner.
She was not at fault.
It is not the case of the respondent that she submitted some wrong information.
Merely because the office of the respondents did not examine the papers at the time of admission cannot be made a ground to throw out the petitioner.
The principle of equitable estoppel would also become applicable in this regard.
In Registrar, University of Madras.
v. Sundara Shetti, AIR 1956 Mad.
309, the petitioner appeared for Secondary School Leaving Certificate examination held by Government of Madras in March, 1952.
Certificate was given by the University that he is eligible for admission to the University course of studies.
He got admission in Madras University.
While he was so undergoing his course of study, he was informed by the Principal of the College that his admission is liable to be cancelled as his name was not found mentioned in the list of candidates eligible for University course of study.
This was challenged in the High Court.
While dealing with this aspect of the matter Rajamannar, CJ in para 15 observed:  "It was not suggested by the University that the petitioner in this case knew that he had not been declared eligible and that his action was mala fide in embarking on a course of University study.
Nor was it suggested that he had procured endorsement of eligibility by fraud or improper means.
In these circumstances, we consider that a Mandamus should issue both to the University of Madras and to the Principal of the Thiagaraja College to forbear from preventing the petitioner to complete his intermediate course and appear for the intermediate examination in due course."
This principle of equitable estoppel was made applicable by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in K Jagannadham v. District Collector Kurnool, AIR 1966 Andh Pra 59.
In this case probationer was discharged on the ground that he was not competent to appear for competitive examinations.
There was no concealment of facts on the part of the petitioner.
The order of Government cancelling the appointment of the petitioner was quashed.
Reference be also made to a decision reported as 1995(6) SCC 531 : 1996(1) SCT 515 (SC), Anil Baipadithaya and ors. v. State of Karnataka and ors.
In the above case, admission was secured by issuing incorrect ranking.
This was done in collusion with the members of the Selection Scrutiny Committee.
The appellant was given admission.
This was not challenged by another eligible candidate.
The appellant had studied for two years.
It was observed that even though the members of the Selection Committee were equally guilty, it would not be apt to punish only one party namely the appellant in the case.
The fact that the appellant had continued to study for two years was taken note of and the Supreme Court of India did not cancel the admission.
The circumstances in this case are similar.
The petitioner has been permitted to continue her studies.
She has completed the course of study.
Interim directions were also given to send her admission form.
She has taken part in the examination also.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
The order passed by the respondents, cancelling the candidature of the petitioner is set aside.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.