Satyabrata Sinha, J - The appellants has filed this appeal being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with a judgment and order dated 15.1.1998 passed by a learned single Judge of this Court in C.O.
No. 18503(W)/92 whereby and whereunder two orders of promotion issued by the appellant herein dated 25.11.92 as contained in Annexures `D' and `E' to the writ application in terms whereon the respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil).
2.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
3.
The writ petitioner-1st respondent and respondents No. 6 and 7 in the writ petition were all material times working as Foreman (Civil).
The 1st respondent admittedly is senior to the promotees.
In terms of the promotion rules the matter relating to the eligibility of the candidates is considered by a selection committee.
Such promotion is governed by the recruitment and promotion policy framed by the appellant herein.
The seniority of a candidate is to be determined in the following manner:  "(a) Seniority will be determined by the date of entry into the scale of pay.
When there is a tie in date of promotion/appointment in a scale of pay the seniority will be resolved by going backward to the date of joining/promotion in the next lower grade of pay and so on.
If the tie still exists, even on no date of first appointment, in that case the seniority in age would be the determining factor.
(b) In the case of officers, officiating in a higher post and subsequently promoted to that higher post, seniority will be determined : (i) From the date of officiating appointment to the higher post, if such officiating appointment is made from the panel prepared by Departmental Promotion Committee/Selected Committee and continued without break till the date of promotion on regular basis.
(ii) From the date of promotion, if the officiating appointment to the higher post is not made from the panel prepared by Departmental Promotion Committee/Selection Committee."
4.
For the purpose of promotion of the Departmental candidates three criterias have been laid down, viz., qualification bearing 30 marks, length of service in the present post bearing 40 marks.
A Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted comprising of the following persons :  1.
Shri RK Pathak, Managing Director, DPL.
2.
Shri KL Ganguly, General Superintendent (Con/Civil).
DPL.
3.
Shri DK Biswas, General Superintendent (Genl.)
DPPS.
4.
Representative of the Power Department.
5.
Shri RC Banerjee, Chief Personnel Officer, DPL".
5.
It is admitted that no representative of the Power Department was present in the meeting of the selection committee.
It is only stated in the written statement that the Power Department was requested to attend the DPC meeting but nobody turned up.
The affidavit-in-opposition has been affirmed by one Sital Kumar Chatterjee, the Secretary of the Durgapur Project Limited to who verified paragraph 7A of the Affidavit-in-Opposition as true but his information derived from records but no records in support of the said statement had been annexed with the writ application.
6.
Admittedly for the purpose of computation of the period of seniority, one mark is to be awarded for every completed year of service.
7.
In the seniority list being Annexure `C' the name of the 1st respondent appeared at Serial No. 5; whereas the respondent Nos. 6 and 7 appeared at Serial Nos. 6 and 14; whereas in the Annexure `A' to the Affidavit-in- Opposition which is said to be a seniority list of eligible candidates the writ petitioner's name is at Serial No. 6 whereas, the name of the respondent No. 6 have been upgraded from 6 to 4 and that of respondent No. 7 has been stated in Item No. 15.
The learned trial Judge held that said Annexure `A' has been prepared for the purpose of the said selection only and no reason has been explained as to why a fresh seniority list is prepared for the purpose of selection.
8.
Mr. AP Sircar, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, however, submitted that the learned trial Judge erred on both counts as the selection committee has awarded 30 marks to each candidate towards length of service and thus, the writ petitioner had not been prejudiced.
It was further submitted that the learned trial Judge has committed an error in holding that in absence of representative of the Power Department has vitiated the entire selection process.
According to the learned Counsel, if 50% marks remain present, the same serves the purpose.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on Shri Ishwar Chandra v. Shri Satyanarain Sinha and others, reported in AIR 1972 SC 1812 : 1972(3) SCC 383.
The learned Counsel further submits that keeping in view of the parameters of judicial review, the learned trial Judge ought not to have interfered with the matter.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on Jasbir Kaur Sehgal v. District Judge, Dehradun and others, reported in 1997(7) SCC 7 : 1997(4) R.C.R.
(Civil) 65.
The learned Counsel further submitted that a new case had been made in the Affidavit-in-Reply and thus, the same ought not to have been considered by the learned trial Judge.
9.
Mr. Moloy Kumar Basu, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner-respondent submitted that it is not a case where the petitioner was aware of the manner of constitution of selection committee nor was aware that before the selection committee Annexure `A' to the Affidavit-in-Opposition had been placed.
In this view of the matter the learned Counsel submitted that entire selection process being wrong, the judgment of the learned trial Judge should be upheld.
It has been pointed out that the respondent No. 7, Sri Samir Bose having been appointed as Foreman on 211979 whereas the writ petitioner having been appointed on 181971, both of them could not have been given the same marks.
After the matter was heard on 17th April, 1998 and 20th April, 1998 this bench formulated two questions which are in the following terms :  (i) Whether SK Bose, respondent No. 12, having joined on 211979 in the post of Foreman would have been allotted 30% marks on the basis of formula for awarding marks, i.e. one mark for every six marks in the present post; (ii) Whether notice has been given to the representative of the Power Department.
10.
With a view to arrive at a correct decision this court directed production of the records.
11.
Pursuant to the said direction the records of the Departmental Promotion Committee have been placed.
It appears that the petitioner was awarded 221 marks towards ACR, 18 marks towards qualification and 30 marks towards length of service totalling 701 marks.
Sri Saradindu Chatterjee was awarded 247 towards ACR, 18 marks towards qualification and 30 marks towards length of service totalling 727 marks whereas respondent No. 6 Samir Bose was awarded 243 marks, 18 marks and 30 marks respectively totalling 723 marks.
12.
The fact that Sri Bose joined in the year 1979 is not in dispute.
What is now sought to be contended is that as 3 years experience is the minimum requirement for being considered and 60% marks of the aggregate of the factors mentioned in the process of selection which means that one was to receive 18 marks out of 30 marks and all having the said requisite qualification; only 12 marks were out of 30 marks and all having the said requisite qualification; only 12 marks were to be allotted towards the length of service and thus, whether had completed 3 + 6 = 9 years service in present post has been allotted 30 marks.
13.
The Rules, as regard the length of service is stated thus :  One mark will be allotted for every six months of service subject to the miximum of 20/30 marks.
Annual Confidential Reports Departmental Promotion Committee Selection a), Maximum marks of A.C.R.
for 3 years.
40 marks 30 marks b), Marks of ACR per year 13 marks 10 marks 14.
A bare perusal of the aforementioned rules clearly show that the selection committee has adopted absolutely a wrong procedure inasmuch as Sri Samir Bose could not have been granted 30 marks keeping in view the fact that he joined on 211979 and the meeting of the Selection Board had taken place on 14.7.1992.
He, therefore, had not completed 15 years of service.
The procedure which is now said to be put forward before us by the learned Counsel for the appellant is wholly misconceived.
The selection committee was bound to follow the rules.
They could not have interpreted the same in their own fashion so as to suit the purpose of one candidate.
The entire selection process so far as Sri Samir Bose is concerned was, therefore, vitiated in law.
15.
Furthermore, from the said records it does not appear that any notice in writing had been served upon any authority of the Power Department to nominate a person so as to enable the said nominee to attend the said meeting of the selection committee.
It is now a well settled principle of law that service of a notice is a precondition for holding a valid meeting.
If the rules framed by the appellant itself provide for the manner relating to constitution of a Selection Committee, the same cannot be constituted in any other manner.
Having constituted a selection committee each member of the selection committee and particularly the outsider was entitled to a notice of the meeting.
If having received such notice he had not attended the meeting, the matter might have been different.
16.
In Shri Ishwar Chandra v. Shri Satyanarain Sinha and others, reported in AIR 1972 SC 1812 : 1972(3) SCC 383, the question which arose for consideration was as to whether the appointment of respondent by a committee who had only two members and thus being present in the meeting the same was valid.
The Chancellor in exercise is its power conferred upon under Section 43-A of Ordinance No. 1 of 1970 rescinded the said order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant.
The entire correspondence had been produced and the High Court held that if the Chancellor under Section 43-A of the Act formed that opinion that the meeting held on that date was not legal, it cannot be said that there was prima facie material in the formation of that opinion, reached by him after giving the person an opportunity to state why the action proposed should not be taken.
The Apex Court on fact held that correspondence does not show that there was no deliberate attempt made by the Chairman to exclude one of the members in this case, Justice TP Naik and secondly, that the Chancellor had, because of this exclusion declared the meeting held on April 4, 1970, as not being valid.
After taking into consideration the question as to whether one of the members had deliberately been kept out viz. Justice Naik from the meeting it referred to a letter dated 27th March, 1970 of Justice Shinde and held that the said letter negatives the assumption in the High Court's order.
In that situation it was held :-  "It is also not denied that the meeting held by two of the three members on April 4, 1970, was legal because sufficient notice was given to all the three members.
If for one reason or the other one of them could not attend, that does not make the meeting of others illegal.
In such circumstances, where there is no rule or regulation or any other provision for fixing the quorum, the presence of the majority of the members would constitute it a valid meeting and matters considered thereat cannot be held to be invalid."
17.
Thus, in that case sufficient notice had been given, to the person concerned and on that basis, it was held that attendance of more 50% of the members would render the meeting valid.
In this case, however, as noticed hereinbefore, no notice in writing had been served at all.
The purported statement made in the Affidavit-in-Opposition had not been supported nor such notice is in the file in the Departmental Promotion Committee.
Thus, there cannot be any doubt that no notice had been served upon representative of the Power Department at all.
18.
In Sri Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta v. The Union of India, reported in AIR 1973 SC 2389 : 1973(2) SCC 543, it has been held :-  "Now, it cannot be disputed that notice to all the Directors of meeting of the Board of Directors was essential for the validity of any resolution passed at the meeting and that as, admittedly, no notice was given to Mr. Khaitan, one of the Directors of the Company, the resolution passed terminating the services of the appellant was invalid."
19.
Their Lordships also quoted from Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 9 at page 46 that such notice is essential.
20.
In this view of the matter, in our opinion, the judgment of the learned trial Judge is correct.
21.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.