GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is a physically handicapped, has filed this petition for quashing the selection and appointments made by the respondent-University on the posts of Clerks.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief are that in response to advertisement No. 2 of 1997 issued by the respondent-University for recruitment of 49 Clerks-cum-Typists, one of which was shown as reserved for physically handicapped candidates, the petitioner who was already working as Clerk-cum-Typist in the service of the University on the basis of contractual appointment, submitted her application for being considered against the post reserved for physically handicapped candidates.
For the purpose of selection, the respondent-University conducted type test from 171997 to 1571997.
The petitioner appeared in the said test on 571997, but her name did not figure in the list of 183 candidates, who were declared eligible to be called for viva voce test.
The interviews were held on 781997 and 881997.
The respondents No. 4 to 8 are among the candidates appointed by the University on the basis of the impugned selection.
The petitioner has assailed the selection of the private respondents on the following grounds :-  (1) The appointments are vitiated because of the hot haste with which the respondent-University finalised the selection list.
It has been alleged that the interviews were completed on 881997, letters of appointment were issued on that very day and the candidates were made to join on 981997 which was a holiday in the University.
(2) The names of the respondents No. 4 and 5 did not figure in the list of the candidates, who had passed the type test and yet they have been appointed.
(3) The respondents No. 5 and 6 did not appear in the type test and still they have been selected and appointed in the service of the University.
(4) The selection of the respondent No. 5 Sanjay Mittal has also been challenged on the ground of mala fide.
It is alleged that the Vice Chancellor's son is working as a junior under the father of the respondent No. 5.
(5) The selection of the respondent No. 8 against the vacancy reserved for physically handicapped candidates has been assailed on the ground that he does not fall in that category.
3.
In its reply, the respondent No. 1 has questioned the locus standi of the petitioner on the ground that she has failed to clear the type test with the minimum speed of 30 W.P.M.
On merits, the respondent No. 1 has pleaded that the name of the respondent No. 4 was not included in the list of successful candidates because he was shown to have cleared the type test with speed of 29.76 W.P.M., but on rechecking it was found that he has successfully passed the type test.
The name of the respondent No. 5 was omitted due to oversight and, therefore, it was included in the list of candidates who were ultimately called for interview.
The allegations of pick and choose and mala fides have been denied.
With regard to the respondent No. 7, the respondent-University has pleaded that he is a dwarf of about 3'-6" and as no other candidate of physically handicapped category qualified the type test, the Selection Committee decided to appoint him against the post reserved for candidates of that category.
4.
The respondent No. 3 has filed a separate written statement controverting the averments made in the writ petition.
He has specifically denied the allegation of mala fides.
In paragraph 11 of his written statement, the respondent No. 3 has stated that he does not know the father of the respondent No. 5 and his son is in no way connected with the father of the said respondent.
5.
The respondents No. 4 to 6 have filed a joint written statement.
They have contested the allegations made by the petitioner regarding the so-called irregularities committed by the respondent-University in the selection of the Clerks-cum-Typists.
6.
In a separate written statement, the respondent No. 7 has stated that he is a permanently handicapped person because he is a dwarf of 3"-6".
He has also claimed selection against the general category post on the basis of his merit.
7.
The arguments in this case were heard on 23.2.1998 and the judgment was reserved.
Thereafter, the learned counsel representing the respondent- University filed letter dated 23.2.1998 written by the Superintendent (Legal), Guru Jambheswar University, Hisar.
A perusal of this letter shows that 13 candidates who have been appointed against general category posts secured 75 marks.
Their details are :-  1.
Jagbir Singh 22.7.1966 2.
Bimla Devi 2231968  3.
Surender Singh 1.4.1968 4.
Arvind Kumar 17.7.1968 5.
Pardeep Anand 19.4.1969 6.
Harbans Lal 16.12.1970 7.
Sanjay Mittal 1971971 8.
Harish Kumar 231972 9.
Vinod Kumar 1771972 10.
Anil Kumar 1881975 11.
Neelam Rani 5.2.1976 12.
Naveen Kumar 9.4.1976 13.
Mohinder Kumar 8.5.1976 8.
This letter also shows that the respondent No. 7 has also secured 75 marks and his date of birth is 24.2.1968 and further that one post of Clerk is still lying vacant in general category.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the appointments made by the respondent-University are vitiated due to male fides and arbitrariness.
He submitted that undue haste shown by the respondent-University of issuing letter of appointment within two hours of the completion of interview and its action of accepting the joining reports on a holiday coupled with the fact that ineligible candidates were called for selection, should be treated as a conclusive proof of the mala fides of the authorities of the University.
However, after having perused the averments made in the written statements of the respondents No. 1 and 3, we are unable to agree with the learned counsel.
The fact that the appointment letters were issued soon after the completion of the interview and the fact that the candidates were allowed to join on a holiday cannot lead to an inference that the authorities of the University acted with some ulterior motive.
Rather, it is indicative of the efficiency with which they finalised the selection, appointed the meritorious candidates and accepted the joining reports of the candidates.
The petitioner has not made any allegation of personal ill-will against the Vice Chancellor or the members of the Selection Committee.
Therefore, it is not possible to record a finding that they were interested in the respondents No. 4 to 7 or in any other candidate.
The allegations No. 4, 5 and 6 have been denied by the respondents and we do not find any reason to order a roving and fishing enquiry on the basis of bald and contested allegations made by the petitioner.
10.
However, we find some merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the respondent No. 7 could not have been appointed against the post reserved for physically handicapped candidates.
Learned counsel representing the University was fair enough to concede that the respondent No. 7 does not fall in the category of physically handicapped persons in the strict sense and there is no evidence available on the record to show that the respondent No. 7 has been declared physically handicapped by the competent medical authority.
He, however, tried to justify the appointment of the respondent No. 7 by arguing that the decision taken by the Selection Committee to recommend the said respondent is neither arbitrary nor malicious.
Shri Aggarwal submitted that the physical structure of the respondent No. 7 amply justifies the Committee's decision to recommend his appointment against the post reserved for physically handicapped persons.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 7 justified the appointment of his client and argued that the Court should not invalidate the same at the instance of the petitioner, who failed even in the type test.
11.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective contentions.
Admittedly, the petitioner is a physically handicapped person.
Therefore, her right to be considered for selection against the post reserved for physically handicapped candidates cannot be doubted.
As against this, there is nothing on the record to show that the respondent No. 7 has been categorised as a physically handicapped person.
The respondent No. 7 has not produced the certificate of doctor or other competent medical authority to show that he is physically handicapped.
Therefore, his appointment against the reserved vacancy cannot be upheld.
The contention of Shri Ashok Aggarwal and Shri Amrit Paul that the decision taken by the Selection Committee should not be interfered with, notwithstanding its being ex-facie erroneous does not appeal to us.
The reservation in favour of the physically handicapped persons is required to be made by the public authorities and bodies like the respondent-University in view of the mandate of Article 41 of the Constitution and the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 and against the posts reserved for physically handicapped persons, appointment cannot be given to a person who does not fall in the category of physically handicapped.
The dwarfness of the respondent No. 7 cannot make him a physically handicapped person.
Therefore, the action of the Selection Committee to recommend his name for appointment against the reserved vacancy cannot be upheld.
However, we do not consider it necessary to nullify the appointment of the respondent No. 7 because :-  (i) he is entitled to be selected against the general category posts;  (ii) it he was not selected and appointed against the post reserved for physically handicapped persons, the respondent No. 7 would have been, according to his date of birth (22.4.1968), placed at No. 4 among the candidates who secured 75 marks.
The date of birth of Shri Surender Singh whose name has been shown at No. 3 among the candidates who have secured 75 marks, is 1.4.1968 and the date of birth of the next candidates in that category is 17.7.1968.
Thus, the respondent No. 7 would have been entitled to be appointed against the general category post; and  (iii) one post of Clerk in general category is still vacant.
12.
The objection raised by the respondents to the locus standi of the petitioner deserves to be rejected in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Prem Singh and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, JT 1996(5) SC 219 : 1996(3) SCT 563.
In that case, an objection was raised to the locus standi of the writ petitions on the ground that they failed in the selection.
The High Court overruled this objection and held that the candidate who has failed to the selection is not precluded from challenging the illegal appointments of others.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court upheld this finding of the High Court.
13.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is disposed of in the following manner :-  (1) The selection and appointments of the respondents No. 4 to 6 are upheld.
(2) The selection of the respondent No. 7 is also upheld.
However, his appointment against the post reserved for physically handicapped persons is set aside and it is directed that the respondent-University should treat him as appointed against the general category post.
(3) The post reserved for physically handicapped persons be re-advertised and appointment be made against the same after making fresh selection from among eligible candidates.