ML Singhal, J - Through this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner-Dr. Manjit Singh who is Reader and the Head of the Department of Social Work, Punjabi University, Patiala has challenged the selection of respondent No. 4 to the post of professor in the Department of Social Work of Punjabi University, Patiala and has prayed for the quashing of the selection to that post, conveyed to him through order dated September 20, 1996, Annexure P-7.
The facts which have given rise to the writ petition, briefly stated, are as follows :  2.
The petitioner-Dr. Manjit Singh is working as Reader/Head of the Department of Social Work in Punjabi University, Patiala.
He claims to be an academician of repute.
He is MA in Sociology and also PhD in the subject.
In November, 1987 he was selected and appointed as Lecturer in the Department of Social Work in Punjabi University, Patiala.
On 1351991 he was selected and appointed as Reader in the Department of Social Work, Punjabi University, Patiala.
At present he is holding the post of the Head of the Department of Social Work in the Punjabi University, Patiala.
Prior to his joining the Department of Social Work as Lecturer in 1987, he was working in the Centre for Research in Social Change in that University with effect from 17.1.1979, till he joined the Department of Social Work, Punjabi University, Patiala as Lecturer in November, 1987.
He is gold medallist in NSS He was nominated as a member of the Punjab State Social Welfare Advisory Board.
The trouble started for him when he and 18 other members of the Punjabi University Teachers Association (PUTA) requisitioned the meeting of the general body of the Association to discuss large scale financial irregularities and embezzlement of public funds by the University authorities.
That requisition was signed by him and other 17 members on 3011996.
Another requisition was signed by him alongwith 72 members of the Association for requisitioning meeting on 1221996 for organizing the annual conference of Indian Science Congress at Punjabi University, Patiala.
The Punjab Government sanctioned the grant of Rs. 8 crores.
Respondent No. 3 was the Vice Chancellor of the Punjabi University at that time.
The meeting of the PUTA was not convened.
The PUTA was split into two groups, one group wanted to highlight the illegalities being committed by the University authorities which was known as PUTA Singla Group.
He was elected as Vice President of PUTA Singla Group.
The PUTA Singla Group of which he was the Vice President had been time and again representing to the Governor, Punjab and the Chief Minister, Punjab against the illegalities being committed by respondent No. 3 - especially in controlling the finances.
The petitioner annoyed/displeased the Vice Chancellor because the PUTA Singla Group of which he was the Vice President continuously was highlighting the embezzlement committed by the Vice Chancellor-respondent No. 3.
The Vice Chancellor-respondent No. 3 was bent upon to harm his interest.
He and other office-bearers of the PUTA Singla Group became eye sore to the Vice Chancellor.
The petitioner has given instances of some of the office-bearers who have been charge sheeted by the Vice Chancellor, with a view to amplifying the Vice Chancellor's bias against him.
It is not necessary for us to detail those facts.
3.
The post of Professor in the Department of Social Work was advertised on 1221996 in `The Daily Tribune'.
Annexure P-5 is the relevant advertisement.
It was mentioned in the advertisement Annexure P-5 that 431996 shall be the last date for the submission of the applications to the Deputy Registrar (Establishment).
It was also mentioned that incomplete applications and those received after the last date shall not be entertained.
Respondent No. 4 (selectee) made no application for the post of Professor in the Department of Social Work, Punjabi University, Patiala up to 431996.
He submitted his application in pursuance to the aforesaid advertisement on 25.6.1996, which was entertained.
No corrigendum was issued to the advertisement extending the date for submission of applications for the post of Professor, Social Work, Professor Philosophy, Geography etc. as mentioned in Annexure P-5.
It is further averred by the petitioner that if corrigendum had been issued to the said advertisement extending the date for the submission of the applications, other eligible persons could also have offered themselves for the post and thereby the range of selection would have covered a large number of candidates and the selection could have been that of the more merited and deserving.
It was not done because respondent No. 3 wanted to select respondent No. 4 and that was why he invited his application on his own after 431996 and got him selected.
The post of Professor in the Department of Social Work was to fall vacant on 31121997 on the retirement of Dr. NS Sodhi, Professor in the Department of Social Work.
Respondent No. 3 transferred the post of Professor from the Department of Oral History Cell to the Department of Social Work, in anticipation of the vacancy that was to arise on 31121997 vide order dated 1521996.
The post was to go back to the Oral History Cell on the retirement of Dr. NS Sodhi.
The Vice Chancellor could not take any decision regarding creation, abolition, revision, modification of teaching course in the University without the recommendation of the Academic Council as per University Calendar 1990 Chapter-1, Clause 8(4)(ii)(a) & (b) page 30.
It was for the administrative committee of the relevant Department to exercise the power and function to decide the filling up of the new posts, creation of new posts and up-gradation of existing posts.
Respondent No. 3 did not seek approval of the administrative committee of the Department.
Annexure P-6/A is the relevant extract of the calendar that is clause 8(4)(ii)(a) & (b).
The petitioner applied for the post of Professor in pursuance of the advertisement dated 1221996 Annexure P-5.
The interview for the post was held on 14.2.1996.
On the interview committee Dr. Girish Kumar and Dr. BN Srivastava, Department of Social Work, Kashi Vidhya Peeth, Varanasi had been associated.
Those two outside experts were biased against the petitioner and in favour of respondent No. 4 inasmuch as respondent No. 4 was also teaching in the same Department at Kashi Vidya Peeth, Varanasi to which the said experts belonged.
Respondent No. 4 was selected for the said post because of the influence exercised by those experts on the selection committee.
The selection/appointment (Annexure P-7) is illegal inasmuch as it was issued without the approval of the syndicate.
He represented to the Governor vide his representation dated 2691996 (Annexure P-8) bringing to his notice that the post which was advertised was never got approved by the Academic Council and the Administrative Committee of the Department was also by passed and that application of respondent No. 4 had been entertained after the expiry of the last date that is 431996, which was never extended and corrigendum to the advertisement extending the date was never issued.
It was also mentioned in the representation that to select respondent No. 4, the colleagues of respondent No. 4 were invited as experts on the interview committee.
According to para 6(a) of the University Calendar in the case of teaching/research post, only the applications received upto the last date mentioned in the advertisement (sic) be taken on the applications received after that date.
4.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 contested this writ petition, urging that selection of respondent No. 4 cannot be quashed at the instance of the petitioner, who himself appeared at the interview and competed for the post.
The writ of certiorari is directed not against the decision but against the decision making process.
Since the petitioner himself submitted to the decision making process by appearing before the interview committee, he is estopped from questioning the selection process as he was duly considered by the selection committee but was found less meritorious vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 who was selected.
The selection committee which was constituted under Statue 12 Chapter 1 of Punjabi University Calendar Volume 1 considered all the names placed before it for consideration, for selection to the post of Professor, Department of Social Work.
The power to place before the selection committee the names of various candidates for consideration is to be exercised by the Vice Chancellor and the selection committee is required to consider all such names.
Since the post of Professor is the highest post on the academic side in the University, there exists certain special provisions in the Statutes of the University for consideration and selection of the most meritorious, qualified and suitable person for the said post.
The selection committee comprised of the Vice Chancellor, Pro Vice Chancellor, Dean of the faculity concerned, one member appointed by the Syndicate from amongst its own members and 3 external experts and Professor from the faculty concerned.
When Professor is to be selected, the Head of the Department if he is a Professor, is to be associated.
After consideration of the relative merit of each of the candidates, the selection committee decides upon selection.
No writ lies to question the appointment of respondent No. 4, when there is right of appeal provided by proviso to sub-section (8) of Section 9-A of the Punjabi University Act, 1961 at the instance of one who is in the service of the University.
The petitioner has also preferred a representation to the Chancellor of the University.
According to the Statute 6, Chapter 2 Volume 1 of Punjabi University Calendar, 1990 the Vice Chancellor has the power to place before the selection committee, the names of the suitable candidates for consideration for the post of professor alongwith applications received through advertisement.
So far as the question of transferring the post of Professor from one Department to another is concerned, it lies within the power of the Vice Chancellor, who is to keep in view the academic interest of the Department.
The names of the experts are sent by the Board of Studies, which are later approved by the Academic Council.
The Head of the Department concerned is the Chairman of the Board of Studies.
In this case the petitioner himself was the Head of the Department and therefore he was ex- officio chairman of the Board of Studies.
He himself had suggested the names included in the panel of the experts.
The selection of respondent No. 4 has been approved by the Syndicate.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner, learned counsel for respondents No. 1 to 3 and learned counsel for respondent No. 4.
6.
The petitioner was a candidate for the post Professor in the Department of Social Work in the Punjabi University, Patiala.
In response to the advertisement Annexure P-5 which appeared in `The Daily Tribune' dated 1221996, applications for the post were required to be submitted to the Deputy Registrar (Establishment) not later than 431996.
It was specifically provided in the advertisement Annexure P-5 that incomplete applications and those received after the last date shall not be entertained.
The contention of the petitioner is that so far as respondent No. 4 Dr. Birinder Singh Kapoor is concerned, he had not applied for the post up to 431996, his application received after 431996 could not have been entertained and he could not be interviewed for that post.
There is, however, power vesting in the Vice Chancellor by virtue of Statue 6 Chapter 2 - Volume 1 of the Punjabi University Calendar, 1990 which reads as follows :-  "Whenever a post of Principal, University Professor, or of a University Reader, or of a University Lecturer is to be filled up, it shall be advertised and applications invited : Provided that for the post of a Professor, the Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to place before the Selection Committee the name of a suitable person for the consideration along with the applications received in response to the advertisement but such persons shall not be from amongst those in the service of the University or those who have retired from its services."
7.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents No. 1 to 3 the post of Professor in the University is a post, which is required to be held by a person who is a great academician and so that the best among the best is selected for the post of Professor, Legislature thought of not limiting the selection process among those only who had applied for the post in response to the advertisement alone.
Those persons who were otherwise suitable and who were eminent in the field of academics but who could not know of the advertisement could make application direct to the Vice Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor could place that application before the selection committee for consideration of that application for the post alongwith other applications.
It was submitted that the Vice Chancellor exercised this power vesting in him while sending the name of respondent No. 4 as also that of Sh. Arvinder Singh Kohli to the selection committee after condoning delay for judging their suitability vis-a-vis that of others.
Faced with this position, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no specific order passed by the Vice Chancellor brought to the notice of this Court that the Vice Chancellor had allowed the candidature of respondent No. 4 and that of Sh. Kohli to be considered for the post of Professor alongwith other applicants arraigned before it in pursuance of the applications made by them in response to the advertisement.
It is clear from the plain language of Statute 6 Chapter 2 Volume 1 of Punjabi University Calendar, 1990 (ibid) that the Vice Chancellor had the power to condone the delay in the making of the application by a candidate for the post of Professor, where he felt that the applicant was a suitable person meriting consideration for the post of Professor.
This exception has been made only in the case of the post of Professor and in case of no other post.
The Vice Chancellor for the post of a Professor shall have the power to place before the selection committee the name of a suitable person for consideration alongwith the applications received in response to the advertisement but such person shall not be from amongst those in the service of the University or those who have retired from its services.
Whenever a post of a Principal, University Professor or of a University Reader or a University Lecturer is to be filled up, it shall be advertised and the applications invited.
For the post of Professor, the Vice Chancellor has been given the power to condone the delay in respect of an applicant who submits the application late and the Vice Chancellor can send him to the selection committee for being interviewed for that post.
It would bear repetition that this power has been given to the Vice Chancellor keeping in view the larger academic interest of the students, which requires that a Professor of the University should be a man of sufficient learning and an academician of great repute and the selection for the post of Professor should be after considering as many persons as possible.
8.
We do not see any mala fides in the Vice Chancellor exercising this power and sending respondent No. 4 and Sh. Kohli to the selection committee for being interviewed for the post of Professor, Social Work in the University, though they had applied much after the last date set out in the advertisement for submitting the applications.
When this power is there in the Vice Chancellor and is exercised by the Vice Chancellor, it is not open to the Court readily to view the exercise of this power by the Vice Chancellor with suspicion or view the same as having been exercised on insufficient grounds.
The discretion has been given to the Vice Chancellor so far as relaxation of this condition is concerned.
He has relaxed this condition in favour of respondent No. 4.
9.
The petitioner himself participated in the selection process but was not selected.
He is attacking the selection because of Dr. Girish Kumar and Dr. BN Srivastava of the Department of Social Work, Kashi Vidya Peeth, Varanasi having been there on the interview committee with whom respondent No. 4 had been working.
Suffice it to say, the selection committee constituted for the purpose is required to be as follows in view of Statute 12 Chapter-1 Volume 1 of Punjabi University Calendar 1990 :  "12.
The Staff of various teaching and research posts at the University shall be appointed on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose as follows :- (i) The Vice Chancellor as Chairman; (a-i) The Pro-Vice Chancellor; (ii) The Dean of the Faculty concerned; (iii) One member appointed by the Syndicate from amongst its own members; (iv) One external expert appointed by the Academic Council when a Research Assistant or a Research Associate is to be selected, two external experts when a Reader or a Lecturer is to be selected; three external experts when a professor is to be selected; (v) When a Professor is to be selected, the Head of the Department concerned, if he is a Professor, when a Reader/Lecturer/Research Associate/ Research Assistant is to be selected, the Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor or a Reader.
Provided that when a Reader or a Professor is to be selected, one Professor from the Faculty concerned shall be nominated by the Vice Chancellor.
(vi) When a Reader or a Professor for the Evening Institute of Post-graduate Studies is to be selected, the Director of the Institute if he is a Professor.
When a Lecturer for the Institute is to be selected, the Director of the Institute if he is a Professor or a Reader.
(vii) When a teacher for the Directorate of Correspondence Course is to be selected, the Director Correspondence Courses also.
Provided that the Syndicate shall be competent to make appointments without appointing Selection Committee in the case of a ward of a University employee who dies while in service.
Provided further that the minimum qualifications will not be relaxed in such cases".
10.
The selection committee comprised of the Vice Chancellor, the Pro-Vice Chancellor, the Dean of the Faculty concerned, a Syndic, Faculty Professor Dr. Sucha Singh and three experts i.e.
Professor Girish Kumar, Professor BN Srivastava and Professor Surendra Singh.
Out of these only one expert i.e.
Professor Girish Kumar belonged to Kashi Vidyapeeth.
The names of the experts were sent by the Board of Studies which were later approved by the Academic Council.
The Head of the Department concerned is the chairman of the Board of Studies.
In this case Dr. Manjit Singh himself was the Head of the Department and therefore he was ex-officio chairman of the Board of Studies.
He himself had suggested the names included in the panel of the experts and, therefore, he cannot question the integrity of Dr. BN Srivastava and Dr. Girish Kumar.
It would be too much to impute dishonesty or bias to the deliberations of such a high powered selection committee.
In KL Rathee-petitioner v. Municipal Corporation Delhi-respondent, 1995(1) RRR 483, it was observed that the Court should not stretch its Judicial arm to grab the subject matter with the assumption that justice can be meted out only by the Court.
11.
It was submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that appointment of respondent No. 4 was not approved by the Syndicate.
Suffice it to say, the selection of respondent No. 4 was approved by the Syndicate as pleaded in para 10 of the return filed to the writ petition by respondents No. 1 to 3.
Section 12(5) of the Punjabi University Act, Chapter-1, Punjabi University Calendar Volume 1, 1990 vests in the Syndicate the management and administration of the University in general and also the power to conduct all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.
The selection made by a selection committee approved by the Syndicate is, thus, a good selection.
12.
The Vice Chancellor is fully competent in view of the decision taken by the Syndicate (Annexure R-1) to transfer the post of Professor from one Department to another keeping in view the academic interest of the Department concerned.
The petitioner having participated before a duly constituted selected committee and having failed to make the grade cannot turn around and say that the selection of respondent No. 4 was un-warranted and un- meritorious.
13.
For the reasons given above, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and we accordingly dismiss the writ petition.
No order as to costs.