VK Bali, J (Oral) - Mrs. BK Sharma, a Hindi Teacher, who came to be so employed with respondent No. 4, the management of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, way back in 1955 strongly objects the way and manner in which she has been shown the exit door and consequently relieved just a few years before she was to superannuate.
In wake of facts and circumstances, the reference whereof shall be made, she seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the order dated March 10, 1986, passed by the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, respondent No. 1 herein.
2.
In 1986 when the present petition came to be filed the petitioner had since already worked for a period of 30 years as Hindi Teacher with the management of Handerson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar (hereinafter to be referred to as respondent No. 4).
Respondent No. 4 concededly is getting 90% aid from the State of Punjab and, therefore, the provisions of the Act known as the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised School Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1969 substituted later by the Act of 1974 and Rules of 1981 were applicable to the Institution.
Petitioner proceeded on earned leave from November 26, 1975 to November 25, 1980.
One Mr. Kulvinder Kaur respondent No. 2 herein came to be employed on the post of Hindi Teacher with effect from 1st of March 1978.
In the appointment letter, it was stated that the same was subject to the approval of the Punjab Government.
Inasmuch as respondent No. 2 was appointed against the post of Hindi Teacher earlier held by the petitioner, the Education department did not approve her appointment as the petitioner herein had only gone on leave and had not left the job.
An objection was, thus, raised by the education department to that effect.
Respondent No. 4 addressed a letter on 25th of February, 1978 informing respondent No. 2 that she had been appointed on temporary post against leave vacancy of the petitioner.
She was also informed that condition No. 3 in the earlier appointment letter issued to her stood modified in view of the changed circumstances.
The latter was duly received by respondent No. 2 and she did not raise any objection at that stage with regard to modified terms and conditions of her appointment letter.
The District Education Officer in view of the modified letter of appointment of respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 11th of September, 1978 conveyed approval of appointment of respondent No. 2 from 1978 to 1980.
Various letters written on that behalf have been placed on record and they all go to show that respondent No. 2 was appointed against a leave vacancy.
When the petitioner was still on leave and respondent No. 2 was getting extension against the leave vacancy, respondent No. 4 sought confirmation of the proposed termination of the petitioner under Section 6(2) of the Punjab Aided School (Security of Service) Act of 1974.
Under Rule 18(3) the powers to confirm the punishment vested with the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab.
The Deputy Commissioner, who exercised the said powers under the repealed Act ie Act of 1969, transferred the case to the DPI, who vide orders dated October 18, 1981 did not approve the confirmation of the proposed punishment of termination of service of the petitioner.
Accordingly, respondent No. 4 was directed to observe the procedure as provided under the Act and Rules made thereunder.
A copy of the order aforesaid has been annexed with the petition as Annexure P-5.
Petitioner, in pursuance of the order dated October 18, 1981, referred to above, submitted joining report in the school but she was not allowed to resume her duties.
When repeated representations of the petitioner evoked no interest with respondent No. 4, DPI gave show cause notice dated March 1, 1984 to respondent No. 4 and directed the Institution to allow the petitioner to resume duties, in default whereof, petitioner would be made payment after deducting proportionate amount from the grant of the school.
When the orders aforesaid came before the managing committee of the school, it was decided to allow the petitioner to resume her duties w.e.f.
March 31, 1984 by extending her leave and the services of her substitute i.e. respondent No. 23 were decided to be dispensed with.
To that effect, thus, the Committee passed a resolution March 10, 1984 which was to be implemented w.e.f.
March 31, 1984.
Respondent No. 2, having learnt the resolution, referred to above, which was obviously to adversely affect her, filed a civil suit on March 24, 1984 in the civil Courts at Kharar.
She sought a declaration from the Court that she was permanent employee against regular government aided post.
By way of consequential relief, she also sought a decree for permanent injunction restraining respondent No. 4 from terminating her services without holding proper enquiry under the Act of 1969 and the Rules framed thereunder of the year 1981.
During the currency of the suit, she also sought to maintain an application for grant of temporary injunction as envisaged under the provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
She, however, failed in her attempt to get an ad-interim injunction and notice in the application was issued to respondent No. 4.
This application came up for final disposal on March 31, 1984 when the same was dismissed.
Having failed in her attempt to obtain an ad-interim injunction from Civil Court, respondent No. 2 chose to prefer an appeal under Section 4 of the 1979 Act before the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, who exercised the powers of Tribunal to hear the appeals as per provisions of 1979 Act.
During the pendency of the appeal, she obtained a stay.
It is the case of the petitioner that she was able to secure the stay by withholding material facts and, in particular, that she was appointed against a leave vacancy.
She also did not disclose the fact that she was unable to obtain an ad-interim injunction from the Civil Court in a suit instituted by her earlier in point of time.
However, after obtaining stay from the Tribunal, she withdrew the suit on November 5, 1984.
When her appeal came up for hearing, the same was dismissed on the ground that it was not maintainable being premature.
After her appeal was dismissed, petitioner submitted her joining report on May 28, 1985 and she was allowed to join her duties by respondent No. 4.
Consequently, respondent No. 2 was relieved vide orders dated May 28, 1985.
Once again, being aggrieved respondent No. 2 filed yet another appeal before the Tribunal but this time with a different result.
The same was allowed on March 10, 1986 vide impugned orders, Annexure P-10.
It is basically against this order that the present writ has been filed.
3.
Before the contentions raised by Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner, are noticed, it may be mentioned here that the appeal preferred by respondent No. 2 was basically allowed on the ground that the order passed by respondent No. 4, Annexure P-2, modifying the appointment letter of respondent No. 2 was illegal.
It may be recalled that appointment letter of respondent No. 2 was modified for the reason that the DPI had not granted approval to the initial appointment letter of respondent No. 2 whereby she was given permanent appointment despite the fact that she was appointed against leave vacancy which had arisen, for the time being only, due to leave of the petitioner.
4.
Mr. Gopal Mahajan vehemently contends that order, Annexure P-2, having attained finality way back in 1978 as the same was not agitated by respondent No. 2 at that stage could not be set aside by respondent No. 1 while dealing with the appeal of respondent No. 2.
The said order also could not be faulted as the same came to be passed by recognising the fact that the petitioner had not left the job but had gone on leave and, therefore, respondent No. 2 could not possibly be given regular appointment.
5.
The matter has been contested by all the respondents.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 as also official respondents.
Number of pleas have been raised in the written statements but there is no need at all to mention all such pleas as, during the course of arguments, the cause of petitioner was sought to be opposed on the sole ground that she was proceeded against for her long absence and was relieved after holding departmental enquiry.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records of the case.
In considered view of this Court, order passed by the Tribunal dated March 10, 1986, Annexure P-10, deserves to be set aside and so also the order ultimately relieving the petitioner on April 17, 1986 (Annexure R-2/3).
It is overwhelmingly proved from the records of the case that respondent No. 2 came to be appointed against a leave vacancy substituting the petitioner, who had gone on sanctioned leave.
It is clearly made out in order Annexure P-1 that the petitioner time and again advanced one reason or the other for extension of leave which was acceded to by the Managing Committee and consequently leave of the petitioner was sanctioned from November 26, 1975 to November 25, 1980.
Till such time, petitioner was on sanctioned leave, respondent No. 2 could not possibly be given a regular appointment.
Having initially given her regular appointment, the mistake was later rectified when her appointment letter was modified so as to say that respondent No. 2 is appointed on a post which is temporarily lying vacant on account of sanctioned leave of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 2 never agitated that matter and reconciled with the modified order.
She, however, woke up when the petitioner was permitted to join.
In an appeal preferred by respondent No. 2, thus, the Tribunal could not possibly come to the conclusion that the Managing Committee i.e. respondent No. 4 could not modify the appointment letter of respondent No. 2.
In so far as defence projected by respondents that petitioner was relieved on account of departmental enquiry conducted against her, is concerned, suffice it to say that the enquiry officer submitted his report on January 24, 1984 and vide resolution, Annexure R-2/1, respondent No. 4 yet permitted the petitioner to join and serve.
It was so done after sanctioning the leave asked for by the petitioner subsequently i.e. from November 26, 1980 to March 31, 1984.
As mentioned above, petitioner was relieved on April 17, 1986 vide order, Annexure R-2/3 i.e. after more than two years when order Annexure R-2/1 was passed.
That apart, order Annexure R-2/3, relieving the petitioner, in terms mentions that she is being relieved in view of the decision of the School Tribunal (Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala) which was rendered in favour of respondent No. 2 herein.
The said order nowhere states that the petitioner was relieved on account of departmental enquiry conducted against her.
Looked from any angle, thus, both these orders, Annexure P-10 and Annexure R-2/3 are wholly illegal and cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the said orders are quashed.
However, while granting the relief to the petitioner, changed circumstances have to be noticed.
Petitioner, as by now, has already reached the age of superannuation.
She was also employed after when was relieved vide orders dated April 17, 1986.
She would, thus, not get any pay for the period she remained re-employed.
The period that she might have put in if she was not relieved, shall however be counted for the purpose of computing her pension etc. Respondent No. 2, who is continuing in service, in view of the changed circumstances, might not be relived, if the Management i.e. respondent No. 4 might still like to continue with her services.
In other words, it is made clear that on account of setting aside of order Annexure P- 10 alone, respondent No. 2 shall not be relieved.
Even though the relief is different as contained in the petition, the Court has to mould the same in view of the changed circumstances.
In peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, parties are however left to bear their own costs.