Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a member of the Punjab Civil Medical Service Class-I, is aggrieved by the order dated March 30, 1992 by which he was dismissed from service.
He challenges this order on a number of grounds.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Member of the Punjab Civil Medical Service Class-II on December 12, 1968.
He was promoted to PCMS-I on June 1, 1978.
In the year 1972, the petitioner was working as Incharge, Primary Health Centre, Tanda.
On August 2, 1979, he examined an injured person by the name of Pir Mohammad and submitted a Medico-Legal Report to the effect that the injury had been caused by a sharp edged weapon and was grievous in nature.
Later on, without conducting an X-ray examination, he declared the injury to be simple.
It was alleged that the petitioner had demanded Rs. 700/- from Mohinder Singh, who had brought the injured to the Health Centre.
Initially, Rs. 350/- had been paid in the presence of Pritam Singh.
Later on, when Mohinder Singh did not pay the remaining amount of Rs. 350/-, the petitioner had sent the revised report.
The matter was investigated by the Vigilance Deptt.
On June 27, 1984, the petitioner was given a charge-sheet.
A copy of the Memorandum with which the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner has been appended as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
A copy of the charge-sheet has been produced as Annexure P-4.
The statement of imputation of misconduct is contained in Annexure P-5.
Ultimately on June 26, 1985, an Enquiry Officer was appointed.
During the pendency of the enquiry proceedings, vide order dated July 29, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, the petitioner was allowed to cross the efficiency bar with effect from December 1, 1984.
On October 8, 1986, the enquiry against the petitioner was concluded.
The charge was found to have been proved.
A copy of the enquiry report has been produced as Annexure P-23 with the writ petition.
3.
On March 10, 1990, the Government promoted various officers as Deputy Directors.
On July 31, 1991, the petitioner filed the present petition alleging that he had been wrongly ignored for promotion.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner was called upon to represent against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer vide letter dated September 19, 1991, a copy of which has been produced an Annexure P-23 with the writ petition.
Along with this notice, a copy of the report had also been furnished to the petitioner.
He submitted his reply, on October 18, 1991.
This was followed by a representation dated January 26, 1992 (Annexure P-25 with the writ petition), by which the petitioner prayed for permission to permit his counsel to address arguments.
This prayer was declined.
On March 30, 1992, the impugned order dismissing the petitioner from service was passed.
Thereafter, the petitioner amended the petition to challenge the order of dismissal.
4.
The respondents had filed their respective written statements to the writ petition as originally presented to this Court.
On behalf of respondent No. 1 it was inter alia stated that the petitioner had been conveyed adverse remarks for the years 1979-80, 1986-87 and 1989-90.
It was further averred that the enquiry report "was examined by the Vigilance Department and it was tentatively decided by that department to award him major penalty of dismissal from Government Service pending approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The promotion case of the petitioner was kept pending because of charge-sheet/inquiry pending in the Vigilance Department."
A separate written statement had also been filed on behalf of Respondent No. 2 viz. the Secretary, Department of Vigilance, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh.
5.
Initially, the arguments in this case were concluded on March 2, 1994.
Thereafter an affidavit dated March 3, 1994 was filed by Mr. Ashok Kumar Gupta, Joint Secretary, Vigilance Department, on behalf of respondent No. 2.
Since this affidavit had been placed on record after the conclusion of arguments, the case was directed to be listed for rehearing on March 25, 1994.
On this date, a copy of the affidavit dated March 3, 1994 was given to Mr. JS Wasu, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He prayed for a short adjournment.
This was granted.
The arguments were heard thereafter.
6.
In the affidavit dated March 3, 1994, it has been inter alia averred that a complaint was received from the Health Department on February 18, 1980 requesting the Vigilance Department to conduct an enquiry against the petitioner.
After examination of the case, it was decided to hold a regular enquiry.
The Director General of Police registered the enquiry on August 13, 1982.
The report was received from the Director General of Police on December 8, 1982.
After certain correspondence, it was decided to hold a regular departmental enquiry.
The draft of the charge-sheet was received on November 18, 1983.
The necessary list of documents etc. was received on May 21, 1984.
On June 27, 1984, the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
He was permitted to see the relevant record.
He submitted his reply, which was forwarded to the Director General of Police (Vigilance) for his comments on January 9, 1985.
After examination of the comments, the Enquiry Officer was appointed.
The Enquiry Officer had submitted the report on December 12, 1986.
It was considered on January 21, 1987.
The Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Health was requested to supply the record of the petitioner for consulting the Public Service Commission.
The record was sent on December 18, 1987.
On February 25, 1988, the Public Service Commission was requested to give its advice.
On October 18, 1988, the Commission asked for more information.
It was supplied vide letter dated August 1, 1989.
Thereafter, reminders were sent to the Commission vide DO letters dated May 15, 1990 and August 13, 1990.
The reply was received on October 1, 1990.
This reply was examined.
Certain departmental correspondence ensued.
The petitioner had submitted his representation dated February 1, 1991 to the Governor.
He had filed C.W.P.
No. 12241 of 1991 (the original petition) on August 6, 1991.
The reply from the Punjab Public Service Commission was received on September 11, 1991.
On September 19, 1991, the copy of the enquiry report was sent to the petitioner.
7.
Mr. JS Wasu, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised the following contentions :  1.
The action is wholly without jurisdiction.
The petitioner being a member of the Punjab Civil Medical Service, Class-I, the action should have been initiated only by the Department of Health and not by the Vigilance Department;  2. the action is vitiated on account of inordinately long delay of 12 years;  3. the petitioner having been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar vide order dated July 29, 1986, every allegation prior to that date shall be deemed to have been condoned;  4. the action is vitiated inasmuch as the petitioner's representation dated October 18, 1991 was not placed before the Public Service Commission and the order of dismissal from service was passed in spite of the fact that the Punjab Public Service Commission had opined that a minor penalty would be sufficient.
It is also vitiated because vide letter dated July 16, 1987, it had been clearly stated by the Deputy Secretary, Vigilance, that enquiry had been initiated "to dismiss the petitioner;"  5. that the Show Cause Notice given to the petitioner was not in accordance with Rule 9(4) (i) (b) of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules;  6. that the action is vitiated as the petitioner was not granted a hearing by the punishing authority;  7. the punishment awarded to the petitioner is highly excessive and not commensurate with the charge proved against him.
Re : (1)  Mr. Wasu contended that the appointing authority of the petitioner is the Government in the Health Department.
Even the power to punish vests in the same authority.
In the present case, the action was initiated by the Vigilance Department which is neither the appointing nor the punishing authority of the petitioner.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submitted that the entire proceedings were vitiated.
At the first flush, the contention seems to be attractive.
However, this matter is concluded by the decision of a Full Bench of this Court in JK Dhir v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 P & H 1 : 1987 (4) SLR 72.
Their Lordships have categorically held that "the Government in the Vigilance Department would be competent to launch the departmental proceedings and punish the employee, if found guilty, as a result of the said proceedings."
Consequently, nothing more need be said in this behalf.
In view of the decision of the Full Bench, the contention has to be rejected.
Re : (2)  It was contended that the alleged incident had taken place on August 2, 1979 and the impugned order was passed against the petitioner in the year 1992.
According to the learned counsel, the delay of more than 12 years was sufficient to vitiate the proceedings.
Normally, whenever there is a complaint against an officer, it is expected that the authority would proceed to examine and decide the matter as expeditiously as possible.
This is in the interest of all concerned.
It helps the Department as well as employee to collect and adduce the relevant evidence.
With the lapse of time, the best evidence may not be available and the interest of either side can suffer.
Consequently, it can be reasonably said that the proceedings should be initiated and completed as expeditiously as possible.
However, it cannot be laid down as a matter of law that delay be itself would vitiate the proceedings.
To succeed, the employee must show that his interest has been prejudiced.
8.
In the present case, the entire sequence of events has been noticed.
It is undoubtedly true that the respondents did not decide the case with the urgency that it deserved.
In spite of the fact that the incident had occurred in the year 1979, the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner after the lapse of about 5 years on June 27, 1984.
Similarly, even after the conclusion of the enquiry proceedings on October 8, 1986, the notice was given to him along with a copy of the enquiry report on September 19, 1991.
The sequence of events does show that there was an avoidable delay in the proceedings conducted by the respondents.
However, no complaint is shown to have been made by the petitioner in this behalf at any stage of the proceedings.
Even at the hearing of the case, learned counsel for the petitioner could not point out that the petitioner was deprived of an opportunity to adduce relevant evidence or that any evidence had ceased to be available on account of delay.
In fact, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show that there was any failing of memory as a result of which the interest of the petitioner was adversely affected.
Consequently, no prejudice whatsoever is shown to have been caused to the petitioner by the alleged delay.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents is vitiated merely because delay had occurred.
There is no rule laying down any specific period during which the proceedings must be concluded.
As such, unless prejudice is shown to have been caused, the proceedings cannot be said to be vitiated.
If at all, the employee who could have been dismissed from service many years back, got an opportunity to continue in service.
Re : (3)  Mr. Wasu contended that the petitioner having been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar vide order dated July 29, 1986, all allegations against him prior to that date shall be deemed to have been condoned.
This contention is wholly misconceived.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner crossed the Efficiency Bar in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-60-1700/75-2000 w.e.f.
December 1, 1984.
As a result, his pay was raised from Rs. 1700/- to Rs. 1775/-.
This, however, does not mean that the allegations which were pending enquiry shall be deemed to have been condoned.
There is no rule or principle of law supporting the contention raised by the learned counsel.
The contention is rejected.
Re : (4)  In this behalf, it is relevant to mention that the petitioner has relied on the provisions of Rule 9 as it stood prior to the 42nd Amendment to the Constitution of India.
Rule (4) (ii) (a) inter alia provided that "the record of the enquiry together with a copy of the notice given under clause (i) and the representation made in pursuance of such notice, if any, shall be forwarded by the punishing authority to the Commission for its advice."
However, the provision of Rule 9 was amended and the requirement regarding the issue of a second show cause notice was repealed.
Further, it was provided that "the record of the enquiry shall be forwarded by the punishing authority to the Commission for its advice and such advice shall be taken into consideration before making any order imposing any penalty on the Government employee."
This was clearly done in the present case.
Consequently, the contention which is primarily based on the provision contained in the unamended rule, cannot be accepted.
Still further, the letter dated July 16, 1987 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-2 with the written statement, inter alia reads as under :-  "Subject :- Regular Inquiry No. 14/82 - Hoshiarpur against Dr. Diwan Chand S.M.O.
Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Health & Family Welfare may kindly refer to this department U.O.
No. 7479-IV(1) 84/7994 dated 881985 on the subject noted above.
2.
In this regard it is stated that in the above said enquiry action is being initiated to dismiss Dr. Diwan Chand.
This case has to be referred to Punjab Public Service Commission for advice.
It is, therefore, requested that Service Book ACR file of the delinquent proforma in duplicate attached with this letter duly filled and attested may be sent.
This may be treated as most urgent."
9.
This was an inter-departmental communication by which the Vigilance Department had requested the Health Department to forward the Service Book and record of the petitioner.
It is also a fact that proceedings had been initiated against the petitioner for the imposition of a major penalty.
In this situation, it cannot be said that this letter contained a final decision to dismiss the petitioner.
It only contained a statement of fact that proceedings had been initiated which may lead to the dismissal of the officer.
It cannot be said that the respondents had a predetermined mind or that their action is vitiated.
10.
It is also well to remember that the function of the Public Service Commission is merely advisory.
In given case, the State Government may not accept the view of the Public Service Commission.
In State of UP v. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, AIR 1957 SC 912, the provisions of Article 320 have been clearly held to be directory.
As such, it cannot be said that the action in the present case was vitiated."
Re : (5)  It was then contended by the learned counsel that in accordance with the provisions of Rule 9(4) (i) (b) of the Rules, the punishing authority had to give the petitioner a notice regarding the penalty to be imposed on him.
This contention is also based on the provision which has since been repealed.
The contention is wholly lacking in merit.
Under the provisions of Rule 9, it was not necessary to give the petitioner a notice to show cause against the proposed penalty.
However, it deserves mention that the petitioner was given an opportunity to represent against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
A copy of this notice has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-23 with the writ petition.
He had submitted his representation vide letter dated October 18, 1991.
This was followed by another representation dated January 26, 1991 wherein he sought permission that his counsel may be permitted to appear and argue his case on his behalf.
This prayer was declined vide order dated February 28, 1992.
The petitioner then submitted another representation dated March 1, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-26.
A copy of final order has been produced Annexure P-27 with the writ petition.
There was no violation of the rules by the respondents.
Re : (6)  Learned counsel for the petitioner then contended that the petitioner had a right to be heard before the final order was passed.
Reliance has been placed on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in SL Loona v. The Punjab National Bank & Anr., 1992(1) SLR 250.
In this case, it was held that the appellate authority was bound to hear the petitioner before rejecting his appeal.
11.
The sequence of events as delineated above clearly shows that the petitioner was given an opportunity to represent against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
He had submitted the representation.
Thereafter, a request was made for allowing the counsel for the petitioner to address oral arguments.
This was rejected.
The petitioner had then submitted another representation to contended that he was not guilty of the charge levelled against him.
In this representation, he did not make a prayer for the grant of personal hearing.
Even at the hearing of this case, it was not shown that the petitioner had not put forth his view point clearly in his reply to the notice dated September 19, 1991.
Was the authority still bound in law to give the petitioner an opportunity of hearing ?
12.
In Ram Chander v Union of India, 1986 (2) SLR 608, their Lordships have observed that "the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case (AIR 1985 SC 1416) unequivocally lays down that the only stage at which a Government servant gets 'a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him' i.e. an opportunity to exonerate himself from the charge by showing that the evidence adduced at the inquiry is not worthy of credence or consideration or that the charges proved against him are not of such a character as to merit the extreme penalty of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank and that any of the lesser punishments ought to have been sufficient in his case, is at the stage of hearing of a departmental appeal.
Such being the legal position, it is of utmost importance after the Forty-second Amendment as interpreted by the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case that the Appellate Authority must not only give a hearing to the Government servant concerned but also pass a reasoned, order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal."
Accordingly, it can be said that in a case where an employee has not been given an opportunity to "exonerate himself from the charge by showing that the evidence adduced at the enquiry is not worthy of credence ....... or that the charges proved against him are not of such a character as to merit the extreme penalty of dismissal .....", a hearing, has to be given by the appellate authority.
However, in the present case, the employee had been given complete opportunity to represent against the enquiry report.
He could have shown that the evidence was not worthy of credence or that the charge was not established against him.
Once such an opportunity had been given, neither on the basis of the decision in Ram Chander's case (supra) nor by invoking the principles of natural justice can it be contended that it is necessary to grant oral hearing to an employee before he is punished.
Still further, the petitioner had the remedy of review in view of the provisions of Rule 21.
He did not resort to this remedy.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner had a right to the grant of an oral hearing by the punishing authority.
Accordingly, the contention is rejected.
Re : (7) :  Lastly, it was contended that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is highly excessive.
13.
The petitioner is a Doctor.
He is charged with the duty to help the sick to heal.
In the present case, he was charged with demanding and accepting "illegal gratification ..... for the treatment and issuing a favourable medico-legal report-1 ......".
He has been found guilty of this charge and yet it has been contended on his behalf that the punishment awarded to him is excessive.
This, the learned counsel urges in spite of the fact that it is not the function of the High Court to determine the quantum of punishment.
It is primarily the prerogative of the competent authority.
14.
Corruption has come to run through the warp and woof of our society.
It is rampant.
It is on the increase.
It needs to be checked.
This can be done by making the punishment formidable.
The corrupt when punished brings disgrace only to himself.
However, if he were to be left unpunished, it would be disgraceful for the whole Society.
The aim of punishment is not only to 'correct the guilty but also to warn others'.
It is rare that charges of corruption are proved.
Deterrent punishment alone can be a 'just retribution' for the guilty.
It is necessary for the protection of the Society.
Notwithstanding the fact that the petitioner has faced the proceedings for a long duration of 12 years, in the words of Augustine, "the punishment is justice for the unjust."
The Society has an interest in the purity of Administration.
As Plato said - "It is as expedient that a wicked man be punished as that a sick man be cured ...; for all chastisement is a kind of medicine."
The petitioner has to swallow this bitter pill.
The 'severity and certainty' of punishment are probably the only guarantees against crime.
15.
No other point was urged.
16.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.