NK Kapoor, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of writ, order or direction calling upon the respondents not to terminate the services of the petitioner and further direction seeking his regularisation from the date of his joining the service.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Junior Engineer in the department of Public Works Department, Public Health Haryana on 6.11.1981 on ad hoc basis.
The petitioner was interviewed by the Chief Engineer, Public Health Division.
The appointment letter is Annexure P-1.
The petitioner possessed necessary qualification to be appointed as a Junior Engineer.
He had passed three year Diploma Course in Civil Engineering from Polytechnic, Nilokheri, and this way the appointment made by the Chief Engineer was as per requirement of the assignment.
Subsequently, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, advertised 70 posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) for Public Works Department, Public Health.
The petitioner who possessed the requisite qualification also applied pursuance to the advertisement referred to above and so appeared in interview before the Service Selection Board and was successful.
Service Selection Board, Haryana recommended the name of the petitioner vide order dated 18121985, Annexure P-3.
The operative Part reads as under :-  "The Board have recommended your name to the Engineer-in-Chief PWD (Public Health Br.)
Haryana for appointment as Junior Engineer (Civil).
Your name appears at Sr. No. 2 (BC) of the merit list."
In view of the recommendation of the Board, the Engineer-in-Chief, PWD Public Health Branch, Haryana, Chandigarh asked the petitioner to fill in certain forms duly attested along with photographs so as to verify his character and antecedents (Annexure P-4).
The petitioner complied with the order of the Engineer-in-Chief within the stipulated period.
The grievance of the petitioner is that despite the recommendation of the Board which indirectly has been accepted by the Engineer-in-Chief as well as is clear from Annexure P-4, he had been treated as an ad hoc employee thereby creating a cloud upon his legitimate claim being a regular employee.
The petitioner rendered almost 12 years of unblemished service to the department.
Despite this the Chief Secretary Haryana by an administrative order directed the various departments to terminate the services of the ad hoc employees forthwith, thus compelling the petitioner to knock the door of this Court.
3.
The petitioner has sought restrain order against his illegal termination on the ground that not only the petitioner possesses the requisite qualification but was approved by the Subordinate Services Selection Board way back in 1985.
Merely for the reason that the authorities were somewhat negligent in not regularising the services of the petitioner, the petitioner's service could not be dispensed with on account of the direction given by the Chief Secretary.
4.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by this Court, respondents have put in appearance and filed a joint written statement controverting the averments made by the petitioner as well as raising preliminary objections.
The claim of the petitioner has primarily been contested by the respondents on the following grounds (i) that the petitioner was neither appointed through Employment Exchange nor he was appointed after obtaining non-availability certificate from the Employment Exchange and has thus no right to remain in service (ii) no right of petitioner has so far been infringed and this way he has no locus standi to file the present writ petition; and (iii) the petitioner's services could not be regularised despite recommendation of his name by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana for the reason that the High Court had granted interim stay to other ad hoc Engineers working in different offices and since the list of the Subordinate Services Selection Board is valid for one year, the petitioner cannot get the benefit on account of recommendation of the Board.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the various documents annexed to the petition as well as to the written statement.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner joined as Junior Engineer pursuance to the appointment letter dated 6.11.1981.
The petitioner possessed the requisite qualifications.
It is also admitted that his name was recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana in the year 1985.
Not only this, Engineer-in-Chief Haryana, intimated the petitioner about the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana and further directed him to supply some attested forms along with his photographs for verifications of character and other antecedents.
This too was complied with by the petitioner within the stipulated period.
The primary objections of the respondents is that the petitioner could not be appointed initially as his name was not recommended through Employment Exchange nor any non-availability certificate was taken from the Employment Exchange.
This objection is without any substance.
In the present case, the Superintendent Engineer, PWD, Public Health Circle, called for interview to recruit Junior Engineer on ad hoc basis, pursuance to which the petitioner was selected who continued to serve the department diligently as no reference has been made to any adverse remarks during the span of almost 12 years of his service.
At best, the objection raised can be termed as hyper technical for the reason that the petitioner appeared before the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana in the year 1985 and his name was recommended to the Engineer-in-Chief for appointment as a regular employee.
As a matter of fact, on account of petitioner having been successful in the interview conducted by the Board, his services ought to have been regularised from 18121985, Annexure P-3.
Inadvertently or on account of negligence the petitioner continued to be deemed as an ad hoc employee for all these years for which certainly the petitioner cannot be blamed nor he is to suffer on account of the inaction of the respondents in any manner.
It was incumbent upon the respondents to regularise the service of the petitioner as per recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana dated 18121985.
Attempt has also been made to justify the laxity of the concerned authority taking shelter under some alleged order of the High Court passed in a writ petition filed by other ad hoc Junior Engineers challenging their termination.
Particulars of the case have not been referred to in the written statement.
We thus find no merit in this submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that the services of the petitioner could not be regularised on account of interim stay granted to some other ad hoc Junior Engineers by this Court.
Accordingly, we accept the writ petition and direct the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner from the date of recommendation made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana with all consequential benefits of service.
No order as to costs.