Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in this case are holding various Class III posts in the Chandigarh division of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter to be referred as the Corporation).
They impugned the provision which allocates 333% marks for interview as also the consequential selection of respondent Nos. 4-42 for the posts of Higher Grade Assistants.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners are Class-III employees of the Corporation.
They are working as Assistants, Cashiers and Typists for the last about 30 years.
On July 10, 1992, a notification indicating that there were about 39 vacancies of Higher Grade Assistants was issued by the Senior Divisional Manager, Chandigarh.
In anticipation of the notification, the Corporation had invited applications from various eligible categories of employees for these posts.
A list of about 120 applicants who were to be interviewed was issued on July 4, 1992.
The interviews were actually held from July 13, 1992 to July 18, 1992.
After the interview, the result was notified on July 21, 1992.
Respondent Nos. 4-42 along with certain other persons who belong to a different category were selected.
A copy of this list has been produced an Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
The provision in the promotion Rules allocating 25 marks out of a total of 75 marks for interview and the consequential selections have been challenged as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has been averred that the provision is wholly unreasonable, discriminatory and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It has been stated that the procedure adopted for selection is wholly arbitrary and the selections are consequently vitiated.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It has been inter alia averred by way of preliminary objections that according to the promotion policy, some persons could be considered for promotion after qualifying the written examination while others were entitled to be considered without taking the said examination.
The former category is of persons who have not completed 10 years of service while the latter were those who had completed 10 or more years of service.
A written examination was held in respect of those who had put in less than 10 years of service.
After the compilation of the result of the examination and keeping in view the number of vacancies the eligible persons were called for interview.
All `persons who were eligible after qualifying the test and those applicants who were entitled to be considered without passing a written test were called for interview.
While 50 marks were fixed for seniority, qualifications and record of service, the remaining 25 marks were allotted for interview.
The respondents aver that keeping in view the judgment of the Apex Court, in selections where persons of maturity, experience and old age are to be considered for promotion or recruitment - the test can be only on the basis of interview without even the written test.'
The respondent maintains that there is nothing wrong with the method adopted by them.
It is further averred that the petitioners having taken their chance in accordance with the impugned rules, cannot now be permitted to turn round and assail the same rules after they have failed to make the grade in the selection.
It is further averred that the Central Govt. had referred the dispute relating to the rules of promotion of Class III and IV employees of the Corporation to the National Industrial Tribunal.
It gave the award on June 8, 1974 which was published in the Gazette of India on July 20, 1974.
The Tribunal had upheld the provision for allocation of 30 marks for interview and it was held that it was `open to the Corporation to make reasonable modifications'.
The impugned rules have been issued broadly in line with the direction given in the award.
The respondents also aver that the petitioners had an effective alternative remedy by way of an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No. 9.
4.
On merits, it has been averred that the Corporation has been constituted as a body corporate under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956.
It has framed regulations known as the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Staff Regulations).
These Regulations define the terms and conditions of service of every wholetime, (salaried) employees of the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
The Act was amended in the year 1981.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 48 of the Act, the Staff Regulations are to be deemed to be the Rules made by the Central Govt.
It has been further pointed out that the Class-III service consists of supervisory and clerical staff.
Regulation 7 deals with recruitment and promotions.
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 48 of the Act, the Central Govt. has framed rules regulating the promotion of Class III and Class IV employees.
These rules are known as the Life Insurance Corporation of India Class III and Class IV Employees (Promotion) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter, referred to as the Promotion Rules).
Rules 5 and 6 of the Promotion Rules prescribe the categories of employees who are eligible for promotion to various cadres, the conditions of eligibility and the criterion for selection.
It is inter alia laid down that the criterion shall be "as specified in the Schedule."
The relevant part of the Schedule provides that the promotion to the rank of Higher Grade Assistants shall be made from amongst the category of Section-heads, Stenographers, Assistants and other employees" in the scale of Section-head or Assistant."
Candidates with 5 years or more but less than 10 years of service in the scale of Assistant are required to pass a departmental test or to acquire the prescribed technical qualifications so as to be eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Higher Grade Assistants.
Candidates with 10 years or more service are entitled to be considered for promotion without any qualifying test.
The Schedule further lays down the marks allotted for the qualifications, seniority, service record and interview.
5.
It is further averred that the departmental test was held for candidates with less than 10 years service and the result was declared on July 1, 1992.
In accordance with the provisions of Regulation 7(2) of the Staff Regulations, a committee was constituted consisting of one Divisional Manager and two Assistant Divisional Managers.
The committee interviewed all the candidates and after judging the merit and suitability for the posts, a ranking list was prepared by the committee in the order of merit which was approved by the competent authority.
According to the respondents, the "case of all the petitioners was considered by the committee along with other candidates on the basis of marks obtained for qualifications, seniority, work record and in interview but the petitioners were not selected as others were found more suitable and meritorious on the basis of marks obtained for seniority qualifications, work-record and interview".
The challenge to the reservation of 25 marks for interview out of the total of 75 marks has been controverted.
It has been averred that the decision of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1987 SC 454 laying down that the competent authority could not prescribe more than 122% marks for interview cannot be applied to the selection in the present case.
Various other grounds raised in the petition have also been controverted and it has been averred that the selection is perfectly legal and valid.
6.
The petitioners have filed a replication by way of an affidavit of petitioner No. 1.
It has been averred that the stand of the respondents is palpably wrong.
Further, averments have been made to show that petitioners Nos. 5, 7, 10 and 15 have very high qualifications and long experience.
Accordingly, the petitioners aver that they were more suitable for the posts than the respondents who have been actually selected.
The respondents have filed a counter-affidavit controverting the stand of the petitioners.
7.
I have heard Mr. IK Mehta, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. HL Sibal as also Mr. BR Mahajan for the respondents.
Mr. Mehta has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, he contends that the rule is arbitrary inasmuch as it gives complete discretion to the authorities to award 25 marks to one candidate and zero to another.
As a result, the selection can be adversely affected.
He further contends that persons have been left out while juniors have been selected and the effort was only to weed out the senior persons like the petitioners.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have pointed out that the rule lays down a very fair method of selection and that there was no basis for suggesting that the selection was arbitrary or unfair.
8.
It is apt to notice the relevant provision in the Promotion Rules.
CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY FOR PROMOTION TO VARIOUS CADRES  Sr. No. For Promotion to the cadre of Categories eligible Conditions of eligibility Marks to be allotted XX XX XX XX XX 5 Higher Grade Assistants Section Head Stenographers Assistants and all other employees in the scale of Section Heads or Assistants.
(a) Section heads OR (b) 5 years' service in the scale of Assistants and a pass in the Departmental Test or on acquiring prescribed technical qualifications OR (c) 10 years' service in the scale of assistants.
Qualifications and seniority : (maximum 10 marks for qualification and 20 marks for seniority) Maximum for both .. 25 Work record .. 25 Interview 25 In the present case, we are only concerned with the category of employees who have completed 10 years service in the scale of Assistants.
The petitioners and respondent Nos. 4-42 belong to that class.
9.
A perusal of the above provision shows that persons working as Section Heads, Stenographers, Assistants and all other employees in the scale of Section Head or Assistants are eligible to be considered.
For making these selections, marks are allotted for qualifications, seniority, work record and interview.
The criterion for allocation of marks for qualifications and seniority has also been specifically laid down.
10.
In the present case there is no dispute with regard to the allocation of marks for seniority, qualifications and work record.
The only dispute is regarding the marks allocated for interview.
The petitioners maintain that the 25 marks allotted for interview are highly excessive while the respondents maintain that the provision is perfectly just and reasonable :  11.
A post can be filled up by direct recruitment or by promotion.
In the case of direct recruitment, the competent authority can hold a written test as also an interview.
In such a case, it has been held that the marks allotted for interview should not be excessive.
This is so primarily because young entrants who are fresh from educational institutions with practically no experience are competing for recruitment to the post.
Their personalities have not yet developed and they have not acquired the requisite maturity so as to be selected primarily on the basis of interview.
Accordingly, it has been laid down that the marks for interview should not be highly excessive.
For this purpose, no fixed yardstick can be laid down but in certain given situations, allocation of about 12% marks has been considered as adequate and proper.
However, the rule laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court cannot ipso facto be applied to every selection.
12.
The position in the case of promotion can be different.
In case of promotion, persons who have been in service for some length of time have to be considered.
Normally, they are mature.
Their personalities have fully developed.
In such a situation, the competent authority can decide to make the selection on the basis of the written test as well as interview.
It may also be decided to exclude the written test and have the test of interview only.
It is primarily a question of policy.
It is for experts to lay down the method.
The Courts are normally reluctant to enter these thickets.
Basically, the employer has to consider and decide as to what is the best and the most reasonable method of making the selection.
13.
Coming to the present case, it is clear that the candidates have put in long years of service.
They are experienced.
They are mature.
It is in this context that the validity of the criterion has to be considered.
14.
A perusal of the rules shows that marks have been allocated for seniority.
It was stated that a candidate is awarded 1 mark for every completed year of service subject to a maximum of 20 marks.
Marks have also been allocated for qualifications.
A candidate can get a maximum of 10 marks.
For seniority and qualifications, a candidate can secure a maximum of 25 marks.
The authority has then prescribed 25 marks for record of service.
Consequently, the prescribed criterion takes into consideration the experience, the qualifications and the past performance.
All these considerations are relevant and marks have been rightly allocated to each one.
15.
Could the selection be made on the basis of above alone by leaving out the interview totally ?
Probably it could be.
However, the competent authority can be said to have violated no rule or law by introducing the criterion of interview as well.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the selection has to be made from various categories of employees.
A Section Head, an Assistant, a Stenographer and various other persons holding different categories of posts in the scale of Assistant are eligible.
Their suitability for the post of Higher Grade Assistant has to be considered.
This Post, as suggested on behalf of the Respondents, carries duties of a supervisory nature.
Consequently, qualities of leadership, ability to get the work done and to supervise the subordinates have to be judged.
Two persons may be belonging to different cadres and may have put in equal years of service.
Their qualifications may be identical.
The record of service may be equally good.
As such, they would secure equal number of marks on the basis of the above considerations.
Who out of them should be selected ?
If the competent authority decides to judge their suitability the process of interview, as has been done in the present case, it cannot be said that the authority has violated any rule or provision of law.
Introduction of the method of interview in the circumstances of the present case appears to be well founded.
16.
Is the allocation of 25 marks excessive ?
It is true that every process of selection should completely exclude arbitrariness.
The discretion available to an authority should be kept at the lowest.
However, when contending claims of persons belonging to different cadres are being considered for promotion to a higher post, the weightage that should be given to different factors is primarily for the authority to decide.
It has been averred that the National Tribunal had upheld the allocation of 30 marks for interview.
It had also authorised the Corporation to modify the criterion if considered necessary to a suitable extent.
If on consideration of the entire material, the Central Govt. has laid down that 25 marks should be awarded for interview while promulgating Rules under section 48 of the Act, prima facie, there is no arbitrariness involved.
Furthermore, it is clear that the Corporation is considering mature persons at the time of interview.
It is also relevant that the Supreme Court in its latest pronouncement in Indian Airlines Corporation v Capt.
KC Shukla and others, (1993) 1 SC 17 : 1993(1) SCT 234 (SC) has reversed the view of the Delhi High Court and upheld the allocation of 40% marks for interview in case of promotion.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I find no infirmity in the impugned provision.
17.
This brings me to the question regarding validity of the selection.
It may be noticed at the outset that Mr. BR Mahajan had fairly produced the record of service before me at the time of hearing of the case.
A perusal of the record shows that while persons who had secured more marks than some of the petitioners in the matter of record of service and seniority/qualifications etc. had been rejected, while others some of whom had secured even lesser marks have been selected.
It is undoubtedly true that their performance during the interview had vitally affected the selection.
But that is the precise purpose of an interview.
Neither a perusal of the pleadings of the parties nor on consideration of record I am satisfied that the respondents had acted arbitrarily.
Furthermore, there is no allegation of mala fide against any member of the selection committee.
It has not even been suggested that any member of the committee was either interested in a candidate or was biased against any of the petitioners.
Consequently, if on a consideration of the relevant material the competent authority has selected some and rejected others, I am unable to find any infirmity in the action.
18.
Mr. Mehta contended that there was a bias against the petitioners as a class.
The petitioners had attained an age of about 55 years and as a result all of them were sought to be left out.
This has been specifically denied in the written statement.
The averment on behalf of the respondents has not been controverted in the additional affidavit/replication filed by the petitioners.
Even if it were so and if by chance no one who had attained the age of 55 or more has been selected, it cannot be held that the entire selection is vitiated.
19.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition Dismissed.