Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 13714 of 89 and 7589 of 1991.
In sequence of time, CWP No. 13714 of 1989 was filed earlier.
Consequently, the facts as stated in this petition may briefly be noticed.
2.
The petitioners herein are working as Tracers or Draftsmen in the Department of Architecture.
It is averred that there are 34 posts as Senior Draftsmen in the department.
These posts, the petitioners aver, are to be filled up by promotion from amongst the Draftsmen to the extent of 50 per cent and the remaining 50 per cent have to be filled up by direct recruitment.
It is the case of petitioners that the recommendation in this behalf was made by the Third Pay Commission and that this recommendation was accepted by the department.
3.
On June 9, 1988 the department advertised 8 posts of Senior Draftsmen.
2 out of these 8 posts were reserved for members of Scheduled Caste and Tribes, one for Backward Classes and one for ex-servicemen, or their wives/children.
The petitioners claim that in pursuance to this advertisement, the department actually appointed 12 persons instead of 8.
It is further averred that prior to this advertisement nine posts were actually held by the direct recruits and on the appointment of 12 more persons by way of direct recruitment, their total number has risen to 21.
It is further averred that 3 more persons viz. Smt. Tejinder Kaur, Miss Sunanda and Mrs. Baljit Kaur were appointed on ad hoc basis.
As a result, out of 34 posts, 24 are held by direct recruits which is violative of the quota laid down for the purpose of working recruitment to the posts of Senior Draftsman.
4.
The petitioners further state that at the time of advertisement dated June 9, 1988, only 6 posts were held by persons who had been promoted to the posts of Senior Draftsmen.
7 Persons had been promoted on ad hoc basis.
As a result, 13 persons were actually working.
On this premises, the petitioners claim that 4 posts belonging to the share of promotees have been wrongly filled up by direct recruitment.
In spite of their representation, nothing was done to rectify that order.
As a result, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition.
On this premises, a prayer has been made that an appropriate writ or direction be issued to the respondents to fill up 17 posts in the service of Senior Draftsmen from out of the Draftsmen working in the department of Architecture.
It has been further prayed that the services of the 3 persons viz. Smt. Tejinder Kaur, Miss Sunanda and Mrs. Baljit Kaur be not regularised.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by the Chief Architect, Punjab.
It has been averred by way of preliminary objection that no appointments have been made beyond the prescribed ratio of 50 :50 as provided in the draft service rules.
On merits, it has been averred that the posts of Senior Draftsmen have always been filled up in the ratio of 50 :50 by way of promotion and direct recruitment.
It has been further averred that so far as the report of the Pay Commission is concerned, no approval regarding the recommendation of the Pay Commission had been received from the State Govt.
It has been further stated that 12 posts of Senior Draftsmen meant for direct quota were filled up instead of 8 posts as advertised.
The respondents point out that a roster is maintained at the time of advertisement on June 9, 1988, 25 posts had been filled up from amongst the promotees whereas only 13 posts were given to the direct quota appointees.
As a result, there was a backlog of 12 posts for direct appointment.
Accordingly, 12 posts have been filled up by way of direct recruitment.
Further, details from the year 1973 till 1988 have been furnished.
A perusal thereof indicates that from the year 1973 6111988, 25 appointments had been made by way of promotion.
Similarly, from the year 1973 to 1987, 13 posts had been filled up by direct recruitment.
In 1988, 12 more posts have been so filled up.
As result, total number of persons appointed by way of direct recruitment has also come to be 25.
On these premises, it is averred that the provisions of the draft rules have been fully complied with.
6.
Two separate written statements have also been filed on behalf of the private respondents.
The pleas raised are similar to those in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
7.
I have heard Mr. RS Bindra, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mrs. Charu Tuli, for the respondents.
8.
The primary and only contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that the quote as laid down in the draft rules has not been adhered to and as a result, the rights of the petitioners under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution have been violated.
On the other hand, Mrs. Charu Tuli has produced a list of persons appointed by way of direct recruitment as also by way of promotion.
According to this chart, the following 15 persons have been promoted as Senior Draftsmen on regular basis :-  1.
Shri Sardara Singh  2.
Miss Dharmbir Kaur  3.
Miss Devinder Kaur  4.
Shri Surinder Singh-I  5.
Shri Surinder Singh-II  6.
Miss Romesh Vasudeva  7.
Shri Lalit Kumar Sharma  8.
Shri Karnail Singh  9.
Shri Dayal Singh  10.
Shri Rishi Raj  11.
Shri Raminder Singh  12.
Shri Amar Singh  13.
Smt. Rajinder Kaur  14.
Shri Balbir Singh  15.
Mrs. Tarvinder Kaur  Out of the above 15 promotees, Mr. Sardara Singh, Miss Dharambir Kaur, Mrs. Devinder Kaur and Shri Surinder.
Singh-I were further promoted to the post Head Draftsmen on ad hoc basis.
As a result, 4 temporary vacancies occurred in the cadre of Senior Draftsmen.
Besides, there was another vacancy available in the quota of promotees.
As a result Mrs. Baljit Kaur, Mrs. Gulbhushan Chawla, Mrs. Sunita Sharma and Sarvshri Sukhdev Singh and Harish Chander were promoted on ad hoc basis.
It is thus apparent that 15 persons have been promoted on regular basis while 5 are working on ad hoc basis.
Further 16 persons are factually in position as promotees in the cadre of Senior Draftsmen and 4 of them are working as Head Draftsmen on temporary basis.
In this situation, Mrs. Tuli appears to be absolutely right in contending that the promotees have got their share of 50 per cent out of 34 posts.
There is no violation of the quota of 50 per cent as laid down in the draft rules.
As such, the petitioners cannot legitimately complain any violation of their right under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the petitioners are seeking to enforce only draft rules.
These are not statutory.
These do not confer a legal right.
It has not even been shown that the draft rules have been approved by the authority competent to frame rules.
Even if there were to be a minor violation of the draft rules, it would not have resulted in vitiating the appointments made by the competent authority.
Consequently I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
CWP 7589 of 1991  10.
This brings me to the consideration of CWP No. 7589 of 1991.
The petitioner herein was one of the candidates for the 8 posts advertised on June 9, 1988.
The petitioner avers that she is the daughter of an ex-serviceman and consequently she applied for being considered for recruitment.
On June 15, 1989, the petitioner received a letter informing her that she has been "selected for appointment on regular basis subject to verification of your character/antecedents".
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
In spite of her selection, the respondents did not appoint her.
She represented and ultimately vide letter dated December 12, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 the petitioner was informed that "in a writ filed by some Draftsmen in the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court had stayed the direct recruitment of Senior Draftsmen.
So until and unless the Hon'ble High Court in the above said writ petition does not vacate the stay orders, it is impossible to appoint you in the said post as Senior Draftsman".
Aggrieved by this communication, the petitioner has approached this court through the present petition.
11.
The petitioner avers that respondent No. 2 has appointed 3 persons in the year 1989 from amongst those who had been selected along with her.
On this premises, she claims that the action of the respondents in not appointing her is discriminatory and arbitrary.
Resultantly, a prayer for the issue of a writ, order or direction for appointment of the petitioner as Draftsman against the regular vacancy has been made.
12.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that.
out of 8 posts of Senior Draftsmen advertised by the department, one was meant for "ex-servicemen, of their wives/children."
During the interviews it was brought out that 4 more posts have since fallen vacant, and 6 of the posts lying vacant could not be filled up due to the ban imposed by the Govt. but were likely to be released.
Accordingly, a waiting list was prepared.
The complete list prepared by the selection committee included 3 candidates under the category of ex- servicemen or their wives/children.
The petitioner was at number 3 in this list.
12 persons were appointed to fill up the 12 posts on regular basis.
Out of these 12 posts, 2 candidates viz. Mr. Amrik Singh and Mrs. Balwinder Kaur belonging to the petitioner's category of ex-servicemen or their wives/children were appointed.
In the meantime, the ban on direct recruitment was lifted by the Govt. As a result, more posts of Senior Draftsmen could be filled.
However, "it was observed that all the available posts could not be offered to the outside candidates since as per draft service rules, 50% of the posts were to be filled by promotion and 50% by direct recruitment....
According to the latest instructions the direct recruitment could not be made unless the verification of character and antecedents of the candidates is got done from the police authorities in terms of Punjab Govt. instructions ----- dated October, 1986 ------".
According to the respondents, the waiting list is valid for a period of 6 months.
As this period was likely to expire and permission to make appointments after the expiry of the period was likely to be required, it was decided to fill up the posts on ad hoc basis till regular arrangement could be made.
4 posts were accordingly filled up on ad hoc basis.
The respondents further aver that "out of 4 posts one post was reserved for the candidates of Schedule Caste/Schedule Tribe.
In the roster meant for ad hoc direct appointments, there did not occur point reserved for ex-servicemen category while filling these posts."
(emphasis supplied).
On these premises, the respondents claim that there has been no violation of the petitioner's right.
13.
I have heard Mr. IP Singh for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli for the respondents.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner having been selected, has a right to be appointed.
He further contends that a vacancy failing to the quota of ex-servicemen had occurred on account of death of one Amrik Singh and therefore, the action of the department in not appointing the petitioner is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
The claim as made out on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
15.
A perusal of the advertisement dated June 9,1988 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P- 1 in CWP No. 14714 of 1989 shows that 8 posts of Senior Draftsmen had been advertised.
Out of there 8 posts, one was reserved for ex-servicemen or their wives/children.
It is no doubt true that the number of posts could vary as per the requirements of the department, but the variation could only be reasonable.
The terms of the advertisement cannot be interpreted to mean that the department could fill, up any number of posts.
In any event, the department has actually filled up 12 posts on regular basis, and three on ad hoc basis.
Out of these 15 persons, 2 belonging to the category of ex-servicemen or their wives/children have been appointed.
It has been further stated categorically in the written statement that no other post failing to the share of ex-servicemen came within the number of posts filled up by the department.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that action of the department in not appointing the petitioner was in any way illegal or violative of the petitioner's right under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Apparently, out of 8 posts, the department had reserved one post for "ex-servicemen, their wives/children."
Out of the 15 actually filled up posts 2 had been given to the said category.
The action is fair, just and reasonable.
There is nothing before me to indicate that the department is bound to fill up 3 posts from amongst the ex-servicemen or their wives/children.
16.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that a vacancy falling to the share of ex-servicemen had occurred on the death of Mr. Amrik Singh.
There is no such averment of record.
In the writ petition the petitioner has not taken a plea to the effect.
Even after the filing of the written statement, no replication or additional affidavit has been filed to controvert the stand of the respondents that no point for the category of ex-servicemen appears in the roster of vacancies.
Even the factum of the death of Mr. Amrik Singh has not been brought on record by filing any additional affidavit; In such a situation, learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be allowed to raise this contention.
17.
The learned counsel then contends that a selected candidate has a right to be appointed and the action of the respondents in not appointing her is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution Reference has been made to the judgment in Bimla Devi v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SCT 60 as also to the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in The State of Haryana and another v. Rajinder Kumar and others, 1990(2) RSJ 744.
In these cases it has been held that the State cannot arbitrarily refuse to appoint a selected candidate.
There is no dispute with this proposition.
Is the action of the respondents arbitrary in the present case ?
I am afraid, it is not.
The petitioner has been duly considered.
She is at number 3 on the list of candidates belonging to the category of ex-servicemen, their wives/children.
Only two posts failing to the share of this category have been filled up.
If a third post falling to the quota of ex-servicemen is not available, and the Govt. does not make appointment from this source, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents is unfair or arbitrary.
In fact, reservation is made at the cost of merit.
The rule relating to the reservation has to be strictly construed.
As such, unless a case for reservation is clearly made out, no order in favour of the candidate claiming reservation can be passed.
In the present case, no infirmity whatsoever can be found with the action of the respondents.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.