SC Jain, J - Petitioner No. 1 is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act which started as institution called Jai Santoshi Ma College in the year 1989 in Sector 7 Rohini, Delhi.
The petitioner applied to the Chairman of the Board of Technical Education, Delhi Administration for getting permission for making them as their examining body which was necessary for getting the course of study approved from Pharmacy Council of India under Section 12 of the Pharmacy Act.
Vide letter dated 25789, Shri Kula Nand Bharti, who was the Chairman of the Board of Technical Education, permitted the petitioners to make admission to D-Pharma course of two years duration with an intake of 120 students.
w.e.f.
1989-1991 Academic session on the condition that the institution meets all the requirements of Pharmacy Council of India under the relevant provisions of the Pharmacy Act i.e. the availability of essential infrastructure and manpower etc.
It was also mentioned that the institution will also have to provide necessary facilities as would be required by the Board of Technical Education in due course.
In pursuance to the said permission the petitioner applied to the Pharmacy Council vide letter dated 5989 for getting their course approved under Section 12(1) of the Pharmacy Act.
2.
The Pharmacy Council of India did not take any action in the matter till 10.1.1990.
It was on 10190 that a letter was received from the Pharmacy Council of India asking the petitioner to furnish the requisite information in the standard inspection form along with the consent letter in respect of institute affiliation to an examining authority along with a sum of Rs. 1500/- as inspection fee.
3.
A copy of the letter written by the Chairman of the Board of Technical Education dated 25789 was also asked for as the same was not received by them.
The petitioners requested the Board of the Technical Education Delhi Admn.
vide their letter dated 9290 to send a copy of the letter of the Chairman of the Board of Technical Education to the Pharmacy Council of India as desired.
The petitioners were informed by the Registrar that no institution or course can be opened without the approval of the All India Council of Technical Education and further they asked the petitioner to submit a copy of the detailed project on the prescribed proforma so as to inspect them to examine their case for onwards submission to All India Council for Technical Education for final decision.
4.
On 2621990 the petitioner sent the requisite information in the prescribed proforma as desired to the Registrar Board of Technical Education Delhi.
On 2390, the committee constituted for this purpose inspected the petitioner No. 2 institution and found that the institution was without the basic infrastructure and facility of plot/building with clear title to fulfil the norms as laid down by the All India Council of Technical Education and as such it was recommended that this institution should not be considered for approval by All India Council of Technical Education.
5.
In this writ petition, the petitioners have challenged the procedure adopted by the respondents in refusing to grant approval to the diploma course in pharmacy and sought a mandamus directing the respondents to grant approval to the course to the said pharmacy college of petitioner No. 1 and declare the said course of study as approved course of study for admission to the approved examination of pharmacists.
They have also sought a mandamus directing the respondents to declare the examination of the students with the petitioners being in conformity with the education regulations and to declare the said examination to be an approved examination for the purpose of qualifying for registration as Pharmacists under the Pharmacy Act.
Directions have also been sought to allow 120 students studying in the petitioner's college to appear in the first year course of the examination to be conducted by the Respondent No. 2 Board of Technical Education Delhi Administration, Delhi.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the Board of Technical Education Delhi Administration, who is the examining body permitted the petitioners to make admission to D-Pharma course of two years with an intake of 120 students for 1989-91 session subject to the condition that the institute meets all the requirements of the Pharmacy Council of India under the provisions of the Pharmacy Act.
The Pharmacy Act, 1948 was enacted with a view to make better provision for the regulation of profession and practice of pharmacy and in the statement of objects and reasons it was made clear that it is desirable that as in most other countries, only persons who have attained a minimum standard of professional education should be permitted to practice the profession of pharmacy.
It is accordingly proposed to establish a Central Council of Pharmacy, which will prescribe the minimum standards of education and approve courses of study and examination for Pharmacists.
In furtherance of the said object the Pharmacy Council of India has laid down educational regulations which must be complied with by all the institutions conducting the course of pharmacy and the State Institutions which conduct the examination.
Under Section 12(1) of the Act any authority under a State which conducts a course of study for Pharmacists should apply for the approval of the course of study for the purpose of admission to an approved examination for Pharmacists.
The Central Council of Pharmacy after holding such enquiry as thinks fit and after satisfying that the course of study is in conformity with the education regulations shall give such approval.
Similarly, an examination for the purpose of qualifying for registration as a Pharmacist would also need the approval of the Central Council under Section 12(2) of the Act.
On an application made by the examining body the Council would make an enquiry as it thinks fit and after satisfying that the examination is in conformity with the Education Regulations such approval shall be given.
7.
According to the learned counsel the petitioners had complied with all the requirements as are required for approval under the Pharmacy Act but the approval has not yet been granted.
According to the learned counsel the Pharmacy Act 1948 is a special Act and that the provisions of All India Council of Technical Education Act are not applicable to the present case.
According to him the provisions of All India Council of Technical Education Act will be applicable to those institutions which need its grant with a view to proper planning and coordinated development of technical education system in the country.
There is no procedure prescribed in any of the provisions of the said All India Technical Education Act for making an application for starting a new college since the main function of the enactment is to allocate the grants.
The petitioner has not obtained any grant from the said Council and accordingly no approval of All India Council of Technical Education for starting the course of pharmacy is required.
After the grant of permission by the Chairman of Board of Technical Education in July, 1989, 120 students were admitted in the college for two years session of diploma in Pharmacy in academic session 1989-91.
One year course has already been completed and those 120 students are supposed to appear in the examination which is to be conducted by the Board of Technical Education.
The petitioner satisfied the requirement of rule 12(1) of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 and they have no authority to refuse the grant of admission to an approved examination for Pharmacists.
Non-grant of approval to the course of study by Pharmacy Council of India and by not allowing 120 students to appear in the first examination, has resulted in wastage of precious one year of 120 students who got admission with petitioner No. 2 who was given permission to admit the students to the extent of 120 students.
He drew my attention towards various gazette notification and copies of various letters written by Pharmacy Council to the Govt. of India Press whereby the Pharmacy Council of India has sought the publication of notification of resolution passed by it with regard to approval of courses being commenced by different institutions all over India.
According to the learned counsel as per the practice followed by the Pharmacy Council of India, an institute which has applied for approval of a course are permitted to grant approval while the application is under process and is pending with the appropriate Board under the Pharmacy Act of 1948.
This is the practice and procedure which has been followed by the respondents all along and is being followed by the Council in this case.
The Pharmacy Council of India has approved and notified the course of examination in the Institution, examining bodies for varying period retrospectively.
Learned counsel submitted that the entire procedure adopted in this case is illegal and unjustified and they were not given due opportunity in advance before inspecting their institution as is required.
The college was commenced on the basis of permission granted by the Chairman of the Board of Technical Education Delhi and all the formalities were completed by the petitioner by sending the requisite information on the prescribed form along with the inspection fee.
No opportunity was granted to the petitioners to explain the difficulties while making the report by the Expert Committee.
8.
The entire case of the petitioner revolves around the letter dated 2571989 issued by Shri Kula Nand Bharti, the then Chairman of the Board of technical Education whereby her permitted the petitioners to make admission to D-Pharma course of two years duration with the intake of 120 students provided the institution meets all the requirements of the Pharmacy Council of India under the relevant provisions of Pharmacy Act i.e. the availability of infrastructure and manpower etc.  9.
The only question is whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the petitioners are entitled to get the relief prayed for in the writ petition.
All India Council for Technical Act (52) of 1987 came into force on 141988 and therefore the power to grant approval to any technical institution vests with All India Council for Technical Education.
Section 10(k) of the said Act provides that All India Council of Technical Education may grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of a new courses or programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned.
Sub-Section (n) of Section 10 also provides that the Council may take all necessary steps to prevent commercialization of technical education.
The following guidelines are laid down by the Council which must be fulfilled by all private technical institutions before approval of the Council is secured :  i.
The financial position of the organisation is sound.
ii.
The organisation is genuinely interested in the development of technical education and has a history/background of developing educational facilities with or without aid from Central or State Govt.  iii.
The management system including Governing Council should be as per guidelines laid down by the AICTE.
iv.
The Chairman of the Governing Council shall be appointed as per norms laid down by the AICTE.
v. The infrastructure and other facilities should be provided as per norms laid down by AICTE.
vi.
The admissions should be made strictly on merit and the institutions concerned should join the entrance test at the national or at the State level or associate with the tests conducted by the technological institutions of national importance or similar other bodies and take students from any one of these tests in order of merit.
vii.
The tuition and other fees should be prescribed as laid down by AICTE.
viii.
The institute should be financially and academically viable.
ix.
The courses to be started should be as per assessed technical man power needs and should be as for as possible in emerging areas or where employment potential is clearly foreseen.
x.
The accounts of the Institute should be audited by a Chartered Accountant and be open for inspection by AICTE or anybody authorised by it.
xi.
The staff should be recruited on all India basis by open selection as per qualification and experience etc. laid down by the AICTE.
xii.
The reservation in these private institutions may be provided as per policy of the respective state Governments.
When petitioner No. 1 made an application to respondent No. 2, the examining body, for its approval and affiliation for the purpose of diploma education in Pharmacy, respondent No. 2 informed the petitioner by its letter dated 14.2.1990 that All India Technical Education has been entrusted the responsibility of planning, promotion and co-ordinated development of technical education under the Act of Parliament and that no institution/course can be opened without the prior approval of All India Council for Technical Education.
They also called upon the petitioner to send a detailed project proposal on the prescribed proforma along with the information regarding management system, financial status of the society and infrastructure to run the institute/course so that an expert group of All India Council of Technical Education may visit the institution to evaluate the standard and status of the proposed institution.
The petitioner complied with the directions and submitted the requisite information on the prescribed proforma on the basis of which the Chairman of the All India Council of Technical Education constituted an expert committee of seven persons (One Chairman and six members) who after inspecting the institute-petitioner No. 2 gave the report that the institute does not fulfill the main two guidelines of All India Council for Technical Education i.e. Financial soundness of the organisation and taking of interest by the organisation in the development of technical education and recommended that since the institution is without the basic infrastructural facility of land and building with a clear title and also it does not fulfill the norms of All India Council for Technical Education for technical education and as such and the institution does not deserve any consideration for approval by All India Council for Technical Education.
The committee recommended that the institution need not be considered for approval of the All India Council for Technical Education.
10.
The position which emerges is that the Pharmacy Council of India is regulating the technical standards in Pharmacy Diploma level Institutions.
After 1988 when the All India Council for Technical Education became statutory body under an Act of the Parliament, no new technical Institution can be started by the State Govt. or private agency without prior approval of All India Council for Technical Education.
Thus, the approval of All India Council for Technical Education has become a prequisite for affiliation of a new technical institution by an examining body.
In this case, neither the Pharmacy Council of India gave approval for starting this institution Jai Santoshi Ma College nor All India Council for Technical Education gave its approval.
11.
The Board of Technical Education is not competent authority to grant permission for starting this technical institution ever since All India Council for Technical Education became statutory body under the Act of Parliament.
No technical institution/course can be started without prior approval of All India Council of Technical Education.
This question came up for consideration in various cases before this court as well as before the Madras High Court.
In Nehru Institute of Pharmacy and Technology v. Union of India and others, (42) 1990 DLT 544 a Division Bench of this Court has specifically laid down that all the three bodies i.e. the Board of Technical Education, Pharmacy Council of India and All India Council for Technical Education are independent and different bodies.
A distinction has to be made between approval which is granted by the Pharmacy Council of India to an educational institution and affiliation which is granted by an examining authority to that institution.
The approval is with regard to the course of study and the standard of education which is provided and that approval has to be granted by the technicl body, namely Pharmacy Council of India and the affiliating authority like the Board of Techical Education which grants affiliation according to its own regulation.
After coming into force of All India Council of Technical Education Act, which came into force on 28388, the power to grant approval to any technical course vests in All India Council of Technical Education and State Govt. which was exercising such jurisdiction ceased to have that power.
The provision of the said Act as well as the effect thereof on the powers of the State Govt. were considered by a Division Bench of Madras High Court in Writ Petition Nos. 793, 797 and 821 of 1989 decided on 23111989 reported in AIR 1991 Madras 141, Noorul Islam Education Trust v. Govt of Tamil Nadu and it was held that on the coming into force of the All India Council of Technical Education Act, the State Govt. ceased to have jurisdiction to grant approval/disapproval regarding any technical education.
Hence the permission allegedly granted on 25789 by Shri Kula Nand, Chairman Board of Technical Education to the petitioner society to start the pharmacy college is of no consequence.
Even in this permission letter it has been specifically mentioned that permission is granted to make admission to D-Pharma course of two years duration with an intake of 120 students with effect from 1989-91 Acasemic Session, provided the institution meets all the requirements of the Pharmacy Council of India under the relevant provisions of Pharmacy Act viz. the availability of essential infra-structure and manpower etc. and the petitioner will also have to provide necessary facilities as will be required by the Board of Technical Education in due course.
None of these conditions have been fulfilled and before fulfilling these conditions, the petitioner rushed to make admissions of students in his institution and also without getting approval from All India Council of Technical Education this technical institutions was started.
Even the Board of Technical Education Delhi Administration in its subsequent letter specifically made it known to the petitioner that approval of All India Council of Technical Education has become a pre-requisite for affiliation of a new institution by an examining body.
In these circumstances, I have no hesitation in holding that approval of All India Council of Technical Education is mandatory for all institutions started for imparting of technical education.
The standards and norms laid down by All India Council of Technical Education are not unreasonable and should be complied with.
No mandate can be granted in favour of the petitioner in view of the present circumstances of the case.
12.
The main grievance of the petitioner is that before inspecting the institute, no opportunity was granted to the petitioner, nor any time was given to explain their position and the report of the expert committee is one sided and biased.
It is correct that principles of natural justice require that the petitioner ought to have been given an opportunity before conducting the inspection by the expert committee.
The petitioner's application can be considered afresh provided they satisfy all the requirements as laid down by the norms and guidelines in this regard and remove all shortcomings pointed out by the expert committee.
I, therefore, direct that the petitioner shall comply with the requirements of the norms and guidelines laid down by All India Council of Technical Education and as pointed out by the Expert Committee and make a fresh application for approval within one month from today.
The respondent will carry out a fresh inspection through expert committee after giving notice to the petitioners to see that the norms and guidelines are strictly complied with and if the guidelines stand complied with the request for getting approval/affiliation should be decided forthwith.
13.
The contention of the petitioner that 120 students were admitted in the Institute after getting permission from the chairman of Board of Technical Education in 1989 and now it will not be proper to drive them to streets after they have undergone prescribed course with the necessary syllabi is not tenable in the present circumstances of the case.
It is the case of the Board of Technical Education and it has also come on record that no request for starting the institution was received by the said Board and the said Board had released a public notice dated 23889 in four English dailies and two Hindi and one Urdu daily that no approval has been accorded by the Board of Technical Education to Jai Santoshi Ma Pharmacy College regarding admission to two years diploma course in pharmacy for 1989-91 session.
Any one taking admission in the said college would be doing so at his own risk.
In continuation to the said notice another notice was given on 7111989 and it was made known in very clear terms that the Board has no authority to grant permission to start an institute ever since All India Council of Technical Education became statutory authority under the Act of Parliament.
No institution/course can be started without the specific approval of All India Council of Technical Education.
This fact has been ignored by the petitioner while admitting these students and even it was not mentioned in the writ petition.
14.
The petitioner cannot now take benefit of the fact that on getting permission from the Chairman Board of Technical Education, Delhi Administration they immediately started the process of admission thereby admitting 120 students and now they should not be deprived of their valuable time which they have spent in studying the course of pharmacy in this institution.
15.
Even on humanitarian grounds the students of an unrecognized institute cannot be permitted to appear in public examination held by the Govt.
Practice to admit students by an unrecognized institute and then to seek permission to allow the students to appear in the examination has been looked with disfavour by the Supreme Court in State of Tamil Nadu v. Joseph Teachers Training Institute and another, JT 1991(2) SC 343.
It is pertinent to mention here that these students separately filed writ petitions seeking the relief that they may be allowed to appear in the examinations as they got admission under the bonafide belief that institution is duly recognised but they got the writ petition dismissed as withdrawn and no writ petition is pending on behalf of the aggrieved students.
The petitioner society and the Institution are not entitled to this relief also in this writ petition because they did not bother to obtain the permission of All India Council of Technical Education, Pharmacy Council of India and the Board of Technical Education before starting the institution.
The so called permission of the Chairman Board of Technical Education was a conditional permission and it was also not processed in the normal course.
This writ petition is disposed of with these above observations made above.
There is no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.