Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Assistant in this Court, claims the grant of Senior grade with effect from June 10, 1981, when persons immediately junior to him were granted the said grade.
A few facts may be noticed.
The petitioner was recruited as a Clerk on June 30, 1966.
On March 26, 1974 he was promoted to the post of Assistant.
In January, 1980 the petitioner was placed under suspension and was reinstated in November, 1980.
On August 6,1982, 20 Assistants were placed in the senior grade of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from June 10, 1981.
A copy of the order has been placed on record as Annexure P2.
The petitioner claims that four persons, whose names appear at Sr. No. 17 to 20 in this order, were junior to him.
According to the petitioner he had a right to be granted the senior grade with effect from the same date as the one on which Smt. Sudesh Manchanda was placed in this scale.
2.
It is further averred that the petitioner was not initially allowed to cross the efficiency bar when it fell due on March 1, 1980.
According to the petitioner, this was only on account of the fact that he was under suspension.
In the year 1983, the petitioner was allowed to cross the efficiency bar with effect from March 1, 1981.
After having been allowed to cross the efficiency bar the petitioner submitted various representations, including those dated October 4, 1983 and June 13, 1990.
The representations were finally rejected vide orders dated August 1, 1990.
A copy of the order rejecting the representations has been placed on record as Annexure P.7.
Having been allowed to cross the efficiency bar the petitioner claims that his record of service upto March 1, 1981 is deemed to be good and consequently he had a right to be considered for the grant of Senior Grade.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's claim for the grant of senior grade was considered along with that of various other persons.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner "was not granted senior scale because of his unsatisfactory record as he was warned to be careful in the year 1977 and subsequently in November 1980, a punishment of withholding of one annual increment with cumulative effect was imposed on account of lapse on his part.
In addition to this, he earned simply `B' gradation in his annual confidential report and as such he was found unsuitable.
As regards crossing of efficiency bar is concerned, it has got no relevancy to the grant of senior scale to the official as the senior scale is always granted in order of seniority and on the basis of service record."
4.
I have heard Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Ajay Mittal for the respondent.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Gill is that after having been allowed to cross the efficiency bar, the petitioner had a right to be granted senior scale with effect from the same date as the one on which persons junior to him had been granted.
He further claims that the record of service prior to the crossing of efficiency bar has to be presumed to be good.
Reliance has been placed on the decisions in C.W.P.
No. 2959 of 1987 Vijay Kumar Vaid v. The Haryana State Electricity Board) decided by the Division Bench on June 29, 1987, Krishan Lal Kapoor v. The State of Haryana, 1988(2) SLR 357 and Avtar Singh v. Government of Punjab and others, 1989(4) SLR 167.
The first two out of the three judgments cited by the learned counsel were cases where a person had been pre-maturely retired after crossing of efficiency bar.
The third was a case where the claim for promotion was involved.
On behalf of the respondent Mr. Mittal contends that the petitioner's claim having been considered and in view of the factual position as stated in the written statement, the petitioner did not have an indefeasible right to the grant of senior scale.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the cases of promotion or grant of a senior scale are not at par with cases of premature retirement.
In case of premature retirement, only the record of service of the individual concerned has to be seen.
His suitability to continue on the post held by him has to be examined.
If on an examination of the service record, the authority finds that the record of service is not good and it is in public interest to retire him, appropriate orders are issued under the relevant rules.
However, in case of promotion or grant of a senior scale, the claims of various persons have to be compared.
A person with better record of service can be considered more suitable for the grant of a senior scale than another person.
So far as the crossing of efficiency bar is concerned, it may be relevant when the suitability of a person to continue in service is being considered.
However, in matters of promotion, it cannot be said that the previous record is washed out or has to be presumed to be good.
6.
A Division Bench of this Court in Ran Singh Kalson v. State of Haryana, 1978(1) SLR 450, inter alia observed as under :-  "On a proper analysis of Dewan Chuni Lal's case, we are unable to hold that the adverse entries prior to the date when a public servant is allowed to cross the efficiency bar are completely wiped out or cannot be taken into consideration while judging his suitability for promotion to a higher rank.
We are, therefore, of the considered view that the case of Shri Shadi Lal (supra) was not correctly decided and that while considering the case of a public servant for future promotion, it is open to the competent authority to take the entire record of service into consideration for judging his suitability."
7.
In view of the above authoritative pronouncement it is obvious that the previous record of service is relevant for the purpose of considering a person's claim for promotion.
In my view, this test would also apply for the grant of a senior scale.
8.
A perusal of the petitioner's record shows that he had been given a warning in the year 1977 and his increment had been stopped with cumulative effect in the year 1980.
If on consideration of these relevant factors, the Chief Justice found that the petitioner was not suitable to be placed in the senior scale, the order can neither be said to be arbitrary nor illegal.
9.
Mr. Gill placed his reliance on the instructions dated June 5, 1980 issued by the Government of Punjab to contend that the senior scale has to be granted primarily on the basis of seniority.
10.
A reference to the instructions shows that these were primarily concerned with the bifurcation of the cadre strength of Assistants and Senior Scale Stenographers in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and the office of Financial Commissioner, Punjab.
These did not apply ipso facto to the employees of this Court.
Even if these instructions are presumed to be applicable, they only lay down that the senior scale should be granted on the basis of seniority and satisfactory record of service."
The petitioner's record was admittedly considered.
It has been specifically averred in the written statement that the petitioner was not granted the senior scale "because of his unsatisfactory record ......" As the petitioner's record had been found to be unsatisfactory, he could not be granted the senior scale, even if the instructions were taken into consideration.
11.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.