MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner was recruited to the Indian Army on 12th July, 1963 and after completion of his training was granted Emergency Commission on 26th January, 1964.
He was released from the Army in August, 1968.
In order to accommodate the released Armed Personnel in Civil Services, statutory rules were framed by the Governor of Punjab under Article 309 of the Constitution, namely, Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968.
Rule 3 of the aforesaid Rules is reproduced hereunder :-  "3.
(1) Twenty per cent of the non-technical posts to be filled up through direct recruitment shall be reserved for being filled up by the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel who joined service or were commissioned on or after the 1st day of November, 1962, and are released at any time thereafter.
(2) Where in any year any vacancies reserved for the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel remain unfilled for want of suitable Released Armed Forces Personnel, such vacancies may be filled up temporarily from any other source in accordance with the recruitment rules for the time being in force for filling up vacancies which are not reserved.
(3) Where in any year, any vacancies reserved for the Released Armed Forces Personnel have been filled up temporarily in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2) above, the number of vacancies so filled up shall be carried forward to the next succeeding year, provided that no such vacancies shall be carried forward for more than four years."
In order to achieve the object underlying the aforesaid Rule, the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, issued a circular letter on 5th October, 1970, directing that where a Released Army Personnel had qualified against a non-reserved vacancy but had been appointed against a general unreserved vacancy in the first instance, he should be given an option to accept a reserved vacancy even if it occurred subsequent to his appointment, thereby automatically giving him the benefit of seniority etc.
The intention was that an Army Personnel appointed against an unreserved vacancy in the first instance should be entitled to the benefit of the Rule as and when a reserved vacancy came into existence.
2.
After his release from the Army, the petitioner was selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission as Secretary, District Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen's Board, and was appointed as such by the Secretary to Government Punjab, Defence Services Welfare Department, Chandigarh, on 9th April, 1975.
Later on, the petitioner was confirmed on this post with effect from 30th June, 1975, by order dated 2nd September, 1983.
Two posts out of twelve posts of District Sanik Welfare Officers (formerly designated as Secretary, District Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen's Board) were reserved for Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel, to which category the petitioner belonged.
however, on 11th June, 1987, the Government declined to grant to the petitioner the benefit under the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel Rules of 1968.
Aggrieved against this order, the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court praying for restoration of the benefit already granted to him.
3.
In the written statement, attempt has been made to justify the impugned action by pleading that though the petitioner was an ex-Emergency Commissioned Officer, yet his appointment was not against one of the vacancies which were to be reserved and notified under the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Service) Rules, 1968, substituted by the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-servicemen Rules, 1982.
It has further been added that in order to get benefit under the Demobilized Armed Forces Rules, the petitioner should have competed and got selected against the post advertised under those Rules.
Since he was not selected against any of such posts, the benefit could not be given to him under the Rules.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel of the parties and having gone through the records, we are of the view that the impugned action of the respondents is wholly arbitrary, untenable in law and in utter disregard of the law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court.
In almost identical matters relating to the ex-Armed Personnel employed in the Central Reserve Police Force, the point involved came up before a Division Bench of Delhi High Court consisting of DK Kapur and S. Ranganathan, in C.W.P.
No. 44 of 1975, decided on 2nd September, 1985 Shri UBS Teotia and others v. Union of India.
After detailed scrutiny of the relevant rules, the Division Bench of Delhi High Court allowed the writ petition by holding that once the petitioners having been appointed to the Service and allowed to continue as such, later on it was not open to the respondent-Union of India to deny to the petitioners the benefits flowing under the Rules, on the ground, that their appointments were not against the reserved vacancies.
Special Leave Petition No. 13910 of 1985 filed by the Union of India was dismissed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on 21st January, 1986, by holding that the employees were entitled to the necessary benefits under the Rules.
In the present case also, the petitioner having been selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission in 1975 and having been appointed against that post and continued since then, today it is too late in the day for the respondents to tell the petitioner, that the benefits under the relevant Rules which are otherwise fully applicable to him, could not be extended to him because the respondents, due to their own mistake, could not notify the vacancies as reserved for the Demobilised Armed Personnel, against which the petitioner had been appointed.
5.
Consequently, we allow this petition, quash the impugned decision of the respondents as communicated to the petitioner on 11th June, 1987 (Annexure P4), and direct the respondents to release to the petitioner all the benefits under the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968, to which he would have been entitled had his appointment been made against a vacancy notified as reserved for the ex-Armed Personnel.
Necessary benefits shall be released to the petitioners within three months.
Petition allowed.