Augustine George Masih, J - Petitioner in this writ petition prays for the quashing of the order dated 132006 passed by respondent No. 2 vide which he has been assigned seniority No. 28-A below Shri Biram Singh and further prayer for grant of notional promotion as Inspector with effect from the date his junior Biram Singh stands promoted.
2.
The petitioner and said Biram Singh were selected together to the post of Sub Inspector, Co-operative Societies by the erstwhile Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') in the year 1960.
The petitioner was placed at Sr.No.
20 by the Board whereas Biram Singh was assigned merit No. 44.
On the recommendations made by the Board, both of them were appointed as Sub-Inspectors on the same date and they joined as such, also on the same date i.e. 1351960.
The seniority of the Sub Inspectors was circulated by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies wherein representations were filed by the petitioner and others but no decision thereon was taken.
Thereafter, the Raghbir Singh Malik filed CWPNo.
901 of 1987 in this High Court, which was allowed and a direction was issued to the respondents therein to redetermine the seniority of the petitioner.
The operative part of the order passed by this Court is reproduced herein-under :  "In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order, Annexure P/5 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to re-determine the seniority of the petitioner from the date he joined as Sub Inspector on 1351960 on the basis of the recommendations made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
Since the petitioner has retired, the respondents are directed to notionally re-fix the seniority of the petitioner.
The petitioner shall also be considered for promotion as and when due under the rules and the seniority be fixed in accordance with rules.
In case the petitioner is found to be suitable for promotion, notional promotions be granted.
The petitioner shall be entitled to consequential benefits also.
In case the petitioner is promoted with retrospective effect, the retiral benefits of the petitioner shall be re-fixed and the same be released to the petitioner.
Let the necessary action be done within three months of the receipt of certified copy of this order.
Sd/- S.S. Nijjar  Judge"  22012003  3.
The petitioner along with four other Sub Inspectors filed C.W.P.
No. 9978 of 1988 challenging therein the same seniority list.
The said writ petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court and it was allowed in the same terms as in C.W.P.
No. 901 of 1987 (Raghbir Singh Malik v. State of Haryana and another, 2003(1) SCT 764 (P&H).
4.
As per the directions passed by this Court, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana vide the impugned order dated 132006 (Annexure P-4) redetermined the seniority of the petitioner and others and assigned him seniority No. 28-A but below Biram Singh who was placed at Sr.No.
28 and above Dhoop Singh who was at Sr.No.
29 in the seniority list.
Accordingly, the petitioner was also granted the notional promotion as Inspector with effect from 11121981.
The petitioner contends that since the directions of this Court were very clear and specific to the effect that the seniority was to be determined on the basis of the recommendations made by the Board, the petitioner who was higher in merit and was at Sr.No.
20 of the merit list as determined by the Board, should have been assigned seniority over and above Biram Singh who was at Sr.No.
44.
Since he was to be assigned seniority over Biram Singh, therefore, he was entitled to the notional promotion as Inspector, Co-operative Societies also with effect from 13101971 i.e. the date when his junior Biram Singh has been promoted as such.
5.
Notice having been issued, the respondents have put in appearance and filed written statement wherein the facts as narrated above have not been denied, however, the only stand taken therein is that the matter relates to Joint Punjab and the merit list was with the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab.
The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab on establishment of Haryana in the year 1966 sent the joint seniority list and on the basis of that seniority list, the Department of Co-operative Societies proceeded with the matter.
The seniority list dated 141971 was issued in February, 1972 which the Department of Co-operative Societies, Haryana has been following as its seniority list.
While complying with the orders passed in C.W.P.
No. 901 of 1987 titled as Raghbir Singh Malik v. State of Haryana and another and C.W.P.
No. 9978 of 1988, Roop Chand and others v. State of Haryana and another (earlier writ petition filed by the present petitioner), the said Seniority list dated 141971 was taken as the basis of seniority list and accordingly, a speaking order was passed.
6.
We have heard counsel for the parties.
The above narrated facts would clearly show the misreading of the judgment passed by this Court in CWPNo.
901 of 1987 Raghbir Singh Malik's case (supra).
There were clear directions to the respondents therein to redetermine the seniority on the basis of the recommendations made by the Board.
Since as per the recommendations of the Board the petitioner was higher in merit to Biram Singh, he was entitled to be placed higher in seniority to Biram Singh.
The petitioner being senior, therefore, deserved to be promoted as Inspector prior to Biram Singh.
Biram Singh was promoted as Inspector on 13101971 and therefore, the petitioner is also entitled to be promoted as such from that date if not earlier.
7.
In the light of the fact that the petitioner stands superannuated from service, he can only be granted notional promotion as Inspector from 13101971, the date when his junior Biram Singh was promoted as Inspector.
Accordingly, this petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondent to place the petitioner Roop Chand over and above Biram Singh in the seniority list.
The petitioner be granted notional promotion from the date his junior- Biram Singh was promoted as Inspector i.e. 13101971.
The petitioner on being granted Inspector from 13101971 shall be entitled to the retiral benefits by refixation of his salary and other dues.
8.
The State has despite of the earlier clear order passed in the C. W.P.No.
9978 of 1988 filed by the petitioner not assigned the seniority due to the petitioner resulting in depriving the petitioner of his due date of promotion and consequential benefits of pay fixation and other retiral dues.
The old man has been again forced to approach this Court for the grant of his rightful benefits which shows the callous attitude of the State and the petitioner is thus held entitled to interest on the retiral dues which is fixed as simple interest at the rate of 8% from the date of filing of this petition till the disbursement of the same.
All retiral benefits to which the petitioner is found entitled to, along with interest, be released to him within a period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.