Prasenjit Mandal, J - This writ application is directed against the order dated 22.12.2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench in OA No. 700 of 1998 whereby and whereunder the learned Tribunal has dismissed the application.
2.
Facts in brief are that the two writ applicants (since retired) originally belonged to the Audit Office, West Bengal, Calcutta.
The said Office was reorganized with bifurcation with effect from 131984 by the circular dated 26121983 of the Central Government.
The two writ applicants exercised their options and they were allocated to the Audit Office, West Bengal, Calcutta with effect from 131984.
Several litigations were held over the bifurcation and the order of injunction was also passed against the operation of the reorganization.
After the injunction was vacated the scheme had been decided for implementation from 1111985 and the joint cadre staff were required to exercise fresh options.
Then some of the employees filed the OA No. 774 of 1988 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench challenging the implementation of the scheme from 1111985 instead of 131984.
The judgment of that OA case was delivered on 3181989 with the direction for implementation of the scheme with effect from 131984 instead of 1111985.
The two writ applicants became junior to the private respondents because of such bifurcation.
Thus anomaly had been done.
So they prayed for the following reliefs before the Tribunal OA No. 700 of 1998;  "8.
(a) The applicants declare that having regard to the cause of action and the nature of relief prayed for, they have a common interest in the matter and hence it is prayed that relief may be allowed to join together and file a single application in terms of Rule 4(5) of CAT (Proc.)
Rules, 1987.
(b) The Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal may be pleased to pass necessary orders directing the respondents to restore the seniority of the applicants on the basis of the inter-se seniority on the date prior to the date of re-organisation of the cadres with effect from 1st March, 1984, on the basis of their circular issued in memo No. Admn.
I/Re-orgn./1290/239 26121983 (in terms of the judgment on Hon'ble CAT/Calcutta dated 31889 in OA No. 774/1988 as cited hereinabove) and allow them all future promotions in terns of the option exercised by them in response to the said circular dated 26121983 with consequential benefits."
The respondent Authority have raised objections to the application on account of limitation and merits.
3.
As regards limitation the learned Advocate for the Respondent Authority has drawn our attention to the fact that the writ applicant Gopi Ballav Naskar claimed to have known the anomaly sometime late in 1992 that Sri Dulal Chandra Mukherjee (Mandal-I), private respondent, who was junior to him in the cadre had been promoted to the post of the AO on 6.7.1992 while he was promoted to the post of the AO on 18.10.1993 (vide annexure P-4 at page 60).
The other writ applicant Sri Nihar Ranjan Saha claimed to have known anomaly sometime late in 1994 that Mr. Pasupati Biswas who was junior to him in the cadre had been promoted to the post of the AO on 31.5.1993 while he had been promoted to the said post on 20122003.
They claimed that such anomaly was highly prejudicial to their interest (vide annexure P-4 at page 58).
But they filed the writ application only in 1998 after retirement.
They have thus acquiesced and waived their rights.
4.
Having due regard to the facts of the case we find that though the two writ applicants knew the anomaly in 1992 and 1994 respectively, they filed the application before the Tribunal in 1998 that is after their retirement from service.
In spite of knowing the fact that their juniors were promoted to the post of the AO prior to their promotion, they did not make any representation placing their demand before the Respondent Authority.
In such a situation, the Apex Court has held in the case of Chairman, UP Jal Nigam and another v. Jaswant Singh and another reported in 2007 AIR SCW 672 that "whenever it appears that the claimants lost time or while away and did not rise to the occasion in time for filing the writ petition then in such cases, the Court should be very slow in granting the relief to the incumbent.
Secondly, it has also to be taken into consideration the question of acquiescence or waiver on the part of the incumbent whether other parties are going to be prejudiced if the relief is granted..... why the Court should come to the rescue of such person when they themselves are guilty of waiver of acquiescence."
5.
The writ applicants having failed to show that they had filed any representation before the Respondent Authority during their service period, in view of the situation and the said ruling we hold that the two writ applicants have acquiesced and waived their rights.
We hold that the application filed before the Tribunal was time barred.
So the relief could not be granted.
The learned Tribunal has rightly held that the application is barred by limitation.
6.
As regards the merit of the case we find that the writ applicants are not also entitled to restoration of the seniority as prayed for.
7.
Admittedly by the circular dated 26121983 of the Central Government, the office of the Accountant General in different States was bifurcated into (i) Accounts and Entitlement Offices and (ii) Audit Offices with separate cadres of their own and the re-organisation was with effect from 131984.
Admitted that some employees challenged the bifurcation and the scheme had been decided for implementation with effect from 1111985.
Pursuant to the judgment dated 3181989 in OA 774 of 1988 the bifurcation was to be implemented with effect from 131984 instead of 1111985.
Admittedly, while the two writ applicants exercised their option to remain in the office of the Accountant General (Audit)-I, West Bengal, the two private respondents exercised their option to remain in the office of the Director of Audit, Central, Calcutta.
After bifurcation the two offices maintained their separate roll of their respective cadres.
Such transfer was final and permanent.
After bifurcation the two offices did not maintain any common cadre or common seniority list with effect from 131984.
The two establishments having completely separate strength of cadres with effect from 131984, the staff of the two establishments could not be considered as belonging to a common cadre or relation in the matter of promotion on the basis of a common cadre that existed prior to 131984 (vide annexure P-5 at page 62).
8.
It is not disputed that some of the staff of the Director of Audit, Central, Calcutta were posted at Andaman and any employee who exercised their option in the Director of Audit, Central, Calcutta was likely to be posted at Andaman.
The employees having opted in the office of the Accountant General (Audit)-I.
West Bengal were not supposed to be posted at Andaman and many employees might have opted in the office of the Accountant General (Audit)-I, West Bengal in order to avoid such transfer at Andaman.
The learned Advocate for the Respondent Authority has submitted that the writ applicants did not exercise their option to the Director of Audit, Central, Calcutta during the service period and after retirement they had filed the case with the relief mentioned earlier only on the consideration that at present after retirement there was no scope of sending them to Andaman.
This submission, we hold, is very much convincing to us.
That is why, the writ applicants did not take any step during their service period in spite of knowing the fact that their juniors had been promoted prior to them.
The anomaly had occurred because of bifurcation, option exercised by the employees and the fact that the private respondents had taken the risk of being posted at Andaman at any time.
9.
The writ applicants had exercised option and thereby they had conceded to the procedure of bifurcation adopted by the Government of India.
So in the given facts and circumstances the writ applicants and the private respondents belonged to separate offices having inter-se seniority amongst the staff of their respective offices.
The gradation list of the combined Audit and Accounts Offices lost its relevance after bifurcation with effect from 131984.
We hold that the writ applicants could not compare their status with those of the private respondents who belonged to a separate office.
We also hold that since bifurcation inter-se seniority amongst staff of the two offices so formed was re-determined and that the staff allocated to the Accountant General (Audit)-l, West Bengal had no connection or concern with the staff allocated to the office of the Director of Audit, Central, Calcutta.
The writ applicants thus came under the re-determined seniority list of their office and the turn of their promotion should be considered in terms on such re-determined seniority list of their office and not on the basis of any common cadre list as claimed by the two writ applicants.
10.
The learned Advocate for the writ applicants has submitted that the delay in filing the writ application might be condoned and the benefits of the other cases filed by other employees might be extended to the writ applicants.
In support of his submission he has referred to the case of KC Sharma and others v. Union of India and others, reported in (1997)6 SCC 721.
The learned Advocate for the writ applicants has also referred to the case of Lieutenant Governor of Delhi and others v. Dharamla and others, reported in (1990)1 SCC 13 to show that writ applicants being similarly circumstances with the private respondents, are also entitled to the same relief.
The writ applicants have also referred to the cases of the some employees who filed the case Nos. OA 216/91, 237/91, 282/91, 668/98, 669/98 and 402/99 and got the financial benefits according to the order of the learned Tribunal.
We have duly considered the rulings cited by the learned Advocate for the writ applicants and OA cases.
As regards the ruling (1997) 6 SCC 721 we find that the appellants of that case were given some relief in the matter of pension as has been granted by the learned Tribunal in favour of other employees.
In that case the appellants filed representations before the Railway Administration and their representations were rejected whereas the writ applicants did not submit representation to the competent authority.
Therefore, we are of the view that the ruling reported in (1997) 6 SCC 721 is not applicable in the instant case.
As regards the case Nos. OA 216/91, 237/91, 282/91, 668/98, 669/98 and 402/99 also we find that the applicants of those cases filed representation before the competent authority and their representations were rejected.
Then they moved before the learned Tribunal.
But in the instant case the writ applicants did not submit representations to their office while they were in service.
Therefore, we are of the view that the benefits of the case Nos. OA 216/91, 237/91, 282/91, 668/98, 669/98 and 402/99 could not be extended to the writ applicants.
As regards the other ruling (1990) 4 SCC 13, the fact of that case was completely different from that of the present one.
That was a case when services of certain police constables were terminated because of their participation in the agitation.
Subsequently some of them were reinstated after rejection of plea of delay and [aches.
Therefore, this ruling is not also applicable in the instant situation.
Here the writ applicants had accepted the seniority list as re- determined after bifurcation.
11.
The inter-se seniority had been settled in terns of the judgment of the Tribunal dated 3181989 in OA No. 774/88.
The promotion obtained by the private respondents was according to re-determined gradation list after the bifurcation.
So the decision of the Respondent Authority in this regard could not be said to be arbitrary and unreasonable.
Consequently, the promotion of the private respondents could not be said to be violative of the Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The ruling of the case Charanjit Lal v. Union of India, reported in AIR (38) 1951 SC 41 is very much relevant in the instant case, which has decided in para 8 as follows :-  "Meaning and effect of the guaranty - The guaranty of the equal protection of the laws means the protection of equal laws.
It forbids class legislation, but does not forbid classification which rests upon reasonable grounds of distinction.
It does not prohibit legislation, which is limited either in the objects to which it is directed or by the territory within which it is to operate.
It merely requires that all persons subjected to such legislation shall be treated alike under like circumstances and conditions both in the privileges conferred and in the liabilities imposed.
The inhibition of the amendment..... was designed to prevent any person or class of persons from being singled out as a special subject for discriminating and hostile legislation.
It does not take from the states the power to classify either in the adoption of police laws, or tax laws, or eminent domain laws, but permits to them the exercise of a wide scope of discretion, and nullifies what they do only when it is without any reasonable basis.
Mathematical nicety and perfect equality are not required.
Similarity, not identity of treatment, is enough.
If any state of facts can reasonably be conceived to sustain a classification, the existence of that state of facts must be assumed.
One who assails a classification must carry the burden of showing that it does not rest upon any reasonable basis."
(Page 579), 1st Edition of "Constitution of Law" by Prof. Willis.
J  Having summed up the law in this way, the same learned author adds :  "Many different classifications of persons have been upheld as constitutional.
A law applying to one person or one class of persons is constitutional if there is sufficient basis or reason for it."
12.
In the case of State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others reported in (1989) 1 SCC 121 the Apex Court has held that the Courts are not suited to evaluate and compare on the basis of affidavits and pleadings and that the matter should be left to the executive who should appoint an expert body for the purpose.
The Courts should respect such determination unless mala fides are shown.
The relevant paragraph No. 17 and 18 are quoted below :  No. 17.
"On the submissions made by counsel on both sides, two questions arise for our consideration : (i) Whether Bench Secretaries in the High Court of Allahabad are entitled to pay scale admissible to Section Officers ?
and  (ii) Whether the creation of two grades with different pay scales in the cadre of Bench Secretaries who are doing the same or similar work is violative of the right to have "equal pay for equal work" ?
No. 18.
The first question regarding entitlement to the pay scale admissible to Section Officers should not detain us longer.
The answer to the question depends upon several factors.
It does not just depend upon either the nature of work or volume of work done by Bench Secretaries.
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be the some or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it.
The Court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration."
Upon due consideration of the facts and circumstances of the present writ application and upon consideration of the above two rulings we are of the view that the bifurcation had been made on policy basis for smooth functioning of the different parts of the jobs of Audit and Accounts.
It was the policy of the Union of India.
There was no mala fide intention on the part of the Respondent Authority in giving promotion to the private respondents.
Since 131984 the avenues of promotion and all other service matters of the two writ applicants had differed from those of the private respondents, we are of the view that there is no scope of comparison of the services of the writ applicants with the services of the private respondents, subsequent to the bifurcation.
13.
Therefore, the contention of the writ applicants that they and the private respondents were all under the similar circumstances in all respects in the matter relating to promotion, status etc. after re-organisation of the cadres with effect from 131984, we hold, cannot be accepted at all.
14.
In the above given facts and circumstances, the prayer of the writ applicants for direction upon the Respondent Authority to restore the seniority of the writ applicants on the basis of inter-se seniority on the date prior to the date of reorganisation of the cadres with effect from 131984 could not be granted.
We, therefore, are of the view that the writ application cannot be allowed even on merits.
The learned Tribunal has rightly dismissed the application.
We hold that there is nothing to interfere with the impugned order.
15.
Accordingly the writ application is dismissed.
16.
No order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the learned Advocate for the parties on their usual undertakings.
Girish Chandra Gupta, J - I agree.
Petition dismissed.