Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - Pursuant to the desire of the Appeal Court, both the matters are taken up for hearing together.
In the first Writ petitions, Sri Prabir Prasad Roy (C.O.
5448 (W) of 1994) asked for the relief directing the respondent viz. District Inspector of School (SE) Dakshin Dinajpur, Balurghat, to accord necessary sanction or approval of the appointment of the petitioner as an Assistant Teacher of Golabari High School pursuant to the interview held on 25th March, 1989.
Further relief has been sought for to cancel, rescind and withdraw the impugned resolution dated 16th October, 1993 adopted by the Managing Committee of the said School, which is Annexure `D' to the writ petition whereby and whereunder the Managing Committee decided to cancel the selection process and to hold fresh interview on various grounds.
2.
So far as the relief claimed in prayer (a) is concerned, in my view, sanction or approval of the petitioner cannot be granted until and unless the panel is approved by the Managing Committee followed by DI However, ignoring the aforesaid mistake in the prayer, I decided to consider the matter in depth on the facts and circumstances as stated in the petition.
There is no doubt that the petitioner appeared in the selection process on 25th March, 1989.
Four out of Seven called candidates appeared in the said selection process and the petitioner claims to have stood first in the panel.
The Selection Committee formed the panel.
After selection being done and the formation of the panel, it was the turn of the Managing Committee to approve it or not as the relevant recruitment rules then applicable provide that the Selection Committee after preparing the panel on the date of interview shall submit the same to the Managing Committee/ Ad hoc Committee/Administrator.
On being examined by the Managing Committee/ Ad hoc Committee/Administrator, the panel shall be forwarded to the DIS.
(S.E.)
for approval with all relevant papers within 15 days from the date of interview.
Upon examination, it was found by the Managing Committee that the panel could not be sent.
So they decided to hold a fresh interview for various reasons by adopting a resolution.
That resolution is also challenged in the writ petition.
3.
Pursuant to this resolution, even before filing of the present writ petition, fresh prior permission from the District Inspector of Schools was obtained and this permission was granted on 31st December, 1993.
It appears that on 15th January, 1993, the writ petitioner Prabir made a complaint with the District Inspector of Schools.
On the basis of this compliant, on 3rd September, 1993, the District Inspector of Schools caused an enquiry to be made by Assistant Inspector of Schools to the School and report to be submitted in respect of appointment to the post in question.
It appears from the records that the Assistant Inspector submitted such report and recommended fresh interview to be taken of course calling all the candidates who had been called on 31st January, 1989 viz. the petitioner and other six persons along with the sponsored candidates.
Pursuant to this second permission on 29th July, 1997, subsequent interview was held to fill up the same very post.
Before this second interview could be held, the present petitioner filed a writ petition and obtained interim order to the effect that no appointment shall be made until and unless the DI considers the question of approval to the panel and grant approval.
This order has not yet been challenged or upset.
Meanwhile, Mr. Maity's client viz Supriya Deb filed a writ petition in this Court asking relief for granting approval to the panel prepared on the basis of the selection held on 29th July, 1997.
On this writ petition initially the Hon'ble Mr. Justice NK Mitra (as His Lordship then was) was pleased to pass appropriate order granting approval to the panel of the second interview.
However, it was not drawn attention of His Lordship that the previous interim order passed by the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Paritosh Mukherjee was in operation.
As such an appeal was preferred against the aforesaid order at the instance of Prabir.
The Appeal Court set aside the order of Justice NK Mitra and asked this Court to decide this matter once for all.
4.
The learned lawyer appearing for Prabir contends that the selection process in the subsequent interview should be ignored in view of the interim order being in operation.
He submits that it was the fault of the erstwhile Managing Committee who sat over the panel, and it was their duty to approve the same once the panel is prepared by the selection committee.
They had no business to cancel the panel nor to sit over the panel.
He submits that this is the statutory duty which should have been discharged by them and when there is a breach thereof on the part of the statutory authority viz. the Managing Committee, the writ petitioner can very well complain.
5.
In my view, the writ petitioner made a complaint to the DI and he has taken an action asking AI to submit a report to this effect and pursuant to such report a fresh selection process was undertaken preceded by seeking prior permission of the DI and this has happened before filing of the writ petition by Prabir.
I place it on record this report of the AI and follow up decision of the DI has not been challenged by Prabir.
In spite of all these, this Court passed an interim order entertaining the writ petition and asked the DI to accord approval of the panel.
6.
In my view, this writ petition would not have been maintainable but for the interim order passed by this Court.
The learned lawyer appearing for the DI submits that no panel was sent by the then Managing Committee.
As such question of granting approval to the panel in terms of the earlier order of this Court did not and could not arise.
The learned lawyer for the Managing Committee submits that recently a xerox copy of such panel was sent.
Interim order of justice Mukherjee provides that there shall not be any appointment until consideration of DI with regard to the approval of panel is made.
7.
Mr. Maity, learned lawyer appearing for the writ petitioner Supriy who is also added as respondent in the first writ petition contends that the order of the second prior permission of the DI is not under challenge and his permission was granted even before passing the interim order.
So action has been taken pursuant to aforesaid approval of the panel.
In my view, during subsistence of the interim order, no step should have been taken aiming at to give appointment.
However, the School Authority has done it even after passing the aforesaid order.
8.
First question in this case, as contended by Mr. Maity, is whether the order for granting prior permission for selection for second time needs to be examined under the provision of the law.
I think it should be in this case.
9.
The selection process wherein Prabir Prasad Roy was a candidate was held on 25th March, 1989.
As I have already observed that the panel was formed by the Selection Committee.
Therefore, it is appropriate to see what were the recruitment rules at that time being in force.
The relevant portion of the recruitment rules then prevailing is set out hereunder :-  "5.
(a) The Selection Committee after holding interview of the candidates shall prepare a panel of three candidates eligible for appointment in order of merit.
However, for the posts reserved for SC or ST or for subject like Physics, Chemistry or English three candidates may not be found suitable for preparing the panel or three candidates eligible for appointment.
In such case the panel may be composed of less than candidates.
(b) For selection and preparation of panel of candidates the Selection Committee shall assess only those qualifications of the candidates which are relevant to the post(s) and award marks to each candidate in the manner given in the chart below.
Marks will also be awarded for experience, extra curricular activities and performance in the interview in the manner prescribed in the chart below and submit the same to the Managing Committee of the School with their definite recommendations.
(c) The panel will be framed with average of marks awarded by the members of the Selection Committee.
If any member of the Selection Committee wants to keep his opinion reserved the average will be calculated on the basis of marks awarded by other members.
(d) The Managing Committee after due consideration shall forward the panel so prepared by the Selection Committee which all relevant papers to the Dist.
Inspector of Schools (S.E.)
for approval and authorise the Secretary or Administrator to issue letter of appointment in order of the position in the panel after receiving the panel duly approved by the DI of Schools (S.E.)
The DI of Schools (S.E.)
will convey his decision ordinarily within a fortnight from the date of receipt of the panel.
The panel will remain valid for one year with effect from the date of approval of the DIS.
(SE) despite any of the empanelled candidate either does not join or leaves the post after serving a short period.
Such candidates who do not join within three months from receipt of appointment letter will be removed from the panel."
10.
Upon fair and plain reading of the aforesaid Rule, it will appear that the task of forming the panel was rested with the Selection Committee and such panel was required to be submitted to the Managing Committee.
It appears that three out of four candidates were chosen as empanelled candidates by the Selection Committee wherein the petitioner's name appeared to be the first candidate.
While submitting the panel the Selection Committee shall make their own recommendations definitely.
This part of the duty appears to have been discharged by the Selection Committee.
Thereafter, it is the duty of the Managing Committee to do the needful.
In terns of Rule 5(d), the Managing Committee has to consider the same duly and then shall forward the panel so prepared by the Selection Committee with all relevant papers to the DI of Schools for approval and shall authorise the Secretary or Administator to issue letter of appointment in order of the position of the panel after receiving the panel duly approved by the DI of Schools (S.E.).
11.
From the records, it appears that the then Managing Committee undertook the task of consideration of the panel and they examined the pros and cons of the same and they found the selection undertaken by them should not be accepted.
In my view, under the provisions of the rule then prevailing the Managing Committee has no jurisdiction or authority to take a decision on the question of legality and validity of the selection process.
They are within their right to consider and discuss and they can observe and record their point of view with regard to the legality and validity of formation of panel and the selection process as well.
They could not, under this Rule, take a decision cancelling the selection process.
Their duty was to forward everything with their observation and deliberations to the DI or the AI They should have awaited the decision of the DI on the papers being sent him.
Instead they had taken a decision of their own that the fresh selection process had to be undertaken for good or bad reasons.
I am of the view that they have no power or jurisdiction to do so.
Of course, subsequently the decision of the Managing Committee though taken illegally for cancelling the selection process has been apparently approved by the DI and the DI has granted prior permission afresh for recruitment of the candidate in the same post.
Pursuant to his permission, selection process had been undertaken in the year 1997.
Therefore, it cannot be said that this granting of prior permission of the DI tantamounts, to the rejection of approval to the panel formed previously in the selection process.
This order of DI granting prior permission subsequently has not been challenged as I have already observed but by granting this permission it cannot be construed that prior selection process is nullified automatically.
The law requires that the decision as regards approval had to be taken by the DI expressly but such decision has not been taken as yet, because as contended by the learned lawyer for the State, no paper was serf to the DI I am of the view that this excuse cannot be a ground or basis for abdication of the statuary duty to be discharged by the DI  12.
The recruitment process subsequent to permission granted by the DI had already taken place.
The selection process was over.
In my view, this selection process ought not to have been undertaken because of the restraint order passed by Paritosh Mukherjee, J (as His Lordship then was) by an interim order Whether the order was passed ex parte or not is rot material but the effect of the order cannot be taken away even if the subsequent action being taken in ignorance thereof Keeping in view the aforesaid sequence of events, I think both the matters can be disposed of by the following order.
13.
It appears that original papers relating to the previous selection process and formation of panel, papers and documents were not sent to the DI If the same are available and lying with the School, the same shall be sent to the DI If those are not available, then the xerox copies of the papers including the observations of the then Managing Committee and the panel shall be sent to the DI The DI shall take decision on the question of approval after having considered the observation and deliberation of the then Managing Committee and other accompanying papers for fonmation of panel by the Selection Committee.
He shall follow the old recruitment rules which were in vogue and as has been quoted above.
Mr. Maity of course said that approval of the Managing Committee to the panel after the same being formed by the Selection Committee was needed.
I cannot accept this argument, as at that point of time, unlike the present rule relating to approval of the panel by the Managing Committee was not provided expressly.
I find there is a difference between the text of the previous rules relating to the step required to be taken by the Managing Committee and the present one.
Previously, the Managing Committee had the authority to consider only the selection process and panel but they did not have any power to grant approval at their own.
The approval which was the only one was to be granted by the DI In the present corresponding rule, I find the Managing Committee on receipt of the panel shall consider and approve of the same and thereafter they shall send all the papers to the DI who in his turn will grant approval formally.
Therefore, it appears that two approvals are needed now, one by the Managing Committee followed by the District Inspector of Schools.
In this context, the text of the present Rules viz. Rule 6(n) is quoted hereunder :-  "The Selection Committee after preparing the panel on the date of interview shall submit the same to the Managing Conunittee.
Ad hoc Committee Administrtor with definite rrnmmendation.
On being approved by the Managing Committee.
Ad hoc Committee after due consideration the panel shall be forwarded to the DIS.
(SE) with all relevant papers within 15 days from the date of interview.
DIS.
(SE) shall convey his decision ordinarily within one month from the date of receipt of the panel."
The aforesaid Rules came into force on and from 20th May, 1993.
14.
After examining all things if the DI thinks the previous panel needs to be approved he shall take a decision within a period of our weeks from the date of communication of the order.
If the panel is approved as above, then the subsequent recruitment process will stand set aside and cancelled because in terms of the interim order of Justice Paritosh Mukherjee, J, no appointment can be given without consideration and approval of the previous panel.
If for any reason, the previous panel is not approved by the DI for which reasons must be given in writing then the panel formed subsequently shall be considered for approval in the event the same is sent in complying with the provisions of Rule 6(n) as above.
This can be done simultaneously and upon hearing and giving prior notice to the writ petitioners viz. Prabir Prasad Roy and Smt. Supriya Deb and the school Authority concerned.
If there is any difficulty with regard to the interpretation of law then the DI can take decision on the particular subject and whose decision under the law is otherwise binding.
This exercise shall be completed within four weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Needless to mention after the decision being arrived at by the DI he shall issue necessary directions and the School Authority shall appoint such person so to be chosen by the DI The School Authority is directed to send all the papers in relation to both the panels, if not already sent, within seven days, from the date of receipt of this order.
15.
Both the writ petitions are disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
16.
Let xerox certified copies of this order be given to the learned lawyers for the parties on urgent basis, if applied for.
Order accordingly.