Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - The petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
A prayer has been made for issuance of directions to the respondents to pay the appropriate retiral benefits to the petitioner as demanded by him.
2.
The petitioner at one stage had earlier approached this Court for the aforesaid relief through CWP No. 10676 of 1992.
The aforesaid petition was decided by this Court vide order dated November 23, 2001.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab was directed to ascertain the claim of the petitioner by calculating the rightful amount, which is due to him, after affording a hearing to the parties.
It was further directed that any amount found due to the petitioner which still remains unpaid, would be paid alongwith an interest @ 18% per annum.
3.
In pursuance of the aforesaid directions, the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh, afforded a hearing to the parties and passed an order dated June 19, 2002, whereby it was found that an amount of Rs. 1,78,625/- was the total amount payable to the petitioner on account of his claim of retiral benefits.
It was further found that an amount of Rs. 83,476/- stood already paid, therefore, the aforesaid amount would be adjusted.
The remaining amount was directed to be paid alongwith an interest @ 18%.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated June 19, 2002 has been appended as Annexure P-7 with the petition.
4.
The petitioner has still felt aggrieved and has approached this Court.
5.
The primary grievance of the petitioner is that while calculating the aforesaid retiral benefit, the Registrar has ignored the law laid down by this Court in the case of Manjit Singh Sodhi v. Punjab State Cooperative Bank Limited and others, CWP No. 1182 of 1997, decided on November 27, 1997.
It has further been claimed that the law laid down by the Apex Court in Accountant General Bihar and another v. N Bakshi, AIR 1962 SC 505, has also not been followed.
On that basis, the grievance is that the total emoluments which were being received by the petitioner at the time of his superannuation, have not been taken into consideration while fixing the amount of gratuity.
6.
During the course of arguments, both the learned counsel for parties have agreed that since the only controversy involved in the present petition is with regard to the calculations of the due amount payable to the petitioner on account of the retiral benefits, therefore, it would be appropriate if the matter is referred for adjudication to the Accountant General, Punjab.
7.
In view of the aforesaid agreement between the learned counsel for the parties, the present petition is disposed of and the Accountant General, Punjab is directed to consider the claim made by the petitioner with regard to his entitlement of gratuity.
The Accountant General, Punjab may either adjudicate the claim of the petitioner himself or may entrust the same to any other officer, competent to adjudicate the aforesaid claim.
In the aforesaid adjudication, it would be open to the petitioner to file a detailed representation before the Accountant General, Punjab.
Likewise, the respondent-Punjab State Cooperative Bank Limited, Chandigarh, would also be entitled to refute the aforesaid claim made by the petitioner by filing an appropriate reply.
8.
On receipt of the aforesaid representation from the petitioner and reply from the respondent-bank, the adjudicating officer shall adjudicate the claim of the petitioner within a period of four months from the date of filing of the representation.
9.
The parties, through their learned counsel are directed to appear before the Accountant General, Punjab on August 17, 2004 at 10.00 A.M.  A copy of this order be given dasti, on payment of usual charges to the parties and be also sent for implementation to the Accountant General, Punjab.
Order accordingly.