Surya Kant, J - Shri Sant Ram and 315 other petitioners have approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to grant them parity in pay scale with Clerks as, according to them, the post of Senior Laboratory Attendants against which they are working have always been equated with that of Clerks.
Petitioners have also sought a direction to provide promotional avenues to them, as also to frame the departmental service rules.
2.
The petitioners are working as Senior Laboratory Attendants in Government High /Higher Secondary Schools in the State of Punjab.
They possess the academic qualification of Matriculation with Science subjects.
According to them, the Senior Laboratory Attendants were granted pay scale of Rs. 90-140 with effect from 121968, which, on their representation, was enhanced to Rs. 100-160 vide order dated 121971 but with retrospective effect from 121968.
The pay scale of the petitioners was further revised to Rs. 400-600 with effect from 111978; similar pay scale was granted to the Clerks, the lowest post in class III service in the general category of posts.
On the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, pay scales were further revised in the State of Punjab and consequently, the Senior Laboratory Attendants, namely the petitioners as well as the Clerks were granted the revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/- with an initial start of Rs. 1,000/- with effect from 111986.
However, the State of Punjab vide the notification issued on June 15, 1990 (Annexure P-1) divided the cadre of Clerks in the ratio of 20:40:40, 20% of the junior-most Clerks were granted the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 with initial start of Rs. 1,000/-, the next 40% were designated as Senior Clerks and were granted the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100 and the remaining 40% senior- most Clerks were designated as Junior Assistants and were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640.
However, no similar revision of pay scales was granted to the Senior Laboratory Attendants and they continued in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 which was granted to the junior-most Clerks to the extent of 20% of their cadre strength.
According to the petitioners, the Senior Laboratory Attendants have been further discriminated in the matter of grant of revised pay scale vis-a-vis various other categories of employees including the Record Supervisor working in the Civil Secretariat, Proof Readers working in the Financial Commissioner's office, Dispensers Unani and Dispensers in the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Stewards and Head English Cook in the Department of Home Guards, Welfare Workers in the Department of Sainik Welfare.
The afore-mentioned categories of employees were initially granted the scale of Rs. 400-600 prior to 111986 but in the subsequent revisions, all of them were placed in the pay scale of not less than Rs. 1200-2100; the Senior Laboratory Attendants have been further subjected to discrimination by not re-designating them as Laboratory Assistants even though in terms of the government circular dated June 24, 1970 (Annexure P-2), the Senior Laboratory Attendants, who possess qualifications of Matriculation with Science, are entitled to be designated as Laboratory Attendants.
The petitioners have further complained that neither they are provided with any avenues of promotion nor any kind service rules have been framed.
The petitioners have repeatedly represented to the concerned authorities including the respondents, but in vain.
3.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
A preliminary objection has been taken that prior to the notification dated January 23, 1984 (Annexure R-1), all the Laboratory Attendants were Class IV employees and vide the afore-mentioned notification only the posts of Senior Laboratory Attendants, which were held by at least Matriculate persons, were converted from Class IV to Class III and were in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioners regarding equation of the posts of Senior Laboratory Attendants with that of Clerks on the plea that while the petitioners were working in class IV cadre, the Clerks were working in Class III from the very beginning.
With regard to the equation of posts, following stand has been taken in para 5 of the written statement:-  "That before 2311984 all the petitioners were working in Class IV cadre.
Thereafter the posts of the Laboratory Attendants were included in Class III.
The qualification and other conditions are totally different with each others.
Moreover the nature of duties are also different.
Therefore the posts of the Senior Laboratory Attendants are not equated with the posts of Clerks."
4.
Similarly, in respect of the comparison made by the petitioners vis-a-vis other posts in different departments to stake claim for the pay scale of at least Rs. 1200-2100, the respondents have taken the following stand in para 9 of the written statement :-  "In reply to this para it is submitted that petitioners have no relevancy with the other categories like the Record Supervisors because the duties and responsibilities of both the categories are not the same."
5.
It is the case of the respondents that the claim of the petitioners to re- designate the post of Senior Laboratory Attendants as Laboratory Assistant was considered by the government but was rejected.
Regarding framing of the service rules, para 14 of the written statement reads as under :-  "In this connection it is submitted that prior to 2311984 these posts were in Class IV category for which separate set of service rules was in existence.
It is further submitted that new set of rules is under the consideration of the Department/Govt.
and are under process of approval of the competent authority."
6.
I have heard Shri Amit Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri KK Goel, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab on behalf of the respondents and have perused the record.
7.
It is a well settled law that the matter with regard to the question of posts and parity of pay scales falls exclusively within the domain of the specialised agencies like Pay Commissions and the final decision in this regard has to be taken by the competent government.
The courts have hardly any expertise to adjudicate upon the intricate issues like equation of posts for the purposes of grant of equal pay scales.
Reference in this regard may be made to State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19 and Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers' Union v. Union of India and others, JT 1991(1) SC 60 : 1991(2) SCT 95 (SC).
It is, however, equally well settled that if there is a consciously taken decision to equate two posts for the purpose of granting pay scale, it is impermissible to discriminate between incumbents of these posts at a subsequent stage while placing them in the revised pay scales so long as the decision to equate the two posts is not reversed on certain valid grounds.
Wherever, there is equation of two posts, the right to claim same revised pay scale has been recognised in a series of judgments by this Court including the Division Bench judgment in The State of Punjab v. Dr. Gautam Mahajan and others, 1994(2) RSJ 102 : 1994(1) SCT 776 (P&H), as well as by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Ltd and another v. Union of India and others, AIR 1991 SC 1367 : 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC).
8.
From the pleadings referred to above, particularly, in view of the stand taken by the respondents in para 5 of the written statement, no equation of the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant vis-a-vis Clerk is discernible.
In the absence of any conscious decision equating the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant with that of Clerks, I am of the view that the petitioners have no legal right to claim the same revised higher pay scales as have been granted to the cadre of Clerks.
Further, in the light of difference in the nature of duties, qualifications and other conditions of service, even the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" cannot be invoked by the petitioners.
I, therefore, find no merit so far as the petitioners' claim for the grant of higher revised pay scales, at par with the Clerks, is concerned.
9.
Coming to the prayer seeking direction to frame the departmental service rules, I find from the stand taken by the respondents in para 14 of the written statement that a new set of rules is under consideration of the department/government and the same are under process for approval of the competent authority.
It has, however, been stated at the Bar by Shri Goel that the rules have yet not been notified.
I find no valid reason for the inordinate delay in the taking of any final decision in this regard.
If there are notified statutory service rules, the same not only bring transparency in the functioning of the department, they also minimise brickerings among the employees as they know before-hand regarding the mode of determining their seniority, promotional avenues and other conditions of service, etc., leaving hardly any element of discretion in the hands of the executive.
It is for the betterment and efficiency of the administration that service rules should be framed and notified at the earliest.
I, therefore, direct the respondents to take a final decision regarding framing of the new set of service rules governing the service conditions of Senior Laboratory Attendants and to notify the same within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment, if not notified already.
10.
Coming to the relief sought by the petitioners for providing avenues of promotion to them it is suffice to quote the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CSIR and another v. KGS Bhatt and another, 1989(4) SCC 635 :-  "It is often said and indeed, adroitly, an organisation public or private does not `hire a hand' but engages or employs a whole man.
The person is recruited by an organisation not just for a job, but for a whole career.
One must, therefore, be given an opportunity to advance.
This is the oldest and most important feature of the free enterprise system.
The opportunity for advancement is a requirement for progress of any organisation.
It is an incentive for personnel development as well.
Every management must provide realistic opportunities for promising employees to move upward.
"The organisation that fails to develop a satisfactory procedure for promotion is bound to pay a severe penalty in terms of administrative costs, misallocation of personnel, low morale, and ineffectual performance, among both non- managerial employees and their supervisors."
There cannot be any modern management much less any career planning, manpower development, management development etc. which is not related to a system of promotions.
The appellant appears to have overlocked this basic requirement of management so far as respondent 1 was concerned till NR and AS was introduced."
Their Lordships reiterated the afore-mentioned view in a later judgment rendered in Dr. Ms. O.Z Hussain v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 311 and held as under :-  "This Court, has on more than one occasion, pointed out that provision for promotion increases efficiency of the public service while stagnation reduces efficiency and makes the service ineffective.
Promotion is thus a normal incidence of service.
There too is no justification why while similarly placed officers in other Ministries would have the benefit of promotion, the non- medical `A' Group scientists in the establishment of Director General of Health Services should be deprived of such advantage.
In a welfare state, is necessary that there should be an efficient public service and therefore, it should have been the obligation of the Ministry of Health to attend to the representations of the Council and its members and provide promotional avenue for this category of officers.
It is, therefore, necessary that on the model of rules framed by the Ministry of Science and Technology with such alterations as may be necessary, appropriate rules should be framed within four months from now providing promotional avenue for the `A' category scientists in the non-medical wing of the Directorate."
In a recent judgment in the case of State of Tripura and others v. KK Roy, 2001 AIR SCW 1 : 2004(1) SCT 331 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has reiterated the afore-mentioned view holding that :  "It is not a case where there existed an avenue for promotion.
It is also not a case where the State intended to make amendments in the promotional policy.
The appellant being a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution should have created promotional avenues for the respondent having regard to its constitutional obligations adumbrated in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Despite its constitutional obligations, the State cannot take a stand that as the respondent herein accepted the terms and conditions of the offer of appointment knowing fully well that there was no avenue of promotion, he cannot resile therefrom.
It is not a case where the principles of estoppel or waiver should be applied having regard to the constitutional functions of the State.
It is not disputed that the other States in India, Union of India having regard to the recommendations made in this behalf by the Pay Commission introduced the scheme of Assured Career Promotion in terms whereof the incumbent of a post if not promoted within a period of 12 years is granted one higher scale of pay and another upon completion of 24 years if in the meanwhile he had not been promoted despite existence of promotional avenues."
Guided by the above enunciated principles of law, I am of the considered opinion that if the State of Punjab has not framed any scheme like "Assured Career Progression" etc., it should sympathetically consider to provide some promotional avenues to the Senior Laboratory Attendants in the new set of service rules, of course, without comprising either on the technical qualifications or the specialised experience, if so required for a higher post.
With the afore-mentioned directions, the writ petition stands disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.