GS Singhvi, J - Intense competition for admission in the professional courses in Medical and Technical Education is the cause for filing hundreds of writ petitions in every High Court in the country.
The chain of litigation starts with the issuance of admission notice/prospectus for holding entrance test and continues even after the session/semester is over.
By and large, these petitions involve challenge to the conditions of eligibility, irregularities allegedly committed in the conduct of examination or determination of merit, claim for admission in a better institution or against free seat.
The experience has shown that only some of the petitioners have a genuine grievance and a large majority of petitions are filed as a chance litigation with the hope that the petitioners would get some or the other relief.
The case in hand is also an example of chance litigation.
The prayer of the petitioners is that corrigendum dated 2612003 issued by Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra (for short 'the University') may be quashed and it may be directed to hold counselling in terms of Annexure P-1 and adjust them against free seats in Dental College, Rohtak as per their merit.
2.
For deciding the issue raised in the petition, we may briefly notice the facts :  Vide Haryana Govt. notification dated 18122001, Vice Chancellor of the University was appointed as the competent authority to conduct the entrance examination for admission in MBBS/BDS/MS/MD/PG Diploma and MDS course and Ayurvedic Courses in Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges in the State of Haryana for the year 2002.
Thereupon, the University issued Information Brochure which contained instructions/information for the students and conditions of eligibility for admission to the entrance examination and the main courses.
For the sake of reference, the relevant extracts of the Information Brochures are reproduced below Medical College : 1.
Pt. BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak.
Pt. BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, an affiliated institute of MD University, Rohtak provides facilities for MBBS, MD, MS and various Post Graduate Diploma Courses.
2.
Dental College, Rohtak The Dental College, Rohtak, an affiliated college of MD University, Rohtak provides facilities for BDS and MDS course.
3.
D.A.V.
Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
The DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar, an affiliated college of Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra provides facilities for BDS and MDS course.
4.
BRS Institute of Medical Sciences (Dental College and Hospital) Village Kotbilla, Panchkula.
The BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla (Panchkula) an affiliated college of Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra provides facilities for BDS Course.
5.
MM College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana (Ambala).
The MM College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana (Ambala), an affiliated college of Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra provides facilities for BDS Course.
Note : The admission in the college will be made only on receipt of yearly renewal/final approval from the Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi.
In case sanction is not received from the Central Govt. up to the date of Counselling the decision of the Competent Authority shall be final in this regard."
6.
That according to the prospectus the following seats were given to the different colleges : BDS Course 2.
Dental College, Rohtak  Total Seats : 60 (a) Seats to be filled on All India Basis by CBSE New Delhi 09 (b) NRI Seats 09 (c) Seats available 42  (d) Open Seats 21 (e) Reserved Seats 21  i) Scheduled Castes : Block A 04  Block B 04 Total 08 ii) Backward Classes :  Block A 06  Block B 05 Total 11 (Except socially advanced persons/sections i.e. creamy layer as defined by Haryana Govt. Letter No. 1170SW(1) 95 dated 7.6.95) and further clarification regarding issuance of certificate to Haryana Backward Classes vide Haryana Govt. Letter No. 22/36/2000-3 GS III dated 9th August, 2000 (Appendix-L(a)., +  iii) Physically Handicapped 01 As defined in Haryana Govt. letter No. 22/89/97-3GSIII dated 7th August, 2000 (Annexure A-II and No. 18/52/2000 UNP (i) Dt. 1842001, Annexur3e A- III) + iv) Nominee of Govt of India 01 Note : (i) The Distribution of seats is provisional and is subject to final decision of the State Govt. + (ii) The Admission against the above seats will be made on provisional basis subject to the approval of the Dental Council of India, New Delhi.
+ 3.
DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
Total Seats 40 (a) Free Seats 20 (b) Paid Seats 20  Distribution of Free Seats : (i) Open Seats 10 (ii) Reserved Seats 10 i) Scheduled Castes : Block A 02  Block B 02 Total 04  ii) Backward Classes :  Block A 03  Block B 02 Total 05 (Except socially advanced persons/sections i.e. creamy layer as defined by Haryana Govt. Letter No. 1170SW(1) 95 dated 7.6.95 and further clarification regarding issuance of certificate to Haryana Backward Classes vide Haryana Govt. letter No. 22/36/2000-3 GS III, 9th August 2000 (Appendix-L(a), +  iii) Physical handicapped 01 As defined in Haryana Govt. letter No. 22189/97-3GSIII dated 7th August, 2000 (Annexure A-II and No. 18/52-2000 UNP (i) dated 1842001, Annexure A- III.
+ i) Paid seats 14 ii) Paid Seats for NRI 06 Total 20 4.
BRS Institute of Medical Sciences (Dental College and Hospital Village Kotbilla), Panchkula.
Total Seats 60 (a) Free Seats 30 (b) Paid Seats 30 Distribution of Free Seats : (i) Open Seats 15 (ii) Reserved Seats 15 i) Scheduled Castes : Block A 03 Block B 03 Total 06 ii) Backward Classes : Block A 05 Block B 03 Total 08 (Except socially advanced persons/sections i.e. creamy layer (as defined by Haryana Govt. Letter No. 1170SW(1) 95 dated 7.6.95) and further clarification regarding issuance of certificate to Haryana Backward Classes vide Haryana Govt. letter No. 22/36/2000-3 GS III 9th August 2000 (Appendix-L(a), +  iii) Physically Handicapped 01 As defined in Haryana Govt. letter No. 22/89/97-3GS-111 dated 7th August 2000 (Annexure A-II and No. 18/52-2000 UNP (i) Dt. 1842001 Annexure A-III)  Distribution of Paid Seats : i) Paid Seats 21  ii) Paid Seats for NRI 09 5.
MM College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana (Ambala).
Note : The admission in this college will be made only on receipt of yearly renewal/final approval from the Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi.
In case sanction is not received from the Central Govt. upto the date of Counselling the decision of the Competent Authority shall be final in this regard.
Total Seats 110 Category A (Free Seats) 50 (a) Open Seats 25 (b) Reserved Seats 25 (i) Scheduled Castes : Block-A 05 Block-B 05 Total 10 (ii) Backward Classes : Block-A 08 Block-B 05 Total 13 (Except socially advanced persons/sections i.e. creamy layer as defined by Haryana Govt. Letter No. 11 70SW91) 95 dated 7.6.95) and further clarification regarding issuance of certificate to Haryana Backward Classes vide Haryana Govt. Letter No. 22/36/2000-3 GS III 9th August, 2000 (Appendix-L (a), +  (c) Physically Handicapped 02 As defined in Haryana Govt. letter No. 22/89/97-3GSIII dated 7th August 2000 (Annexure A-II and No. 18/52-2000 UNP (i) dated 1842001, Annexure A-III).
+ Category B (Payment/NRI seats) 50 (i) Open Paid Seats 35 (ii) NRI/Foreign/NRI Sponsored Candidates 15 Total 50 After publication of Information Brochure the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) sent letter D.O.F.
No. V120525/9/2000-PMS dated June 14, 2002 to the Govt. of Haryana conveying its permission/approval only for 20 seats in Dental College, Rohtak, 40 seats in DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar, 60 seats in BRS Dental College and Hospital, Kotbilla, Panchkula, and also declined permission for admission against 40 seats in Government Dental College, Rohtak, 60 seats in Sri Baba Mastnath Dental College and Hospital, Asthal Bohar, Rohtak, and 100 seats in M M College of Dental Science and Research, Mullana, Ambala.
The relevant extracts of that letter are reproduced below :  "As you are kindly aware, the admission to Medical and Dental Colleges, both private and government, are required to be made only after they have been accorded Central Government permission or renewal of Central Government permission, as the case may be.
Any admission made otherwise is irregular and attract the provisions of Section 10B of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 and Dentists (Amendment) Act, 1993 and the Dental qualification of such irregularly admitted students would not be recognised.
2.
However, it is observed that the managements of the Medical and Dental Colleges commence admitting students even without securing formal permission from the Central Government or renewal of the permission through suppression of the actual status of permission/Renewal of permission and approved admission capacity in respect of their respective medical and dental colleges for their own benefit at considerable risk to the career and prospectus of the students.
3.
With a view to curbing this tendency among the college authorities through creating awareness among the students and their parents with regard to the status of medical and dental colleges in the country, it is proposed to notify in the press that the students aspiring to take joint MBBS/BDS Course and parents of such students should verify the admission status of the concerned colleges for the year 2002-2003 from the Central Govt/Medical Council of India/Dental Council of India before seeking admissions in any medical or dental college.
Further, a complete list separately of the medical colleges and dental colleges in the country with their respective admission capacity and status for the year 2002-2003 is being furnished to the Press Information Bureau for dissemination to the public.
This information can also be accessed on this Ministry's Website, viz., http:/mohfw.nic.in.
4.
For your convenience and perusal, I am enclosing a list of all the medical/dental colleges located in your State/UT with their respective admission capacity and status for the year 2002-2003 (As on 1162002).
Any further addition/alteration in this status list of medical/dental colleges will be communicated to you as and when warranted.
5.
We shall very much appreciate it, if you could kindly note the same and arrange to include the eligible dental colleges in the Seat Matrix for the academic sessions 2002-2003 and also arrange to give publicity, in widely circulated newspapers (English and Major Regional Language) in Your State/UT in respect of the medical and dental colleges for further information of the students and their parents.
xx xx xx xx Haryana 1.
Dental College Medical Campus, Rohtak-124001 (Haryana) Recognised  Govt. 20 
20 to 60 Permitted Not permitted 2.
DAV Centenary Dental College, Model Town, Yamuna Nagar, 135001(Haryana) Recognised Private 40 Permitted  3.
BRS Dental College and Hospital, Kotbilla, Distt.
Panchkula (Haryana) Recognised Private 60 Permitted 4.
Shri Baba Mastnath Dental College & Hospital, Asthal Bohar, Rohtak (Haryana) Approved Private 60 Not Permitted 5.
Maharishi Markendeshwar College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana (Ambala) Approved Private 100 Not permitted" The petitioners appeared in the entrance test conducted by the University on June 30, 2002, and qualified the same.
They appeared in the counselling held in September, 2002, and on the basis of their placement in the merit list, they were admitted against free and paid teats in DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar and BRS Dental College and Hospital, Kotbilla, Panchkula.
After the finalisation of admission against the approved seats in the B.D.S.
Course, the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health), vide its letter F.No.
V12017/9/99-PMS dated 312003 conveyed its approval for increase of seats from 20 to 60 in second year B.D.S.
Course in Government Dental College, Rohtak.
The relevant extracts of letter dated 312003 are reproduced below :-  "I am directed to refer to the recommendations of the DCI vide letter No. DE- 3(IG)-2002/4521, dated 20th November, 2002 and the compliance report submitted by the College Authorities vide their letter dated 27th November on the subject noted above and to convey the approval of the Central Government to renew the permission in respect of the Government Dental College, Rohtak for 2nd year BDS Course i.e. for 2002-2003 for increase of admission capacity from 20 to 60 admissions.
2.
This permission is valid for one year ie for admitting one batch of 60 students during 2002-2003.
No admissions in excess of 20 admissions shall be made during 2003-2004 without renewal of permission for 3rd year for increase of seats from 20 to 60 by the Central Government.
In case any admissions are made in violation of this condition, the same would be treated as irregular and action under Section 10B of the Dentist (Amendment) Act, 1993 will be initiated.
3.
Further the College may take up with the State Government of Haryana to expedite amendment of recruitment rules for the post of Principal in order to bring them in conformity with the DCI norms and promote the eligible Professor to the post of Principal."
Similarly, permission was granted for admission against 100 seats in the B.D.S.
Course in Sri Govind Tricentary Dental College, Hospital and Research Institute Budhera, District Gurgaon for the session 2002-2003.
For the purpose of making admissions against the additional seats sanctioned by the Central Government, the University issued notice Annexure P-1, which was published in The Tribune dated 1912003 inviting applications for counselling from the candidates who had qualified the entrance test held in 2002 including those who had already been admitted in various Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges of Haryana.
The petitioners applied for admission in Dental College, Rohtak.
However, instead of holding counselling in terms of Annexure P-1, the University issued corrigendum Annexure P-2 incorporating the decision taken by the State Government that admission against the newly sanctioned seats will be made by conducting a fresh entrance test.
3.
The petitioners have challenged the corrigendum by asserting that the decision taken by the State Government to hold fresh entrance test for admission against the seats sanctioned by the Central Government vide letter dated 3,12003 is vitiated by arbitrariness and malafides.
They have averred that the impugned decision has been taken under pressure from the Management of private Dental College.
They have further averred that after having invited applications for counselling from the students who had passed entrance test held in June 2002, the University is estopped from holding fresh entrance test and the right acquired by them to be admitted against 40 seats sanctioned for Dental College, Rohtak, cannot be stultified by holding fresh entrance test, more-so because the newly admitted candidates will not be in a position to complete the course in such a short time.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Haryana, it has been averred that even though a total number of 60 seats were shown to be available in the Information Brochure issued by the University for admission in the B.D.S.
Course in Government Dental College, Rohtak, admissions were made only against 20 seats because vide letter dated 1462002, the Central Government had sanctioned only those many seats.
It has been further averred that for making admissions against the seats sanctioned by the Central Government vide letter dated 312003, the University did issue notice Annexure P-1 but keeping in view the fact that shifting of students already admitted in different colleges will disturb the existing arrangement, the State Government decided that the seats be filled up by holding fresh entrance test and in pursuance of that decision, the University issued the impugned corrigendum.
As regards the petitioners' claim for admission against the seats sanctioned on January 3, 2003, the stand of the State Government is that after having taken admission on the basis of counselling held in September 2002, they cannot seek admission against the newly sanctioned seats.
5.
The stand of the University is similar to the one taken by the State Government.
In the reply filed on its behalf, it has been averred that if the petitioners, who are already admitted to B.D.S.
Course in the Colleges affiliated to the University are allowed admission against the newly created seats, then it would lead to lot of dislocation, sliding from one institution to another and litigation and, therefore, it was decided to hold fresh entrance test.
6.
At this stage, it will be appropriate to mention that in pursuance of the direction given by the Court on 25.2.2003, Sh. Bhagwati Prashad, Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government, Haryana, Health and Medical Education Department, filed additional affidavit dated 2722003, in which he has made the following statement :  1.
That Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Department, New Delhi vide their letter No. V12017/32/2001-FMS, dated 29th October, 2002 (Annexure R-1) granted permission to Sri Govind Tricentenary Dental College, Budhera, District Gurgaon for establishing a new dental college with an annual intake capacity of 100 students in BDS course for the session 2002-2003.
The Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak has also granted provisional affiliation to this institute for starting 1st BDS year course vide their letter No. CEII/2002/60058, dated 23122002 (Annexure R-II).
2.
That Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Department, New Delhi vide their letter No. V1201/9/99-PMS, dated 3rd January 2002, (Annexure R-III) granted approval of the Central Government to renew the permission in respect of the Government Dental College, Rohtak for increase of admission capacity in BDS course from 20 to 60 for the session 2002-2003.
3.
That the Dashmesh Educational Charitable Trust, New Delhi and Director, Pandit Bhagwati Dayal Sharma, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak made a request to Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra vide their letters dated 31122002 and 7.1.2003 respectively to fill up the additional seats of BDS Course during this session.
The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra while listed out the problems, like dislocation of students and shifting from one institution to other and from paid seats to free seats etc. in making admissions at this belated stage sent a request to State Government to take appropriate decision in the matter vide their letter No. 350, dated 1512003.
The Government took note of the problems listed out by Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
But on the other hand Government also considered that : i) Refusal to allow will amount to denial of 140 BDS seats during the current academic session to the interested candidates.
They will miss this opportunity for all time to come.
ii) Refusal may adversely effect the case for getting these seats in the next year.
iii) The refusal may also lead to a litigation by the management of Sri Govind Tricentenary Dental College, Budhera.
4.
After due deliberations/discussions and keeping in view the totality of the circumstances it was thought that it will be the best course if admission of these 140 new seats is made by conducting a fresh entrance test by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
Academic matters like completion of the course, schedule to conduct examination and eligibility to appear in the examination though figured during the discussion yet Government did not formally take any decision on them as they fall within purview of the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and the concerned college.
The Colleges and University were already in picture as the former had approached for admission and latter had already granted affiliation (provisionally in case of Sri Govind Tricentenary Dental College, Budhera).
Further, as per information supplied by both the Vice-Chancellors as also the Principal, Government Dental College, Rohtak, that to be eligible to appear in the 1st BDS examination, the students are required to have : i) study of one academic year.
ii) completion of 75% attendance of the full course.
It is stated by them that new 140 students (40 + 100) will be able to complete their academic course by May, 2003, but by curtailing the vacation period and holding extra classes their course, keeping in view the guidelines of Dental Council of India regarding numbers of lectures in each subject, will be completed so as to render them eligible for examination to be conducted in mid-October, 2003.
20 students already admitted in September, 2002 will appear in 1st BDS examination commencing from 1st May, 2003.
5.
That the students in MM College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana (Ambala) were admitted only after the permission of the Government of India to the said college which was granted to make admissions for the session 2002- 2003 vide their letter No. 12017/4/2000-PMS, dated 13th August, 2002 (Annexure R-IV).
This permission was granted by the Government of India prior to the date of counselling for the session 2002-2003.
It is true that this permission was not available at the time of publication of the prospectus."
7.
Shri IS Balhara argued that the decision of the State Government and the University to hold fresh entrance test for admission against the seats sanctioned by the Government of India vide letter dated 312003 should be declared violative of Article 14 of the Constitution because it has the effect of depriving the petitioners of their legitimate right to be admitted against those seats.
He further argued that the reasons assigned by the State Government and the University for not holding counselling in pursuance of Annexure P-1 are extraneous and legally unsustainable.
Shri Balhara submitted that shifting of the petitioners from DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar and BRS Dental College and Hospital, Kotbilla, will not affect other candidates and will not jeopardise the examinations to be held in May 2003, and, therefore, the decision to conduct fresh entrance test should be declared illegal and a direction be issued for admitting the petitioners against the vacant seats in Dental College, Rohtak.
Shri Balhara further argued that the impugned decision is vitiated due to mala fides because the sole purpose of holding fresh entrance test is to enable Sri Govind Tricentenary College to garner fees from the candidates who may qualify in the test.
In the end, he argued that the respondents cannot make new admission in the month of March, 2003 because that will adversely affect the career of the students who had been admitted in the government as well as private Dental Colleges on the basis of counselling held in September, 2002.
8.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana and Shri OP Gupta, counsel for the university argued that the petitioners do not have the right to seek admission against the newly sanctioned seats because they had already been admitted in different colleges on the basis of counselling held in September, 2002.
They laid emphasis on the fact that the petitioners were aware of the provisional character of the seats specified in the Information Brochure issued by the University and argued that in view of the Government of India's letter dated 1462002, the University had no option but to confine admission to 20 seats sanctioned for Dental College, Rohtak.
Shri Jaswant Singh submitted that the admissions made on the basis of entrance test conducted on 22.2.2003 will not, in any manner, affect the admissions already made because the University may organise supplementary lectures for the students to be admitted hereinafter or may postpone the examination to be held in the month of May, 2003.
9.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
A reading of the extracts of the Information Brochure reproduced in the earlier part of this order shows that the University had made it clear to the candidates that the number of seats in the B.D.S.
Course in Dental College, Rohtak, was provisional.
In Notes 1 and 2 appearing below the distribution of seats in the College, it was made clear that the distribution of the seats as well as the admission was to be provisional.
This necessarily meant that admission against the seats specified in the Information Brochure was dependent on the permission/approval of the Government of India and as it had vide letter dated 1462002 categorically declined permission for making admission against 40 seats, the University was left with no choice but to make admissions only against 20 seats in Dental College, Rohtak.
The process of admission which started with the issuance of Information Brochure came to an end with the finalisation of admissions made on the basis of counselling held in September, 2002 and the rights of the candidates including the petitioners who were admitted against free/payment seats in different colleges got crystallised.
The Government of India did give sanction in respect of 40 seats for 2002-2003 vide letter dated January 3, 2003, but that did not create a right in favour of the petitioners to be admitted against those seats by shifting/transfer.
The letter containing the sanction of the Government of India does not give any indication about the manner and mode to be adopted by the State Government and the University for making admissions against the newly sanctioned seats.
In other words, it was left to the discretion of the State Government and the University to adopt appropriate mode for making admissions against the newly sanctioned seats.
Initially, the University issued notice Annexure P-1 and invited applications from the candidates who had qualified the test held in June, 2002 including those who had already got admissions, but keeping in view the likely dislocation of large number of students due to shifting from one institution to other and from paid seats to free seats, the State Government decided that fresh entrance test be held for admission against the seats sanctioned on 312003.
10.
In our opinion, the decision of the State Government cannot be dubbed as arbitrary or unjustified.
Rather, it is in larger public interest.
If the petitioners and other students are admitted against the newly sanctioned seats in Dental College, Rohtak by transfer from private Colleges, the seats vacated by them cannot be offered to other candidates because they will not be in a position to complete the course.
The net result of this exercise would be wastage of seats.
11.
In view of the above, we hold that the petitioners cannot complain against the decision taken by the State Government and the University to hold fresh entrance test to fill up 40 seats sanctioned by the Government of India in January, 2003, and they cannot seek a mandatory direction for admission against those seats.
12.
There is another reason for not entertaining the prayer of the petitioners.
The Information Brochure issued by the University contemplated completion of the admission process by September 30, 2002.
This was in conformity with the guidelines issued by the Dental Council of India.
Therefore, at this stage, the Court cannot issue a direction which may amount to modification of the Information Brochure issued by the University.
Moreover, in the absence of any provision in the Information Brochure for holding another counselling, it is not possible to direct the admission of the petitioners in Dental College, Rohtak, by transfer/shifting from DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar and BRS Dental College and Hospital, Kotbilla, Panchkula.
13.
At this stage, we may notice some decisions in which their Lordships of the Supreme Court have ruled against issuance of direction by the Courts which have the tendency of disturbing the schedule of admission and courses.
In Medical Council of India v. Madhu Singh and others, 2002(4) SCT 444 (SC) : JT 2002(7) SC 1, the Supreme Court referred to a number of precedents relating to admissions in Medical/Dental College and culled out the following propositions :  "(i) there is no scope for admitting students mid-stream as that would be against very spirit of status governing the medical education; (ii) even if seats are unfilled that cannot be a ground for making mid- sessions admissions; (iii) there cannot be telescoping of unfilled seats of one year with permitted seats of the subsequent year; (iv) the MCI shall ensure that the examining bodies fix a time schedule specifying the duration of this course, the date of commencement of the course and the last date for admission; (v) different modalities for admission can be worked out and necessary steps like holding of examination if prescribed, counselling and the like have to be completed within the specified time; (vi) no variation of the schedule so far as admissions are concerned shall be allowed; (vii) in case of any deviation by the concerned institution, action as prescribed shall be taken by the MCI."
The above referred principles have been applied for denying relief to the petitioners in Ms. Neelu Arora and another v. Union of India and others, 2003(3) SCT 629 (SC) : JT 2003(1) SC 447 and Supreet Batra and others v. Union of India and others, 2003(1) SCT 804 (SC) : JT 2003(1) SC 519.
14.
Before concluding, we may notice an ancillary argument of Sh. IS Balhara that despite the refusal of the Government of India to grant permission for admission in MM College of Dental Sciences and Research, Mullana, as many as 100 candidates were given admission in that College.
In this respect, it is sufficient to observe that admissions in the said college were made only after the Government of India gave permission vide letter No. 12017/4/2000-PMS dated 1382002, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure R-IV with the affidavit of Shri Bhagwati Parshad.
15.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, we hope that while making admissions against the newly sanctioned seats, the State Government and the University will keep in view the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Medical Council of India v. State of Karnataka and others, 1998(3) SCT 394 (SC) : JT 1998(5) SC 40, Medical Council of India v. Madhu Singh and others (supra), Ms. Neelu Arora and another v. Union of India and others (supra) and Supreet Batra and others v. Union of India and others, so that the career of the students already admitted may not be jeopardised.
Copies of the order be given dasti on payment of the fee prescribed for urgent application.
Petition dismissed.