Usha Mehra, J - Petitioners, Assistant Teachers in the Cantonment Board Primary School, Village Thanera, Delhi Cantt., assailed the order dated 25th November, 1986 passed by the respondent thereby terminating their services on the ground that they were overage at the time of their appointment and the competent authority had not agreed to relax their age.
2.
Aggrieved by the termination of their services, petitioners approached this court by way of writ petition.
However, petitioner No. 1 Smt. Kunti Devi sought permission to withdraw from array of petitioners.
Accordingly vide order dated 4th April, 1989 her request was granted and her name was allowed to be deleted from the memo of parties.
In this petition, therefore, we have to deal with the grievances of only two of the petitioners namely S/Shri Saroj Pal Singh and Vijay Pal i.e. petitioners 2 & 3.
3.
Brief facts of the case are that Delhi Cantonment Board, Respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the Board), asked for sponsorship of candidates for the post of Assistant Teachers in the primary school from the Employment Exchange.
Pursuant to this requisition by the Board and as per the seniority maintained by the Employment Exchange of the trained teachers for primary school the names of the petitioners were sponsored.
They sat for the written test, and, thereafter, their interview was held on 14th February, 1986.
Once they were declared successful in the written test as well as in the interview, they were offered appointment for the post of primary teachers in the school run by respondent No. 1.
They were issued appointment letter on 25th February, 1986.
And since then they have been teaching in the respondent's school.
4.
The appointment of teachers and their service conditions are to be governed by the rules known as Cantonment Fund Servants Rules, 1937 (hereinafter called CFS Rules, 1937).
In these rules there is a rule of relaxation which empowers the competent Authority to grant relaxation in age to the teachers appointed overage.
Grievance of the petitioners is that the Board discriminated against them.
In the case of similarly placed Assistant Teachers the competent Authority exercised its discretion and granted relaxation of their age but in case of petitioners the same has been denied without assigning any reason.
The only reason which the petitioner can think of is that they are members of the Scheduled Castes whereas in the cases whom relaxation in age has been given are of General category.
Petitioners are not only qualified but experienced teachers.
Their names appeared very high up in the seniority maintained by the Employment Exchange of the Trained Teachers for primary schools and, therefore, their names were recommended.
The Employment Exchange or for that matter respondents were aware of the Rule 5-B(2) of the CFS Rules, 1937.
Despite that petitioners were selected and, thereafter, appointed in the service of respondent as Assistant Teachers.
Even otherwise Delhi School Education Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of 1973) and the Rules made thereunder known as Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as Rule of 1973) are applicable to the teachers employed by the respondent.
According to Rule of 1973 the age limit of recruitment of teachers directly recruited is upto 30 years, relaxable in the case of SC/ST candidates for a further period upto 5 years.
Since Act of 1973 and the Rule of 1973 are applicable to the respondent No. 1's school, therefore, the Employment Exchange sponsored the names of petitioners who belonged to Scheduled Caste category.
In their case age could be relaxed upto 35 years.
Moreover, since the respondent Board is running the primary school in Delhi, therefore, Act of 1973 and the Rules of 1973 are applicable to the Board employed teachers.
5.
The respondent Board contested the petition primarily on the ground that in the appointment letter issued to the petitioners it was made clear that their services were to be governed by the provisions of CFS Rules, 1937.
Further that their appointment was subject to age relaxation by the Competent Authority.
Petitioners accepted their appointments subject to those conditions and, thereafter, joined the service.
Therefore, they are now estopped from challenging their termination order.
The CFS Rules, 1937 provides that no one above the age of 25 years will be appointed as an Assistant Teacher unless the competent authority relaxes the age.
Case of the petitioner was recommended by the Board to the competent authority but the competent authority did not find it fit to relax their age hence their services had to be terminated.
6.
That there are about 62 Cantonment Boards all over the country which are managed by the Ministry of Defence, Government of India.
The terms and conditions of the employees working in various Boards have to be governed by CFS Rules, 1937 and not by the Rules applicable to the employees employed by each State where these schools are situated.
If that principle is accepted then it will create an anomalous position.
It will disturb the uniform conditions of employment of the Cantonment Board Schools throughout India.
Moreover, the power to relax vests with the Officer Commanding-in-Chief and not with the Administrator as envisaged under the provisions of Act of 1973 and the Rules of 1973.
The State of Delhi has no power or jurisdiction to frame service rules or lay down service conditions for employees of the respondent Board inspite of the fact that the respondent Board is functioning in Delhi.
It has been denied that petitioners have been discriminated.
7.
In order to appreciate the relevant contention urged at the Bar, let us examine what the Act and Rules relied by the respective parties provide.
8.
Rule 5B (1 & 2) of the CFS Rules, 1937, which is reproduced as under, provides that employment has to be through the Employment Exchange And Sub- Rule 2 lays down the upper age limit for appointment.
"5-B(1) - All first appointments to services under a Board shall be made through Employment Exchange or in such other manner as the Central Government may direct.
(2) - No person aged below eighteen years and more than 25 years shall be appointed to any post."
9.
The CFS Rules, 1937 also empower the Officer Commanding-in-Chief to relax the upper age limit.
Rule 53 which is reproduced as under provides that the concession provided to SC/ST and as ordered by the Government from time to time would automatically apply to employees of the Board.
"53.
Nothing in these Rules shall affect reservations and other concessions required to be provided for the S/C and S/T or other special categories of persons in accordance with the orders issued by the concerned Government from time to time in this regard."
10.
So far as SC/ST candidates are concerned their appointment and condition of service has to be in accordance with the orders issued by the concerned Government from time to time.
Concerned Government in this case will be the State Government/Central Government.
As per Delhi School Education Act, 1973 the age of appointment for male teachers is 30 years and female teachers is 35 years.
Further the Government has issued notification that for a Scheduled Caste candidates 5 years age relaxation has to be given.
Therefore, a Scheduled Caste male candidate upto the age of 35 years can be appointed and the petitioners being Scheduled Caste candidates their appointment was in accordance with the orders issued by the concerned governments.
Thus, their appointment was in consonance with the provisions of Rule 53 of the CFS Rules, 1937.
In the absence of there being a cogent reason for rejecting their candidature the termination of the petitioners on the ground of overage and non-applying the rule of relaxation, to our mind, has discriminated the case of the petitioners.
It has been brought on record that as many as 36 assistant teachers were appointed by the respondent who were over-age.
In all 36 cases rule of relaxation was put in service.
This is apparent from the seniority list of the Cantonment Board Schools, filed on the record.
11.
Mr. RK Saini, counsel for the petitioners rightly contended that there is no criteria or the guidelines laid down by the Officer Commanding-in-Chief as to under what circumstances the rule of relaxation would be made applicable.
In fact the Officer Commanding-in-Chief has arbitrary discretion and does apply the rule of thumb while exercising his power of granting or rejecting relaxation.
In the absence of any criteria it becomes discriminatory to reject the case of the petitioners and allow the cases of others.
Petitioner's services were terminated vide letter dated November, 1986 on the ground that Officer Commanding-in-Chief had refused to relax their age while in the case of similarly situated teachers in November, 1986 the Officer Commanding-in-Chief granted the relaxation in age.
To name a few i.e. Smt. Chander Kanta, Smt. Nirmala Huria and Smt. Nirmala Jain.
These teachers were also appointed overage.
The date of birth of Chander Kanta is 1561956, that of Smt. Nirmala Huria and Smt. Nirmala Jain is 2561953 and 1551943 respectively.
They were confirmed vide letter dated 10th November, 1986 by granting relaxation in age to them.
They were allowed to continue in service and confirmed vide Office Order issued in Part-II No. 252 dated 10th November, 1986.
Therefore, to our mind, Mr. Saini rightly contended that in the absence of any guidelines or criteria the grant and rejection of relaxation in age amounts to discrimination.
No material has been placed on record nor the files of these three assistant teachers produced to show what weighed the competent Authority while exercising its power in granting relaxation in age.
Those three assistant teachers were appointed in the same manner as the petitioners.
But they have been granted relaxation whereas the same has been denied to the, petitioners without assigning any reason.
Beside, Smt. Chander Kanta was 27 years old on the date of her appointment, Smt. Nirmala Huria approximately 31 years old and Nirmala Jain approximately 40 years old on the date of her appointment i.e. 3rd December, 1983.
There are other assistant teachers appointed who were overage, namely, Smt. Surinder Kaur born on 26th September, 1951, appointed on 25th August, 1988.
She was 37 years old on the date of her appointment.
Smt. Nirmal Gupta date of birth 25th October, 1963 appointed on 9th February, 1989.
She was 26 years old on the date of her appointment.
Smt. Bimla Rani date of birth 6th September, 1957, appointed on 7th January, 1991.
She was 34 years old when she was appointed.
There are about 30 other assistant teachers who were appointed overage.
This proves that the respondent had been applying the rule of relaxation at its whims and fancy.
Respondent has not been able to place on record any document to show what criteria and guidelines were followed while applying the rule of relaxation.
In the absence of any criteria or guideline, to our mind, it gives arbitrary powers to the Authority to discriminate against any one.
12.
Petitioners tried to urge that they had been discriminated because they belong to Schedule Caste whereas all these 36 teachers mentioned in the seniority list belonged to general category.
We cannot appreciate this argument of Mr. RK Saini because there is nothing on the record to suggest so.
But at the same time we cannot loose sight of the fact that no reason has been assigned while rejecting the cases of the petitioners and accepting the cases of 36 other teachers.
13.
Mr. R Nanavaty when confronted with the situation had no answer except to say that the rejection of the case of the petitioners was because they were not fully qualified.
This oral argument, Mr. Nanavaty failed to substantiate.
No record produced to prove the same.
We, therefore, find no substance in this argument.
Moreover, this argument having not been substantiated by documentary evidence deserve to be rejected.
In fact, original files were not produced to show what weighed with the Officer Commanding-in-Chief to reject the case of the petitioners who are Scheduled Castes and in whose case Govt. has already issued circular to relax the age by 5 years.
In the absence of record it is difficult to ascertain whether this fact was considered by the competent Authority or not nor that material had been made available on the basis of which the case of 36 teachers were granted the relaxation in age.
In fact the qualification of the petitioners and those of the persons whom the rule of relaxation was made applicable are identical e.g. petitioner No. 2 Saroj Pal Singh is intermediate plus BTC, while petitioner No. 3 Vijay Pal is Graduate plus BTC.
They were trained teachers that is why Employment Exchange recommended their names whereas Harbans Lal who was given the rule of relaxation was only Matric plus JBT and Smt. Amarjeet Chopra who was appointed at the age of 31 years was Intermediate plus JBT.
Smt. Mohinder Kaur Makkar who was appointed at the age of 29 years was Intermediate plus JBT.
Smt. Nirmal Jain who was granted relaxation was Intermediate plus STC.
Therefore, it is difficult to appreciate that the relaxation in the case of petitioners was rejected because they were less qualified.
In fact Employment Exchange sponsored their names because they were duly qualified and fulfilled the criteria.
Moreover, with the same qualification or with less qualifications candidates who were overage had been appointed as Assistant Teachers by the respondent.
In the absence of any explanation worth the name having been brought on record, to our mind, petitioners have successfully made out a case of discrimination.
The Officer Commanding-in-Chief has not assigned any reason for rejecting their case.
14.
We have not been told under what circumstances and how the Employment Exchange recommended the names of petitioners if they were over-age ?
Why at the first instance the respondent accepted their candidature, took test and interview before issuing appointment letters.
This shows that rule of relaxation must have been very frequently put in use and the Employment Exchange recommended their case because they being SC/ST candidates were entitled to 5 years relaxation in age in any case.
15.
Delhi High Court in the case of Smt. Damyanti Devi v. Delhi Cantonment Board, Civil Writ No. 699/1987 after relying on the judgment of Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of Cantonment Board and Others v. Dhan Singh Thakur and Ors. (LPA No. 129 of 1985) held that discretion to be exercised by the Officer Commanding-in-Chief is subject to the direction given by the Central Government/concerned Govt. That direction is binding on the Officer Commanding-in-Chief and the teachers serving in Cantonment Board School in the State would also be governed by the State Rules.
Relying on these observations it can safely be concluded.
That as per the rules of concerned Govt. male teachers upto the age of 30 years could be appointed and as per the Govt's direction in case of SC/ST 5 years age relaxation is to be given.
This direction of Central Govt. is binding on the respondent.
Taking these factors into consideration, we can say that action of the respondent is violative of principle of natural justice, arbitrary, discriminatory and that the order of termination of service of the petitioners even otherwise without affording any opportunity of being heard as required under rule 8 of the CFS Rules, 1937 is violative of principles of natural justice hence bad in law, firstly because of the discrimination meted out to the petitioners and secondly, having not affords any opportunity of being heard to the petitioners before terminating their services.
This act of the respondent Board is thus in violation of Rule 8(2) of the CFS Rules, 1937.
Rule 8(2) of the CFS Rules, 1937 provides that a show cause notice must be issued before terminating the services of an employee.
In this case petitioners who were employed against substantive post as Assistant Teachers on regular time scale and admittedly, their services were terminated without even issuing a show cause notice to them.
It is not the case of the respondents that there was any adverse report against them or their work was not satisfactory.
In the absence of affording reasonable opportunity the action of the respondent is also bad in law.
Finally, the petitioners being Scheduled Caste were entitled to the concessions as admissible under rule 53 of CFS Rules, 1937 which had been denied to them while considering their case of relaxation in age.
16.
For the reasons stated above, we make the rule absolute and set aside the impugned order thereby terminating their services.
The petitioners will be deemed to have been in service throughout.
They will be entitled to all consequential pecuniary benefits as per rules.
Writ allowed.