JS Narang, J - The petitioner joined the army in the Corps of EME (Electrical Mechanical Engineering) on 6111959 as a Jawan.
He earned commission on 2371979.
He was subjected to Medical Board at the time of his induction into the Army and also at the time when he was commissioned.
On both the occasions, the petitioner was found medically fit in all respects.
2.
The petitioner served at various places and sometimes his posting was made at high altitude/snow bound areas.
He suffered heart attack and was resultantly evacuated to Ambala Military Hospital for treatment.
His medical category was down graded accordingly.
He, however, volunteered for service in IPKF (Indian Peace Keeping Force) and was accordingly sent to Sri Lanka in 1988/89.
He developed IHD, obesity Lumber Spondylosis.
Calcaneal Spurbilateral and Sensory Neural Deafness.
He was again down graded in medical category and was placed in SI HZ A3 PZ E1.
The results were obvious that he lost further promotions.
He was put through Release Medical Boarding in October, 1994.
It was notified by the Board that the petitioner is suffering from the disability which is more than 85% and aggravated by military service.
He was, accordingly, released from the service on 3061995.
He claimed disability pension but none was granted.
A notice dated 13121996 was served upon Union of India for releasing the disability pension in pursuant to the regulations.
The claim was not given in full but partial relief has been granted vide Annexure P1 dated 13121998.
The petitioner was dissatisfied and challenged the order by way of an appeal filed before the Government of India.
The claim is that his disability has been reassessed and has been described as 60%.
Therefore, he is entitled to rateable claim of disability pension.
The appeal was rejected vide order dated 2371998.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the authorities by way of present petition.
The stand is that as per the regulation, if the disability suffered is more than 20% of more, the official is entitled to rateable disability pension.
Reference has been made to regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations.
It is further contended that the disability is admittedly attributable to or aggravated by military service as has been mentioned by the Resurvey Medical Board and which has not been upset by the subsequent Medical Board which was carried out in the year 1997.
Even otherwise, it is contained in the Rules in Appendix II that if nothing is mentioned in the initially medical board carried out in respect of an officer, the subsequent disability suffered shall be deemed to be taken as aggravated by or attributable to military service.
The respondents have, therefore, not granted the disability pension as claimed by the petitioner.
4.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that in view of the amendment which has been carried out in Rule 17 and 27(c) of the regulations, the disability has to be reassessed by the authority described and prescribed in the amendment so promulgated.
However, nothing is brought on record that any subsequent Resurvey Medical Board was carried out for down grading the disability.
Admittedly, the disability has been rated as 60% which is admitted by the petitioner.
5.
Apart from this, learned counsel for the respondent contends that the Medical Boards are competent to redefine and reassess the disability for the purpose of calculating the pension accordingly.
In the case of the petitioner, the disability has been correctly reduced.
It is further contended that there are 9 such Medical Boards all over India and, therefore, to maintain uniformity the Resurvey Medical Board recommendations have been termed as advisory in nature, as such, the competent authority is, therefore, entitled to sit in judgment over the said recommendations.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that in the case of the petitioner, no such plea is tenable because as per the regulations it has been specifically provided that if no such mention is made in the initial Medical Board and that subsequently if the release Medical Board found out any disability, the same has to be taken as attributable to or aggravated by military service.
There is nothing which is contained in the regulations that a finding given by one Medical Board is appealable or any authority can sit in judgment over the same.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgments rendered by this Court in re : Ex. Signalman Surinder Pal v. Union of India and others, 2001(1) RSJ 396 : 2001(1) SCT 294 (P&H), Ex.Sep.
Jagmel Singh v. Union of India and others, 2000(3) RSJ 85 : 2000(3) SCT 265 (P&H) and Ex. Sepoy Shyam Singh v. Union of India and others, 2000(3) RSJ 321 and that the dicta of the Apex Court has been followed by this Court rendered in re: Ex. Saffer Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993, decided on January 14, 1993.
6.
In view of the opinion expressed by this Court and the Apex Court, I am convinced that the stand of the respondent is not correct.
The petition is allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P4 is quashed and the respondents are directed to decide the case of the petitioner in view of the observations made by the Apex Court and the consistent view taken by this Court.
The case of the petitioner be decided within three months and a communication in this regard be sent to the petitioner and the appropriate relief materially payable to the petitioner be also paid within the aforesaid period.
Petition allowed.