RL Anand, J - CM No. 25418 of 2000 is allowed and the applicants are allowed to join as petitioners in the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioners through this writ petition have given challenge to the selection of Sweepers who were recruited into service by respondent in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P-1 vide which 80 temporary posts of Sweepers in Municipal Committee, Panipat were sought to be filled.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is three-fold.
Firstly, that no interview of the petitioners was taken and they were sidelined for the extraneous reasons best known to the authority.
Secondly, 9 posts in excess than the advertisement were filled violating Article 16 of the Constitution of India and thirdly, no person from Panipat was taken in the select-list clearly indicating that there was a bias on the part of the selection committee.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Reply was filed in which the allegations of the writ petition were denied.
According to the respondent No. 2, in December, 1996, the employees of the Municipal Committees went on strike in the towns in Haryana.
The sewerage system was choked and heaps of garbage starting emitting a foul smell threatening the out break of epidemic all over.
The local bodies found it impossible to cope with the situation.
The Government at its own level tried to mediate with the employees but the employees resisted these attempts.
Ultimately the Government banned the strike vide its order dated 14121996.
A cabinet meeting was held on 19121996 and the employees were directed to return to work by 20121996, else the local bodies were at liberty to dispense with the services of the employees and could make fresh appointments in their place from the open market.
This decision was published in various newspapers.
The municipal services were declared essential in the State of Haryana under the Haryana Essential Services Maintenance Act, 1974 for the securing public safety, maintenance of public order, health, sanitation and maintaining supply or services necessary for the life of the community.
On the employees refusing to come back a situation was created vide which fresh Sweepers were required to be recruited.
Thus, recruitment was done.
Respondent No. 2 took a specific stand that all those who appeared for interview were interviewed and selection was made.
These emergency selections were challenged before the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 12227 of 1997 and the High Court vide its decision dated 25111997 upheld the selections.
5.
The petitioners filed a re-joinder in which the reiterated their stand made in the writ petition.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners vehemently challenged the selection of the private respondents on the grounds set forth in the earlier portion of the judgment but I am not convinced with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
It is the specific stand of respondent No. 2 that all those persons who appearded for interview were interviewed and there is nothing for me to hold that the petitioners were sidelined as argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Even if nine extra posts were filled, I am not inclined to upset the selection keeping in view the fact that the margin of excess posts is negligible keeping in view the nature of the job.
Finally, I am of the considered opinion that the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India have not been flouted in this case and the selection which took place in the year 1996 should not be disturbed after a lapse of six years.
I am also not inclined to upset this selection when this very selection was earlier challenged in the High Court though on different grounds.
Resultantly, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.