Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner, who is a member of the Punjab Civil Services (Judicial Branch), presently posted as Civil Judge-cum-Judicial Magistrate, Chandigarh challenges the notification dated 3rd April, 2001 issued by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh for inviting the applications for selection to the post of Superior Judicial Services in the State of Haryana.
2.
In terms of the notification, a person eligible to apply for the post should have been practicing for not less than 10 years as an advocate or pleader as on 3rd April, 2001.
Challenge to this condition is on the ground that it violates the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, as it renders the members of the PCS (Judicial) ineligible.
3.
According to the petitioner, the experience gained by the applicant as a member of the PCS Judicial should also be added for reckoning the period of practice.
Both these contentions have no merits.
4.
The impugned notification issued by the High Court is in consonance with the constitutional mandate contained in Articles 233(2) of the Constitution of India.
A person already in service of Union or State has been specifically excluded under these provisions.
In other words, the notification does not specify anything contrary or at variance to the constitutional provisions.
Furthermore, the petitioner has challenged in this petition only to the notification issued by the High Court and vires, if any, of Articles 232(2) of the Constitution have not been mentioned in the petition.
5.
The notification in question postulates satisfaction of the mandatory condition that a person should have been practising for not less than 10 years as an advocate or pleader.
This expression is nowhere offends mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, and, in fact, is in complete compliance to the provisions of Article 233 of the Constitution of India.
It is settled and in fact is obligation of every person in employment of the State or Union to request the concerned Bar Council for suspension of his licence issued to him by the Bar Council for practising as an advocate as the period under which the person remained in employment of the State or the Union cannot be counted towards the period during which he was practicing as an advocate as that period is under a cloud of suspended licence.
6.
Another factor which would have to be noticed against the petitioner is that the members of the PCS (Judicial) have their own channel for promotion to the Superior Judicial Services under the relevant rules.
This promotion channel is meant exclusively for the members of the PCS (Judicial) and for that matter, they constitute a class in itself.
This class stands excluded for the purpose of being appointed to the Superior Judicial Services as a direct recruit.
The practicing advocate and the members of the Superior Judicial Services, Punjab and PCS (Judicial) are two different and distinct classes.
The obligation and rights of such classes are controlled by independent rules which are neither in conflict of any statutory rules nor they offends the constitutional provisions.
For the reasons afore-stated, we see no merit in this writ petition.
The same is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.