ML Singhal, J - Constable Partap Singh No. 114 of GRP Ambala serving at GRP Lines Ambala City was punished with the stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect by Assistant Inspector General Govt. Railway Police Haryana Ambala Cantt.
Vide order dated 811982 and he was also deprived of the emoluments which would have been payable to him on re-instatement but for the subsistence allowance paid to him during the period he remained under suspension.
He was reinstated w.e.f.
811982 forenoon.
Vide order dated 15.11.1983, Director General of Police/Inspector General Police, Haryana dismissed his appeal in toto.
He filed suit for declaration against the State of Haryana to the effect that order dated 15.11.1983 received on 61283 by virtue of which order dated 8.1.82 was confirmed by the Director General of Police/Inspector General of Police Haryana are illegal, ultra vires, arbitrary, unconstitutional, against the rules and norms of service and natural justice are not binding upon him and that he was entitled to the entire salary for the period during which he remained under suspension and further he was entitled to the release of two increments stopped with cumulative effect through those orders.
It was alleged in the plaint that he was framed up falsely in a case due to his inimical relations with SHO, GRP Ambala which gave rise to an inquiry and eventual punishment upon him namely that on the night intervening 2/3.10.81 he was posted at GRP Ambala Cantt.
Being sick, he was on medical rest for four days.
He was taking rest in the barrack.
While he was taking rest in the barrack as advised by the Medical Officer one Constable Ram Singh No. 27 started abusing him at the instance of the SHO, GRP Ambala Cantt and abused him by his mother and sister and gave him kicks and blows.
When he brought the matter to the notice of the concerned officer on duty, who instead of taking Constable Ram Singh to task framed him in a false case that he abused Constable Ram Singh when he was under the influence of liquor and further he gave him injuries.
Fact of the matter was that Constable Ram Singh had sprinkled liquor on his clothes and he brought it to the notice of the officer on duty that he had not taken liquor and had misbehaved with Constable Ram Singh instead Constable Ram Singh had sprinkled liquor on his clothes and abused him by his mother and sister and gave him kicks and blows.
Officer on duty insisted upon getting him (Constable Partap Singh) medically examined.
He was accordingly got medically examined.
His medical examination was not in tune with the scientific method provided for a test for finding out whether a person is under the influence of liquor.
After he was medically examined, he was placed under suspension vide order dated 7101981.
He made representation to the Inspector General of Police who ordered the said inquiry to be continued.
Inquiry was not held in accordance with the law and rules governing the conduct of such inquiries.
In the inquiry, he was found guilty because of acrimonious relations which he had with SHO, GRP Ambala Cantt.
No misconduct which is the basis of the penalty was proved against him.
It was alleged in the plaint that no inquiry could be ordered against, him as at the relevant time he was not on duty.
He was on four days rest as advised by the Medical Officer.
He was not fit for entrustment of any duty on the said date and time because he was on four days rest under medical advice.
He was denied the reasonable opportunity of defending himself in the inquiry.
There was no evidence that he was under the influence of liquor.
He was fully conscious.
His gait was not staggering.
He was fully oriented with time and space and his speech was normal.
From the mere fact that he was smelling of alcohol it could not be said that he has consumed liquor or that he was under the influence of liquor.
There are glaring contradictions in the statement of the PWs examined in the inquiry as such no mis-conduct could be said to have been proved against him.
2.
The defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit of the plaintiff it was denied that he was falsely framed in a case of misconduct at the instance of SHO, GRP Ambala Cantt.
It was denied that the Inquiry Officer was under the influence of SHO, GRP Ambala Cantt.
In the regular departmental inquiry charges were fully established against him.
He made request for transfer of the inquiry to some other officer.
His request was duly considered by the competent authority but was rejected as it was not supported by any good and valid reasons.
Charges that he had taken liquor and had assaulted a fellow Constable Ram Singh No. 27 inside the barrack of the Police Station were fully established against him in the inquiry.
It was denied that the inquiry held against him was not in tune with the law and procedure governing the conduct of such inquiries.
He was justifiably placed under suspension by Assistant Inspector General, Govt. Railway Police, Haryana Ambala Cantt.
His appeal was justifiably dismissed by the Director General of Police-cum-Inspector General of Police, Haryana.
He was although not on any specific duty at the relevant time, he was not licensed to take liquor and create brawl in the premises of police station and assault a fellow constable under the influence of liquor.
Inquiry Officer gave finding of guilt against him after dispassionately appreciating the material on the inquiry file including the defence of the plaintiff.
Report of the Medical Officer was duly considered in the light of the other evidence direct and circumstantial.
Inference that the plaintiff was under the influence of liquor at the relevant time was not drawn from the mere opinion of the Medical Officer but from the analysis of entire evidence.
Assistant Inspector General, Govt. Railway Police, Haryana considered every facet of the case before the imposed the punishment upon him.
Similarly, Director General of Police-cum-Inspector General of Police, Haryana considered all the points that arose for his consideration while considering his appeal and dismissing it.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the learned trial Court :-  1.
Whether the order dated 15.11.1983 is illegal, null and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit has not been properly valued ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
On the conclusion of the trail of the suit.
Subordinate Judge III Class, Ambala City vide order dated 5485 decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 8.1.82 passed by Assistant Inspector General of Police, GRP Haryana was illegal and was not binding upon him as also order dated 15.11.1983 of the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police.
Haryana dismissing his appeal, in view of this finding that at the relevant time he was not on duty.
If he was not on duty, he took liquor and misbehaved with a fellow constable, he could not be dealt with departmentally but he could be prosecuted in a court of law for having taken liquor and for having assaulted Constable Ram Singh.
It was also found that his request for transfer of inquiry from that officer was rejected out of hand without hearing him and without going into the allegations mentioned by him in his request for transfer of the inquiry.
It was found that simply observation that there was no cogent reasons made by him for the transfer of the inquiry did not mean anything.
It was found that the competent authority should have heard him and gone into the facts and then decided whether the transfer of the inquiry from that officer was or was not warranted.
It was found that rejection of his request for transfer of the inquiry was contrary to the principles of natural justice.
It was found that the acts imputed to the plaintiff do not amount to misconduct and the inquiry was not held in accordance with the principle of natural justice.
4.
State of Haryana went in appeal against the decree of Subordinate Judge III Class, Ambala City dated 5485.
Vide order dated 161286, Additional District Judge Ambala allowed the appeal and in consequence set aside the judgment and decree of the court below and dismissed the suit filed by Constable Partap Singh.
Not satisfied with the decree of reversal passed by Additional District Judge, Ambala, Constable Partap Singh has come up in appeal to this court.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant, the learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana and have gone through the record.
6.
It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that there is no denying the fact that at the relevant time, he was not on duty.
He was on four days rest under the medical advice as he was suffering from eye flu.
It was submitted that at the relevant time, he was lying in the barrack and was on complete rest on the night intervening 2/3.10.81.
At about 1130 PM, Constable Ram Singh came who was under the influence of liquor.
He picked up row with him saying that he would have to take liquor.
He refused to take liquor.
He then threw liquor on him and also gave him fist blow which fell on his left cheek in the bone.
He acted in self defence.
At that time SHO and one ASI came to the spot.
He gave them an application but they did not hear him.
As the SHO was already inimical disposed towards him he was sent for medical examination.
Doctor did not subject him to any scientific test for determining whether he had consumed liquor.
It was submitted that he had not taken any liquor and therefore was no necessity of referring him for medical examination.
Whatever questions were put to him by the doctor he gave coherent answers to those questions.
He was fully conscious.
He had not taken any liquor.
It was submitted that the doctor found only that he was smelling of alcohol and eye flu, was fully conscious, did not have staggering gait, fully oriented with time and space, speech was normal.
Doctor found the following injuries on his person :-  "1) 1-1/2 cm x 1-1/2 cm abrasion on the left cheek bone 2) 1-1/2 cm x 1-1/2 cm abrasion on the middle of left shin."
7.
It was submitted that the doctor did not subject him to any scientific test for conclusively determining whether he was under the influence of liquor.
Doctor medically examined Constable Ram Singh also.
He found blood oozing out of his nose.
Besides, there were four injuries on his person.
It was submitted that in the inquiry, Inquiry Officer only recorded the statements of PWs.
Those PWs were not subjected to any cross-examination by the delinquent.
The Inquiry Officer did not ask the delinquent if he wanted to cross-examine these PWs.
Delinquent does not seem to have been given any opportunity to subject the PWs to cross-examination so that it could be brought out that their statements were not based on truth.
The Inquiry Officer recorded the statements of PWs.
He recorded the statements of DWs and then recorded his findings.
In my opinion it was no inquiry in the eye of law as the Inquiry Officer did not tell the delinquent that he should subject the PWs to cross-examination so that it could be judged whether they were speaking the truth or they were speaking lies or they were making only one-sided statements.
Similarly, he did not ask the department to cross-examine the DWs.
He was after all deciding the fate of the delinquent who had put in about 20 years service.
Inquiry thus does not conduce to the principles of natural justice and fair play Enquiry was merely a ritual.
Doctor has not stated the basis of his saying that he was under the influence of liquor.
He simply stated that he was smelling of alcohol.
In Rattan Lal Ex-Constable v. The State of Haryana and others, 1983(2) SLR 159, learned Single Judge of this Court held that consumption of liquor while not on duty does not render him liable to disciplinary action.
It is not a mis-conduct if a constable while not on duty consumes liquor.
In Rattan Lal Ex-Constable v. The State of Haryana and ors (supra), SI Ram Dev who was on a checking round at the relevant time found that Constable Rattan Lal and two other constables namely Om Parkash and Nand Singh, who were members of the Guard force deputed to guard the Malkhana in the Old Treasury Building at Rohtak, were under the influence of liquor.
Under the orders of the said SI, they were got medically examined and so far as Constable Ram Lal, the opinion of Dr. Goyal who examined him was as follows :-  "Patient Rattan Lal about 40 years, Male, is fully conscious and well-oriented with time and space.
Pulse 100 per minute, blood pressure 130/70.
He is talking well.
Gait normal.
Patient emits smell of alcohol in deep respiration.
Opinion :- He has taken alcohol but not under due effect of alcohol."
8.
It was submitted that in this case also Constable Partap Singh was not found by the doctor to be under the effect of liquor although he has stated that he was smelling of alcohol.
He was fully conscious.
He did not have staggering, gait fully oriented with time and space, speech was normal.
It was submitted that when Constable Partap Singh was not on duty at the relevant time, even if he had consumed liquor, while off duty, he cannot be said to have misconducted himself.
In Rattan Lal Ex-Constable v. State of Haryana and others, (supra) the learned Single Judge observed that if it is taken that a police official is supposed to be on 24 hours' duty and, thus, even if he takes liquor when he is off duty that will be misconduct on his part then every official of the police whether high or low can be caught any time while taking liquor and branded with misconduct.
In the State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh.
Ex-Constable, 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) : 1992(3) RSJ 508, Hon'ble the Supreme court held that taking to drink by itself may not be a misconduct.
Out of office hours one may take to drink and remain in the house.
But being on duty, the disciplined service like police service, the personnel shall maintain discipline and shall not resort to drink or be in a drunken state while on duty.
The fact is that the respondent after having had heavy drink was seen roaming or wandering in the market with service revolver.
When he was sent to the doctor for medical examination he abused the medical officer on duty which shows his depravity or delinquency due to his drinking habit.
Thus it would constitute gravest misconduct warranting dismissal from service.
The authorities, therefore, were justified in imposing the penalty of dismissal.
The courts below failed to properly appreciate the legal incidence and the affect of the rules.
9.
In Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 413 SC, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that conducting an enquiry dehors the rules is no enquiry in the eye of law.
It was submitted that in this case there has been no inquiry which could be said to be in tune with the law and procedure governing the conduct of such inquiries.
10.
No examination or sample testing of the appellant's blood or urine was conducted.
In this case the Inquiry Officer did not care to find out whether Constable Partap Singh had initiated the quarrel or Constable Ram Singh had initiated the quarrel and whether Constable Ram Singh acted in self- defence or Constable Partap Singh acted in self-defence.
Doctor found injuries on both of them.
Constable Ram Singh who was examined at the inquiry has not stated how there was injury on the left shin of Partap Singh.
The cause of the quarrel is shrouded in mystery.
It would, therefore, be unjust to hold Constable Partap Singh guilty.
11.
For the reasons given above, this appeal is allowed.
In consequence judgment and decree passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Ambala dated 161286 is set aside and that passed by Sub Judge III Class, Ambala dated 5485 is restored.
Plaintiff's suit is decreed for declaration as prayed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.