SB Sinha, J - The only question which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether keeping in view the National Maritime (sic).
2.
The claimant-respondent admittedly was working as a Dock Maintenance and he was a seaman.
On or about 19th July, 1981 he met with an accident resulting him in permanent incapacitation to work as a seaman, he was allegedly not engaged after the said accident.
He filed a claim petition before the Workmen's Compensation Commissioner alleging, inter alia, that he had been getting a sum of Rs. 2,700/- pm by way of salary.
The statement made to that effect had been accepted by the appellant.
3.
The appellant's witness, however, in this deposition inter alia, stated that the claimant was getting basic allowance in the following manner :-  "Basic wage  Rs. 77000 Subsistence allowance 30 x Rs. 15/-  Rs. 45000 Leave Pay <$E54 over 12> x <$E770 over 30> Rs. 11550 Subsistence allowance on leave pay 45 x Rs. 15/- Rs. 6750 Total : Rs. 1,403.00 It appears that there exists no dispute between the parties for the purpose of grant of compensation known as Death and Disability Compensation Tripartite Agreement had been entered into.
4.
The National Maritime Board Agreement which was effective from 131980 states that in case where the seaman used to get monthly wages from Rs. 1,800/- and above, in case of death he would be getting a sum of Rs. 62,700/- whereas in a case of permanent disablement, he would be getting a sum of Rs. 79,800/-.
However, another agreement had been entered into in the year 1990 which allegedly was given a retrospective effect.
5.
At the point of time when the said agreement was entered into, the minimum salary of a seaman was Rs. 3,100/- pm The learned Commissioner having regard to the fact that the claimant-respondent has suffered injury as a result whereof, has become a permanent disabled person to work as a seaman granted him the minimum compensation laid down therefor in the said agreement, namely, Rs. 2,58,551/-.
6.
The only question which has been raised in this appeal is that as to which of the agreements shall prevail.
7.
The learned Commissioner relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in support of his aforementioned findings on Pratap Narain Singh Deo v. Sriniwas Sabata reported in 1976(1) SCC 289.
8.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that when the relationship between the parties are governed by an agreement, it was obligatory on the part of the appellant to consider the same.
9.
Mr. Banik, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, submitted keeping in view the evidence adduced on behalf of the appellants itself, it must be held that the minimum amount of compensation was payable.
10.
The principal question which arises for consideration in this appeal is what would be the date on which such compensation would become payable.
11.
The Apex Court in Pratap Narain Singh Deo v. Srinivas Sabata and another reported in AIR 1976 SC 222 : 1976(1) SCC 289 upon considering the provisions of the definition of the expression "total disablement" and dealing with the provisions for imposition of penalty as engrafted in section 4A(3) of the Workmen's Compensation Act held :-  "Section 3 of the Act deals with the employer's liability for compensation.
Sub-section (1) of that section provides that the employer shall be liable to pay compensation if "personal injury is caused to a workman by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment."
It was not the case of the employee that the right to compensation was taken away under sub-section (5) of Section 3 because of the institution of suit in a civil court for damages, in respect of the injury, against the employer or any other person.
The employer therefore became liable to pay the compensation as soon as the aforesaid person injury was caused to the workman by the accident which admittedly arose out of and in the course of the employment.
It is, therefore, futile to contend that the compensation did not fall due until after the Commissioner's order dated May 6, 1969 under Section 19.
What the section provides is that if any question arises in any proceeding under the Act as to the liability of any person to pay compensation or as to the amount or duration of the compensation it shall, in default of agreement, be settled by the Commissioner.
There is therefore nothing to justify the argument that the employer's liability to pay compensation under Section 3, in respect of the injury, was suspended until after the settlement contemplated by Section 19.
The appellant was thus liable to pay compensation as soon as the aforesaid personal injury was caused to the appellant, and there is no justification for the argument to the contrary.
It was the duty of the appellant, under Section 4A(1) of the Act, to pay the compensation at the rate provided by Section 4 as soon as the personal injury was caused to the respondent.
He failed to do so."
12.
The decision of Pratap Narain Singh Deo (supra) in the context of Workmen's Compensation (Amendment) Act, 1995 came up for consideration in Kerala State Electricity Board and another v. Valsala K and another reported in 1999 Lab.IC 3290 wherein following Pratap Narain Singh Deo (supra) and approving the Full Bench decision of Kerala High Court in United India Insurance Co Ltd v. Alavi, reported in 1998(1) Kerala Law Times 951 : 1998(3) SCT 611 (Kerala)(FB) the Apex Court held that the amount of compensation would be determined with reference to the date on which the accident had occurred and not on the basis of latter legislation.
13.
In the instant case, the amount of salary which used to be received by the claimant-respondent is not in dispute.
14.
Although the claimant-respondent was getting total emoluments of Rs. 1,403/- as on the date of the accident as has been stated by D.W.1.
JN Bhowmic, his salary in the year 1986-87 when he was released was Rs. 2,700/- pm but in view of the aforementioned Apex Court decision, compensation was payable as determinable on the date of accident.
The amount of compensation should be computed, keeping in view the date of accident and not the date of filing the claim petition.
Having regard to the National Maritime Board Agreement, 1980 which was effective from 131980 and was in force for a period of two years, we are of the opinion that as the claimant-respondent at that point of time was getting a salary of Rs. 1,403/- he was entitled to get a compensation of Rs. 63,000/-.
However, he would be entitled to simple interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the aforementioned amount from the date of accident till the date of award and thereafter at the rate of 15% per annum till the date of actual payment.
As admittedly the appellant had not deposited the said amount for which there does not exist any justification, we direct that the appellant shall also be liable to pay 50% of the amount of compensation which comes to Rs. 31,500/- as penalty.
The appeal is thus disposed of.
Orders accordingly.