RL Anand, J - Komal Rani has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and she has prayed for the issuance of a writ of mandamus declaring the admission of respondent No. 3, as illegal and the petitioner has further prayed that she be given admission to the Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Course for the Session 1999-2000.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she passed her Matriculation Examination from Punjab School Education Board in Ist Division securing 7015% marks.
The Director Technical Education, Industrial Training Department, Punjab, Chandigarh, issued a prospectus for admission to the Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Course in the State of Punjab.
According to the petitioner the minimum qualification for the course was matric and admission was supposed to be made purely on merit on the basis of marks obtained in Matriculation Examination.
The grouse of the petitioner is that she secured 7015% marks, whereas respondent No. 3 had lower merit and in spite of that admission has been given to respondent No. 3.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and stand taken up by these respondents is that the petitioner attached a bogus certificate allegedly issued by the Headmistress, BS Modern High School, Amritsar to procure the admission by illegal means in the two years Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Course.
The petitioner had tried to mislead this Court also fully realising that she was not eligible for the admission in the said course.
According to the conditions of the prospectus it was incumbent upon the candidate to possess minimum educational qualification of matric or higher secondary and also should have passed the subject of drawing and painting in the Middle Standard Examination.
The petitioner had never passed the drawing and painting subject in the Middle Standard Examination and, therefore, she was not eligible for admission to the said course.
4.
Respondent No. 3 also filed separate written statement and she denied the allegations of the petitioner.
Rather her stand was common as that of respondents No. 1 and 2.
The parties have also placed certain documents with the writ petition and during the course of submissions, I have also examined some records produced by the respondent-department.
5.
As I have just stated above that for the eligibility, it was obligatory on the part of the petitioner to pass drawing and painting subject in the Middle Standard Examination and the only point for determination in this case is that whether the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications or not ?
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, during the course of submissions, has shown me a Middle Standard Certificate, which was attached by the petitioner, along with her application.
A cursory glance of that would show that total marks are 600 and the petitioner appeared in Panjabi, English, Mathematics, Science and Social Study.
There was a column of drawing.
Against this column it has been shown that petitioner allegedly secured 65 marks out of 100 marks and 35 marks have been shown as pass marks.
This entry in the column of Drawing subject, is totally in different hand.
It appears that earlier an effort was made to show that the petitioner has passed the Drawing Examination.
It was shown that the minimum pass marks are 33 out of 100.
These digits have been scored off but are evident and decipherable.
A certificate has also been issued by the Headmistress, BS Modern High School, Amritsar on 1191999, in which it has been certified as follows :-  "Certified that Miss Komal, D/O Shri Sat Pal Sharma, mother Smt. Amarjit Kaur, has passed the Middle Standard Examination of 1995 from this School under Roll No. 129621.
No certificate has been issued by this School other than the certificate issued by the Punjab School Education Board.
During this period the above student did not pass her middle standard examination in drawing subject.
Sd/-  for Headmistress  BS Modern High School,  affiliated to P.S.E.B.
192, Vijay Nagar,  Amritsar"  7.
Thus, the reading of the above would show that the petitioner never passed her Middle Standard Examination in the drawing subject and, therefore, she was not eligible to get the admission in the course.
The certificate which has been attached by the petitioner along with her application, clearly indicates that interpolation has been made in the said certificate and an effort has been made by the petitioner to show that she obtained 65 marks out of 100 against the pass percentage of 35.
A person who commits forgery is not entitled to invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court.
No sympathy can be shown to such a person.
Even otherwise, the petitioner was never eligible to the said course.
If this problem has been detected by the respondent-authority and the petitioner was disqualified from getting the admission, no wrong can be attributed to the respondent-authority.
8.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.