VK Bali, J - Petitioner Jagrup Singh Gill, an Ex-Social Studies Master, through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release his retiral benefits, such as pension, commutation of pension, gratuity, general provident fund etc. as may be admissible to him under the relevant rules applicable to the Punjab Government employees after having rendered more than 20 years qualifying service, with all consequential benefits.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner was appointed as Primary teacher in 1954 and on his improving qualifications, he was made regular against the post of Art and Craft (Drawing) Teacher.
He was further appointed on higher post by promotion as Social Studies Master in June, 1971.
Vide orders Annexures P-1 and P-2, passed in the year 1975, the Government of India gave approval and respondent No. 1 also issued No Objection Certificate on the recommendations of Nigerian Government, for the petitioner to go on deputation for a period of three years with the stipulation that deputation period could be extended for a further period of five years.
In June, 1976, petitioner was relieved enabling him to proceed to Nigeria on deputation, but due to unfavourable circumstances, he could not come back on expiry of three years' deputation period and, thus, requested for extension.
He ultimately returned in 1981 and requested the respondents to permit him to join his duty but he was not allowed to do so on account of non-availability of his service record.
The petitioner, vide Annexures P-5 and P-6, dated February 18, 1987 and March 2, 1987 again submitted his joining report but he was not allowed to do so, again for the reason that his previous record was not available.
In May, 1987, the Director Public Instructions asked District Education Officer, respondent No. 2, to furnish information regarding service particulars of petitioner.
Service particulars of petitioner were submitted by respondent No. 2 to the Director Public Instruction on October 1, 1990.
Just, preceding that, petitioner had made a representation on September 11, 1990 to the District Education Officer wherein a request was made to locate/reconstruct his service record as also that he be allowed to perform his duties.
The District Education Officer forwarded the case of petitioner to the Director Public Instruction for approval and allowing him to join as Master in Government High School, Bibipur, where post of Social Studies Master was available.
In January, 1994, respondent No. 2 again requested respondent No. 1 to give approval so that petitioner could be allowed to join.
On February 17, 1994, respondent No. 1 again asked respondent No. 2 to allow the petitioner to join his duties pending initiation of departmental enquiry and petitioner joined his duties.
It is the case of petitioner that due to unfavourable atmosphere at the place of his posting, he requested for voluntary retirement by giving one month notice and also tendering two months salary to the tune of Rs. 6731/- by way of demand draft in lieu of notice period.
In March, 1994, respondent No. 2 forwarded all the necessary documents including affidavit submitted by the petitioner seeking voluntary retirement.
The notice period of voluntary retirement expired on March 22, 1994.
However, on May 5, 1994, respondent No. 1 intimated that request for voluntary retirement of petitioner could not be accepted as the department intended to initiate disciplinary proceedings against him for remaining absent from duty, although no charge-sheet had been issued upto that time.
In March, 1996, petitioner, before filing this petition, issued a legal notice and prayed for his salary and post-retiral benefits.
But when the same brought no tangible results, present writ, with the prayers, as referred to above, was filed in this Court on May 22, 1996.
3.
Vide order dated May 17, 1996, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, appearing in the Court, was asked to apprise the Court as to what was the stage of departmental enquiry.
It may be mentioned here that on that day, learned Addl AG, had stated that there was departmental enquiry pending against the petitioner.
Nothing further has been mentioned in the interim orders passed thereafter.
In other words, there is no mention in the interim orders passed thereafter as to whether the information, as required to be given by the Addl AG, was ever given.
The writ was, however, admitted to regular hearing on October 7, 1996.
4.
In the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it has been pleaded that the petitioner had been working as Art and Craft Teacher in Government College of Education, Patiala.
He was allowed to proceed on deputation to Nigeria for a period of three years in the year 1976.
There was a condition in his deputation that in no case he may stay beyond period of contract without prior permission of the Government of India.
However, the petitioner remained in Nigeria upto 1987 without the prior permission of the Government of India.
He was allowed to join his duty pending initiation of departmental enquiry.
However, in order to avoid departmental action as a result of wilful absence, petitioner immediately after joining his duties moved the case for voluntary retirement which was rejected by the competent authority stating that he could not be allowed to proceed on voluntary retirement till the decision of pending departmental proceedings against him.
Not a word has been mentioned in the written statement as to what happened to the department enquiry that was initiated against the petitioner.
It is relevant to mention here that in para 16 of the petition, it has been pleaded that when request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement was declined vide order, Annexure P-15, no departmental enquiry was pending nor any charge-sheet under the relevant provisions of the rules, had been issued to him.
In the order, Annexure P-15, it has only been mentioned that the petitioner cannot be permitted to voluntarily retire as the administrative action for absence is going to be taken against him.
5.
From the pleadings of the parties, as have been reflected above, it would, thus, transpire that by the time order, Annexure P-15, came to be passed, no action had been taken against the petitioner.
Mr. Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that no departmental proceedings had even been initiated against the petitioner till such time matter came up for hearing on September 17, 1996, when the Additional Advocate General had informed the Court that enquiry was pending against the petitioner and when he was asked to apprise the Court the outcome thereof.
He states that the writ came to be admitted on October 7, 1996 as learned Addl AG, Punjab, did not apprise the Court as to whether any enquiry was pending or same had since been taken to its logical end.
Position is no different even today, further contends the counsel.
6.
Learned State Counsel has not been able to controvert the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that no enquiry was even held in the matter.
Despite that, Mr. Mahajan, confines the relief in the present petition to post-retiral benefits that may be admissible to the petitioner from the date he joined service, i.e., 1954 and upto the date he legally remained on deputation in Nigeria, i.e., 1979.
It may be recalled that the petitioner joined service in 1954 and, as mentioned above, in 1976 vide Annexure P-1, he was permitted to go on deputation to Nigeria for a period of three years and this period expired in 1979.
Petitioner had served the department for a period of approximately 25 years by 1979 and it could not be disputed during the course of arguments that he had put in qualifying service to earn post-retiral benefits.
That the petitioner should be at least entitled to post-retiral benefits worked out for his 25 years service, i.e., from 1954 to 1979, could not be disputed during the course of arguments by the State counsel.
This Court is also of the view that when the petitioner was ultimately permitted to join duty and sought voluntary retirement, which was not granted only on the ground that a departmental action was contemplated against him and when till date no departmental action has actually been taken, petitioner is at least entitled to post-retiral benefits from 1954 to 1979.
7.
In view of what has been said above, this petition is partly allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to work out the post-retiral benefits of the petitioner from the date he joined service, i.e., 1954, upto the date he lawfully remained on deputation, i.e., 1979.
Let the arrears be calculated within fifteen days from the date a copy of this order is received by the respondents and payment made to the petitioner immediately thereafter.
If there is delay of more than fifteen days, petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 10% from 1979 till such time payment is made.
Petition partly allowed.