Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Considered.
Admitted.
2.
Mr. Attar tenders a statement at bar that the objections filed on behalf of respondent may be treated as reply.
The statement is taken on record, pleadings are complete.
The matter has been heard finally.
3.
Naseem Amir Shah petitioner was appointed as Marketing Inspector on 171996, in the office of Assistant Marketting Officer Lucknow by the then Assistant Marketing Officer Lucknow who happened to be father of the petitioner said Naseem Amir Shah.
He came to be appointed in the arrangement created by transfer of one AR Mir Marketing Inspector to Delhi on stop-gap arrangement till posting of any suitable person from the Head Office with condition that he shall have claim to continue after a gap of one year in which case he shall be treated as regular temporary employee of the Directorate of Horticulture of the State.
The petitioner joined and worked as such marketing inspector till 2181998.
This Govt of J&K terminated his services vide order No. 186-CHPM of 1998 dated 2281988.
This termination order is impugned in the writ and is prayed to be quashed and petitioner allowed to continue to discharge his duties as Marketing Inspector with payment of salary attached to the post through appropriate writ.
4.
In reply respondents are admitting the appointment of petitioner as Marketing Inspector on 171996 by the then Assistant Marketing Officer Lucknow, the father of the petitioner.
It is averred that the father of petitioner abused and mis-used his official position and acted in violation of rules to benefit his own son.
The appointment is alleged to be de hors the selection rules.
Appointment to the post of grading and marketing inspector has to be through State Selection Recruitment Board under SSRB Rules (SRO 194/92).
The selection having been made by SSRB and appointment having not been made by the competent authority to the post, the petitioner's service stand terminated.
It is, however, stated that the arrangement of the petitioner was just a stop-gap arrangement and even in the earlier writ SWP 186/98 filed by the petitioner he did not succeed as prayer for regularisation of his services as grading and marketing inspector was declined by the court.
The petition is prayed to be dismissed.
5.
The counsel for the petitioner submits that the initial order of appointment of petitioner annexure PA, though indicating in terms it as a stop-gap arrangement, provides that in case no suitable person is deputed by the Head Office for one year, the incumbent petitioner shall have a right to continue and shall be deemed as regular employee of the Directorate of Horticulture.
However, as the Directorate failed to appoint any person as grading and marketing inspector Lucknow within one year, therefore, petitioner acquired the right to continue as regular employee.
He further submits that the termination order annexure C has been passed for mala fide reasons.
The petitioner despite having completed over two years as the marketing inspector has been thrown out for extraneous reasons and on mala fide considerations.
His father's rivalry with Commissioner Secretary to Govt. Agriculture department respondent No. 1 has cast him impugned termination (annexure C) and the petitioner has suffered for no fault of his.
Though, the petitioner filed SWP No. 186/98 which has been disposed of on 651998 but the question of regularisation has not been commented upon in the judgment, therefore, the question of regularisation sought is still wide open in this writ.
6.
The counsel for respondents counters petitioner's argument and canvasses that the appointment of petitioner has been sheer abuse and mis-use of powers by the then Assistant Marketing Officer of Lucknow who wanted to shower illegal benefit on his son the petitioner by appointing him as grading and marketing inspector at Lucknow in own office and under his own control.
He had neither powers nor the jurisdiction to make the appointment.
The appointment has been made against the rules.
As a candidate has been selected in accordance with rules by the SSRB and appointed by competent authority, therefore, the arrangement made by the petitioner's father in favour of petitioner has been terminated on due consideration of all the relevant facts and circumstances of the case.
The termination is not for any extraneous reason or mala fide.
It has been done in the interests of administration within the normal course of duties performed by the State Govt. and its officials.
The question of rivalry between petitioner's father and the Commissioner Secretary is nothing but wishful thinking.
In the earlier writ, the court had refused to be drawn to pronounce on the question of regularisation of petitioner's service and impliedly regularisation has been found not legal and just, therefore, the petitioner's prayer over against for the same relief in the petition is impermissible.
7.
Initial appointment order of petitioner dated 171996 annexure A, as marketing inspector in Assistant Marketing Officer (Area Marketing Officer ?)
at Lucknow by the then Assistant Marketing Officer father of appointee petitioner is just a stop-gap arrangement ordered consequent on the arrangement created by transfer of One M.R.
Mir the then Marketing Inspector at Lucknow as marketing inspector Delhi.
The condition in the order that if in case petitioner continues in the arrangement for one year, he shall have the right to continue and to be treated as regular temporary employee of the Directorate of Horticulture, is not covered by any provision of law or rules, such condition cannot even serve the ends of administration.
The appointment to the post of grading and marketing inspector in Horticulture department may be at Lucknow, Delhi or any other place within or outside the State, has to be in accordance with the recruitment rules applicable in the field.
The appointment to the post of the inspector is made in accordance with and under Jammu and Kashmir Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1992 (SRO 194 of 1992).
Any appointment de hors these rules can neither be regularised nor can such appointment or arrangement confer any benefit or right on an incumbent to continue.
From record it is seen that this post of grading and marketing inspector available in the Directorate of Horticulture has been filled in accordance with the rules and the competent authority has issued orders of appointment on the recommendation and selection made by the SSRB and consequent upon such appointment, one Bashir Ahmad Bhat grading/marketing inspector AGMO's office Bomai Sopore Zone has been transferred and posted as marketing inspector in the office of area marketing office Lucknow.
This order has been issued on 2281998, even earlier to the presentation of the instant writ before the High Court.
8.
The contention that the action of the competent authority namely Commissioner/Secretary respondent No. 1 in issuing the order of termination of petitioner (annexure C) is mala fide on extraneous considerations and based on (some) rivalry between petitioner's father and respondent No. 1, is not supported either by facts or by any material on record.
The contention is bald.
It lacks in details.
No particulars or details required to lay foundation for mala fide are mentioned or given in the petition.
Mention of words, mala fide reasons', `mala fide consideration' without anything more cannot clothe the impugned order mala fide.
The necessary pleadings thereto are lacking.
The impugned order on the face of it has been passed within jurisdiction by a competent authority.
All aspects of the matter have been considered.
Even the earlier direction of this court while disposing of SWP No. 186/98 inter se the parties on 651998 has been also considered.
The rule position has been also accounted for.
The order does not appear either on facts or law to suffer from any malice.
There is nothing on record to indicate any rivalry between the petitioner's father an Assistant Marketing Officer at Lucknow (on the relevant date) and the respondent No. 1 Commissioner/Secretary and in any case nothing of the sort based on any fact is given out in the petition.
Mere mention of a word or two of the supposed rivalry will not suffice.
In such a situation it is not an adverse reflection on the impugned action of the respondents.
9.
The petitioner earlier filed writ petition No. 186/98 against the very respondents who are before the court in the instant writ petition, with prayer for declaring him as a regular employee and for release of salary for the period he rendered services in the arrangement as Marketing Inspector Lucknow.
The court while disposing of the petition on 651998 vide annexure R1 declined to grant the relief of regularisation but issued a direction for release of salary to the petitioner for the period he has worked or may work.
In fact the relief of the regularisation as sought in this petition stands declined earlier also.
In such circumstances to petition pray for grant of the relief second time is not appropriate as a matter of policy, if not on other counts.
Merely working in an arrangement over a period may be for a year or two cannot confer any right on the occupant of such arrangement to hold the post indefinitely and then to seek regularisation on such basis, when the arrangement and the appointment itself is beyond the competence of the authority allowing and providing such arrangement and more so when the arrangement/employment is not covered by the recruitment/appointment rules.
In this case, the act(s) of omission and commission is compounded as the then Assistant Marketing Officer at Lucknow who allowed and ordered the arrangement and made the appointment of the petitioner, happens to be no other person than the father of the petitioner.
No other point was taken or canvassed before this court.
In the result, for the aforesaid reasons, the petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.