AR Lakshmanan, J - Heard Mr. KL Narasimhan for the appellant, Government Pleader for R1 and R2, Mr. N Nandakumara Menon for R3 and Mr. PK Kurian for R4.
2.
The Writ Appeal is directed against the order passed by the learned single Judge in OP No. 15373 of 1997.
The said Original Petition was filed by the appellant challenging Ext.
P4 order of the State of Kerala.
The 3rd respondent herein, Air Cargo Complex Workers Union, filed Ext.
P2 before the State of Kerala under Section 22(1)(a) of the Kerala Headload Workers Act seeking reference of the disputes mentioned thereunder by the appellate authority namely the Regional Joint Labour Commissioner, Kollam.
The Secretary to Government issued Ext.
P4 order on Ext.
P2 directing the Regional Joint Labour Commissioner for a final decision in the matter.
3.
We have perused OP No. 15373 of 1997 filed by the appellant.
The main challenge in the petition was that there is no employer-employee relationship between the appellant and the members of the 3rd respondent union and that there is no dispute as understood under Section 2(h) of the Act between the appellant and the members of the 3rd respondent, that the appellant is not the employer in relation to the members of the 3rd respondent and that Ext.
P4 is not passed in conformity with the statutory provisions contained in Section 22(1)(a) of the Act.
It is also urged that no reasons are set forth in Ext.
P4 for referring the dispute and that the notice directed to be issued to the appellant as per Ext.
P1 judgment was not issued before passing Ext.
P4 and that the said order is cryptic and without application of mind and without assigning any reasons therefor as provided under Section 22 of the Act.
4.
The learned Judge dismissed the Original Petition holding that lack of notice as directed to be issued under Ext.
P1 has not created any prejudice to the appellant and that if the Government is of the opinion that there is a case for reference, that matter has to be referred to the authority and it is for the authority to decide the matter on merit and that the absence of employer-employee relationship or non-application of the provisions of the Headload Workers Act, vagueness of the reference etc. have to be raised before the authority itself.
5.
It is also seen from the records that the Original petition was filed on September 1, 1997 and it was heard and dismissed by the learned single Judge on the same day.
No notice or order was issued to the respondents therein.
Being aggrieved by the above judgment, the present Writ Appeal has been filed by the appellant/petitioner.
We have heard all counsel appearing on behalf of all parties.
Mr. Narasimhan, leaned counsel for the appellant submitted that the impugned judgment of the learned single Judge suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record.
According to the learned counsel, the learned Judge ought to have held that Section 22(1) of the Headload Workers Act imposes obligation on the first respondent Government to state the reasons for issuing the order under Ext.
P4 and as Ext.
P4 is one without stating reason, the learned single Judge ought to have quashed the same.
6.
Our attention was drawn to Section 22 of the Kerala Headload Workers Act, 1978.
It reads thus :  "22.
Reference or decision of dispute by Government - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 21, where any dispute exists or is apprehended, the Government may, by order in writing and for reasons to be stated therein - (a) refer the dispute to the appellate authority constituted for the area in which the dispute exists or is apprehended, for decision; or (b) decide the dispute themselves.
(2) Where a dispute is referred to an appellate authority under clause (a) of sub-section (1), that authority shall decide the dispute as if the reference by the Government were an appeal under sub-section (6) of Section 21.
(3) The decision of the Government referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be final and shall be given effect to by the parties to the dispute forthwith."
It is useful to reproduce Ext.
P4 passed by the Government for proper appreciation of the said order and also to see whether the said order satisfies the requirements of Section 22 of the Act.
Ext.
P4 order reads as follows :-  "Government of Kerala Proceedings of the Secretary to Government Department of Labour and Rehabilitation No. 24571/H3/96/LBR Dated : 267/1997