Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The three petitioners are working as Sub Inspectors in the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation.
Vide memorandums dated September 1, 1998, they were served with separate charge-sheets.
It was alleged that on account of their "careless and negligence, a loss of Rs. 45,000/- has been caused to the corporation."
They were accused of misconduct, causing "loss of Rs. 45,000/- to the corporation on account of carelessness and negligence" and "violating the law and breaking the discipline."
2.
It is stated before us that the petitioners filed their replies denying the charges.
On June 24, 1999, the petitioners were called upon to appear before the Enquiry Officer.
They prayed for stay of proceedings.
Their request having been declined vide order dated July 5, 1999, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They pray that the departmental proceedings be stayed on the ground that criminal case is pending and they have already been charged by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Patiala, on December 11, 1998.
3.
We have heard Mr. B S Walia, learned counsel for the petitioners.
4.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the set of facts on which the criminal trial and the departmental proceedings have been launched is the same.
Consequently, if the petitioners are asked to disclose their defence during the departmental proceedings, their rights and interests would be prejudicially affected in the trial before the Court.
5.
The petitioners have been charge-sheeted by the Court as under :-  "CHARGE-SHEET That on 15.5.98 between 200 to 500 pm in the area of Booking Branch, PRTC, Patiala you all committed the theft of tickets worth Rs. 85,000/- by taking it out of the possession of PRTC, Patiala intending to take the said tickets dishonestly without GM consent and thus thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 379 IPC, and within my cognizance.
Secondly, on the same date, time and place you being a servant in the employment of PRTC, Patiala and in such capacity entrusted with tickets of PRTC worth Rs. 85,000/- to which you have committed criminal breach of trust in respect of the said property and thus thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 409 IPC, and within my cognizance.
Thirdly, on the same date, time and place you all being the members of criminal conspiracy and such agreed to do an illegal act by illegal means and thus thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 120-B of IPC and within my cognizance.
And I thereby direct you to be tried by this Court on the abovesaid charge.
Sd/- C.J.M./11.12.98" 6.
A perusal of the above would show that the petitioners have been accused of having committed offences punishable under Sections 379, 409 and 120-B Indian Penal Code.
Still further, allegations relate to the theft of tickets worth Rs. 85,000/-.
As against this, the departmental proceedings are based on the fact that "tickets worth a total amount of Rs. 45,000/- were missing from the almirah from the booking branch ...... On account of carelessness and negligence a lost of Rs. 45,000/- has been caused to the Corporation..."  7.
On a perusal of the record, we are satisfied that the set of facts on which the two proceedings are based being different, and the charges being of a totally different nature, no prejudice whatsoever shall be caused to the petitioners by the continuance of the departmental proceedings.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court in RP Ramajayam v. Tamil Nadu Cements Corporation Ltd, Ariyalur, 1994(1) SLR 171 : 1994(2) SCT 79 (Madras).
In that case, it was found that the continuance of proceedings would affect the petitioner's right to have a fair hearing before the Criminal Court as well as before the disciplinary authority.
In the present case, we do not find the situation to be similar.
Keeping in view the rule as laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd and another, JT 1999(2) SC 456 : 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC), Depot Manager, Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation v. Mohd.
Yousuf Miya, 1996(6) SLR 629 and State of Rajasthan v. BK Meena and others, 1996(4) RSJ 406 : 1996(4) SCT 708 (SC), we find no ground to stay the proceedings before the departmental authorities.
In fact, learned counsel for the petitioners has himself pointed out the decision in Capt.
Anthony's case and has placed reliance on the second conclusion recorded in paragraph 22.
It is precisely on account of the observations in paragraph 22 that we find no merit in this petition.
No other point has been raised.
No merit.
Dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.