KS Radhakrishnan, J - Question that has come up for consideration in this case is whether the management is justified in evaluating comparative merits of two applicants, who submitted applications for appointment under rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A of the Kerala Education Rules, under the dying-in-harness scheme.
The said provision is extracted below :  "51-B.
The Manager shall give employment to a dependent of an aided school teacher dying-in-harness.
Government orders relating to employment assistance to the dependents of Government servants dying-in-harness shall mutatis mutandis apply in the matter of such appointments."
2.
A vacancy of clerk arose in the St. Thomas High School on 3111998.
Second petitioner and second respondent submitted applications for appointment under th dying-in-harness scheme.
Second respondent's father was a teacher in the School, who passed away on 1731987.
Second petitioner's mother was a teacher inthe St Mary's LP School, Malayattor, who passed away on 2171991.
Both the schools are under the management of the first petitioner.
Claim for appointment of second petitioner and second respondent was recognised by the management, and consequently, both the them were called for interview on 17111991.
Board of interview decided to appoint second petitioner in the vacancy of clerk which arose in the school on 3111998.
Aggrieved by the same, second respondent filed a compliant before the District Educational Officer.
Since no action has been taken by the District Educational Officer second respondent approached this Court and filed O.P. No. 1958 of 1998, which was disposed by this Court directing the District Educational Officer to pass appropriate orders on the complaint of the second respondent in accordance with law.
3.
District Educational Officer passed Ext.
P4 order dated 18.3.1998 and took the view that second respondent, having prescribed qualification of SSLC for the post of Clerk under Rule 2(1) of Chapter XXIV-A of the KER, is a better claimant under Rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A of the KER for the post of Clerk which arose on 3111998, due to retirement of a clerk.
Management was therefore directed to take appropriate action to give appointment to the rightful claimant.
Manager as well as the appointee have approached this Court challenging the order of the D.E.O.
4.
Counsel for the petitioners submitted that management is competent to examine the rival claims of second petitioner as well as second respondent and to effect appointment in the school under Rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A of the KER According to counsel, since the second respondent's father had died on 1731987, prior to the introduction of Rule 51B, he is not entitled to get the benefit of the said rule.
According to counsel, Rule 51B operates only prospectively.
Counsel further contended that the mother of the second petitioner died on 2171991, after the introduction of Rule 51B, and therefore he is entitled to the benefit of Rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A of the KER Counsel also relied on decisions of the Supreme Court in Managing Director, MMTC Ltd v. Pramoda Devi, 1997(11) SCC 390, as well as in Director of Education (Secondary) v. Pushpendra Kumar, 1998(2) SCT 791 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 192 : 1998(4) SLR 386 (SC) and contended that the object underlying a provision for grant of compassionate employment is to enable the family of deceased employee to tide over the sudden crises resulting due to death of the bread earner which has left the family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
As far as second respondent is concerned, since the death of his father occurred in 1987, there is every reason to think that family has tied over the difficulties and therefore he is not entitled to get employment under the scheme.
5.
This Court had occasion to consider the scope of Rule 51B in Narayanan v. State of Kerala, 1998(4) SCT 760 (Kerala) : 1998(2) Ker LT 446, wherein this Court took the view in the matter of giving compassionate employment, whether the death occurred prior to the introduction of Rule 51B, is of no consequence.
This Court noticed that there is no time limit fixed in the Rules as to when the application is to be made.
Further statute made all the Government orders application mutatis mutandis.
In fact GO (P) No. 7/95/P&ARD dated 3031995 is passed in suppression of all the existing orders to regulate the appointment under the compassionate employment scheme.
Paragraph 7 of the GO categorically says that dependents of Government servants who died prior to the inceptive the scheme (21st January, 1970) shall also be eligible for employment assistance under the Scheme.
In para 8(ii) of GOMs.
No. 15/97/G Edn.
dated 16.1.1997, it is stated that the managers of aided schools shall give employment to dependent of aided schools teachers/non-teaching staff of aided schools dying-in-harness.
The Government orders relating to the compassionate employment scheme as applicable to the dependent of Government servants dying-in-harness shall mutatis mutandis be followed in the aided schools.
Therefore the contention of management that the death occurred in 1987, and therefore second respondent cannot be considered for appointment cannot be accepted.
In any view of the matter, management has no case that the second respondent was ineligible to apply under the scheme.
In fact, management entertained the application submitted by the second respondent, and after having found that he has got a claim for appointment, he was called for interview.
After evaluating comparative merits of persons who have applied under rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A of the KER, management came to the conclusion that the second petitioner was a better claimant.
In other words, claim of the second petitioner under rule 51-B was recognised by the management, and was selected on comparative evaluation of merits.
6.
I am of the view, in the matter of claims Rule 51B of Chapter XIV-A, there is no question of evaluation of comparative merits.
There is no element of selection.
When an application is made under Rule 51B the only question to be considered is whether the applicant is qualified under the KER If comparative merit is taken as the criterion then the object of Rule 51B would be defeated.
That is not the purpose and intent of Rule 51B.
Evidently those applications preferred by dependents of persons who died earlier will be given preference.
In the instant case, as far as second respondent is concerned, his father dies in 1987 and as far as second petitioner is concerned, his mother died in 1991, and therefore second respondent has to be preferred, provided he continues to be dependent even now.
There is no material in this case to establish that the second respondent has tied over the difficulties due to the death of his father.
In fact, there is no such case for the management.
Management has entertained the application, which presupposes that second respondent has not get over the difficulties.
In the above mentioned circumstances, I do not find any justification in interfering with the decision taken by the District Educational Officer.
Accordingly, this writ petition lacks merits and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.