SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 30th March, 1998 paseed by a learned Single Judge of this Court, whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the first respondent herein was allowed.
Bereft of all unnecessary details, the fact of the matter is as follows :  The first respondent's father Late Eusuf Ali Shaikh was headmaster of Jethmahesh Primary School (hereinafter referred to as the "said School").
He reached his age of superannuation in 1989.
He applied for and was granted extension of service in terms of Rule 4A of the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Rules, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the "1940 Rules") framed under the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, the said Late Eusuf Ali Shaikh while on second extension, died on 2961991.
The petitioner being a dependent of said Late Eusuf Ali Shaikh, filed an application before the appellant herein for grant of appointment on compassioante ground.
The selelction committee allegedly asked the first respondent to appear for interview on 19th August, 1991 by a letter dated 31st July, 1991.
However, he was not appointed.
The first respondent thereafter filed a writ application before this Court which was marked as CO 20683(W) of 1995.
A learned Judge of this Court by a judgment and order dated 811996 disposed of the said application stating, "The respondent No. 4 the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, Nadia District Primary School Council, is directed to consider the representations of the petitioner and his mother dated 271991 which are collectively marked as Annexure-A to the writ petition for appointment on compassionate ground and dispose of the same in accordance with law by passing a speaking order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the writ petitioner and such other person/persons, as may be considered necessary by him, within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
While communicating this order to the respondent No. 4 the petitioner shall also enclose therewith a copy of the writ petition.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
Affidavit-of-service filed today be kept with the record."
Thereafter upon giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner-first respondent an order was passed by the appellant on 3171997 which was contained in Annexure "E" to the writ application, in terms whereof the petitioner-first respondent's application for appointment on compassionate ground was rejected stating as follows :  "In terms of the solemn order passed by the Hon'ble High Court in the matter C.O.
No. 20683(W) of 1995 the matter was heard on 2031996 in presence of the petitioner.
It was submitted by the petitioner namely Md Monirul Islam that his father was the teacher of Jethmahesh FP School who died on 2961991 at the age of 61 years 7 months and 28 days that is while enjoying 2nd term of extension of service.
As per Govt. Order the ward of the teacher who died-in-harness while enjoying extension of service is not eligible for getting appointment under died-in- harness category hence in obedience to the solemn order speaking order was passed to the effect that his case does not come under the purview of the GO and thus rejected.
He is hereby again informed that as per GO appointment on compassionate ground is not applicable for the ward whose father/mother died while enjoying extension of service thus the prayer of the petitioner for getting appointment on compassionate ground was rejected by the then Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, Nadia District Primary School Council on 2031996".
Before the learned trial Judge the only question which was raised was as to whether the said order could have been passed in view of the fact that the Government Order dated 2nd January, 1995 would have no application to the fact of the matter as the first-respondent's father died on 2961991.
The learned trial Judge, keeping in view the aforementioned fact held that as the said Government Order dated 2nd January, 1995 has a prospective operation and not retrospective and retroactive one, the order impugned in the said application was liable to be set aside.
Aggrieved by the said order this appeal has been filed.
2.
The question which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether in terms of Rule 3D read with Rule 4A of the said Rules of 1940 the first respondent was entitled to an appointment on compassionate ground and in any event, whether the appellant could grant such appointment in view of the embargo placed in such matters as envisaged under Rule 14 of the Recruitment and Leave Rules, 1991.
3.
Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent, has raised a question as regards justifiability of the appellant in raising the said contention on the ground that such a plea had not been taken before the learned trial Judge.
The learned Counsel further submits that in view of the fact that the writ petitioner-first respondent's father died on 2961991, when the 1940 Rules were operating in the field, the question of applicability of Rule 14 of 1991 Rules does not and cannot arise.
In support of the said contention strong reliance had been placed by the learned Counsel upon a decision reported in 1998(5) S.C.C.
562.
4.
Rule 3D and Rule 4A of 1940 Rules which are relevant for the purpose of disposal of this appeal read thus :  "3D.
Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 3, rule 3A or rule 3B, but subject to the provisions of rule 3C, a ward of a primary teacher who dies in harness may be appointed, with the approval of the Director of Public Instruction, West Bengal as an assistant teacher/school mother against regular vacancy irrespective of whether the available vacancy is to be reserved for trained or untrained candidates, provided that he/she fulfils the minimum qualifications for such appointment."
"4A.
A teacher appointed by the Board may be retained in service upto the age of 60 years, but the Board may, if it thinks fit, grant thereafter extension of service of a teacher on a year to year basis upto the age of 65 years, provided the teacher continues to be physically fit and mentally alert.
Explanation - The continuous period of service extended beyond the age of 60 years of the teacher will count towards increment in the scale of pay, terminal benefits and other benefits with the approval of the Government."
5.
It is not disputed that the age of superannuation of a primary teacher would be and had all along been sixty years.
Rule 4A, however, empowers the concerned authorities to extend service of an assistant teacher in the manner laid down therein.
Ex facie such extension of service would not carry with it all the benefits which are available to a teacher who was yet to reach his age of superannuation.
Explanation appended to Rule 4A clearly states as to which benefits would be available to an assistant teacher who is on extended service.
It is now well settled that all citizens of India are entitled to be considered for appointment in terms of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Any appointment made in violation of the statutory rules as also the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity.
Clause 2 of Article 16 of the Constitution of India makes an exception to the aforementioned legal principle, in terms whereof a dependent of an employee may be appointed on compassionate ground in die-in-harness category, but the same means that such provision should be made by way of a statute and administrative order and not otherwise.
Rule 3D aforementioned clearly states that appointment on compassionate ground can be given only to a dependent of an employee who had died-in-harness i.e. before he reaches the age of superannuation.
It has not been and could not be disputed that the age of superannuation in relation to an assistant primary teacher was sixty years.
Thus Rules 3D and 4A read together and given a harmonious construction must mean that the benefit of Rule 3D was not available to a teacher who was on extended service in terms of Rule 4A.
Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned Counsel, would urge that words, "other benefits" would include the benefits given to the dependent to the deceased employee in terms of Rule 3A.
We are afraid we cannot agree with the said contention.
Rule 3D was enacted keeping in view the provision of Article 16(2) of the Constitution of India.
If such rule making authority was to grant the said benefit to the dependent of an employee an express reference ought to have been made therefor in the exception.
The same having not been done, it is not possible for the Court to read the benefits of Rule 3D as having been incorporated by reference in the explanation appended to Rule 4A.
An explanation as is well known, has a definite function.
It is not a substantive provision (See S Sunderan v. VR Pratheviraman, A.I.R. 1985 S.C. 582 : 1985(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 422).
In the instant case the explanation appended to Rule 4A clearly suggests the types of benefits which a teacher on extended service was to derive.
No benefit was given nor was contemplated in terms of Rule 3D of the 1940 Rules in favour of a dependent of an assistant teacher particularly in view of the fact that appointment on compassionate ground is not a rule but an exception.
We are also of the view that such a rule has to be expressly provided for.
6.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion, that the petitioner- first respondent was not entitled to any relief in the writ application.
Furthermore, the authorities who could grant appointment in terms of 1940 Rules are no longer the authorities, after coming into force of 1991 Rules framed under the West Bengal Board of Primary Education Act, 1973 in terms whereof the appellant council is the only appointing authority to grant appointment as new rules have been framed under a new statute laying down different procedures for grant of appointment.
The appellant being a statutory authority could grant such appointment only in the event an appointee was entitled thereto within the four corners of the statute.
This aspect of the matter had been considered by a Division Bench of this Court reported in West Bengal Headmasters' Association and others v. State of West Bengal and others, 1991(2) C.L.J 188 : 95 C.W.N 754 of which one of us (Chatterjee, J) was a member.
7.
In Prem Kumar Verma and another v. Union of India and others, 1988(5) S.C.C.
457 : 1998(2) SCT 379 (SC), upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned Counsel, the fact situation was absolutely different.
In that case the post become vacant prior to July, 1989.
Process of selection was completed by 1171989 and amendment to the Rules was introduced on 551990 which was further amended in 1993 as regards the matter of seniority.
As the criteria for appointment was changed, the Apex Court held that the recruitment process having started and completed prior to coming into force of the amendment effected in the said Rules, Rules as they stood prior to such amendment, would operate in the field.
Such is not the position here.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned, we have no other option but to hold that the writ petitioner first respondent was not entitled to any relief.
We, therefore, set aside the judgment under appeal although on a different point.
9.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
10.
There will be no order as to costs.
11.
Xerox certified copy of this order if applied for urgently, may be given on priority basis.
Appeal allowed.