GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - The question which arises for consideration in this petition is whether the petitioner could be denied consideration for selection as Ayurvedic Medical Officer simply on the ground that he did not possess the qualification of Matric with Punjabi as one of the subjects.
2.
The uncontested facts which have come on the record show that the petitioner was one of the applicants for selection as Ayurvedic Medical Officer in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab (for short 'the Board') for recruitment of 46 Ayurvedic Medical Officers.
His candidature was turned down by the Board in the year 1996 on the ground that he did not possess one of the specified qualifications, namely, Matric with Punjabi.
He did not approach the Court at that time but has now invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court in view of the fact that selection made by the Board has been quashed in Civil Writ Petition No. 18406 of 1996, Dr. Adesh Singla v. State of Punjab and others, decided on May 11, 1998, along with a batch of similar writ petitions.
3.
Shri Kathuria relied on the judgments of this Court in Roopa Sharma v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) RSJ 494 : 1997(2) SCT 706 (P&H); and Narinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) RSJ 28 and argued that in view of provisions of Rule 17 of the Punjab Civil Services (General and Common Conditions of Services) Rules, 1994, as interpreted in the two decisions, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for selection and appointment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer notwithstanding the fact that he has not passed Matric with Punjabi as one of subjects.
4.
Shri Khosla has not disputed that in view of the judgments of Roopa Sharma's case and Narinder Kaur's case, a candidate who possesses knowledge of Punjabi of Matric standard is eligible for recruitment to the services of the State of Punjab and it is not necessary that he/she should have passed Matric with Punjabi.
He admitted that petition for Special Leave to Appeal filed by the State against the judgment of the High Court in Roopa Sharma's case has been dismissed by the Supreme Court.
He also conceded that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for selection and appointment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
5.
In view of this, it is not necessary to make a detailed elucidation of the points raised by the petitioner.
Instead, we deem it proper to direct the Board to consider his candidature along with other eligible persons.
Ordered accordingly.
6.
Since the petitioner has already been interviewed in pursuance of the interim direction given by this Court on June 29, 1998, we direct that the result of the selection be announced along with other candidates subject to the stay order, if any, passed by any other Court.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Petition allowed.