TS Doabia, J - Petitioner belongs to the category of service known by designation as Junior Management Grade Scale I.
Next higher promotion is to the hierarchy of the Middle Management Scale II.
Petitioner submits that he was fully eligible and should have been promoted as officer in Middle Management Scale II.
His grievance is that he was not promoted as officer in Middle Management Scale II on account of criteria adopted by the respondent- Bank.
Criteria regarding which the petitioner has made his grievance is limited.
20 marks were given to those persons who were working as Branch Manager-Accountant.
Petitioner submits that he was never given a chance to function as Branch Manager or Accountant.
It is thus mentioned that his consideration alongwith others who were given additional 20 marks has vitiated entire process of selection.
2.
Objections have been preferred.
It is submitted that among the officers who were working in Junior Management Grade Scale II and some officers on account of their efficiency and merits were given higher responsibility, they were appointed as Branch Manager-Accountant.
As they were given responsible position which gave them better managerial skill, they were rightly allowed 20 marks.
It is further submitted that the petitioner has not arrayed all those persons who were selected.
It is stated that in the absence of those persons, who were promoted no relief can be granted under Article 226.
It is also stated that the petitioner was aware of the criteria.
He having taken part in the process of selection, is debarred from challenging the same.
3.
It is also stated that posting as Branch Manager-Accountants were made in the year 1982-83.
Petitioner should have raised objection at that point of time.
It is submitted that Branch Manager-Accountants were rightly given additional weightage.
4.
It be seen that all the preliminary objections taken by the respondent-bank when construed individually and collectively, would lead to the conclusion that this petition is without any merit.
5.
Petitioner was aware of the criteria.
He took part in the process of selection.
As such he would be debarred from challenging the same.
Petition must also fail on the ground of delay and laches.
Postings as Branch Managers and Accountants was made in the year 1982-83.
Petitioner, at that point of time was aware of this posting and also that this would affect his future chances of promotion.
He did not object this.
Again, persons who have been promoted have not been arrayed as respondents.
No relief can be granted to the petitioner in absence of these persons.
6.
There can be dispute with the proposition that once the petitioner take part in the process of selection then he is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted for selection.
This aspect was noticed by this Court in Unemployed Union of Kalkote v. State of J&K, 1998(2) SCT 682, in para 19 it was observed :  "All the petitioners took part in the selection process.
They competed along with others, they were not high up in the merit list.
If this be the position they cannot turn around and contend that the process of selection is bad.
Where a candidate takes part in the process of selection i.e. takes a chance of favourable decision in his favour, he cannot turn around and challenge the process of selection (See G Sarana v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428), Justice MM Punchhi (Now Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India) in Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 109, observed that competing candidates who remain unsuccessful are estopped from challenging the process of selection.
Another Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Rajeshwar Singh v. State, 1991(1) SLR 680 reached the same conclusion.
For this reason also the petitioners must fail."
The view expressed in a recent decision reported as Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan and others, (1998) 3 SCC 694 : 1998(1) SCT 631 (SC), in this regard is categoric and is being noticed.
In para 13, it was said :  "It is not in dispute that all the candidates were made aware of the procedure for promotion before they sat for the written test and before they appeared before the Departmental Promotion Committee.
Therefore, they cannot turn around and contend later when they found they were not selected by challenging that procedure and contending that the marks prescribed for interview and confidential reports are disapproportionately high and the authorities cannot fix a minimum to be secured either at interview or in the assessment on confidential report."
Similar view was expressed in case reported as University of Cochin by its Registrar v. NS Kanjoonjamma and others, A.I.R. 1977 SC 2083.
Thus the petitioner who had taken part in the process of selection is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted by the respondent Bank.
7.
Independently of the above, the criteria for giving 20 marks to those persons who have acquired managerial skill by discharging duties of Managers and Accountants is a criteria to which no exception can be taken.
Persons acquiring experience by working in the higher positions could steal march over others.
This is precisely what has happened in this case.
This cannot be now challenged.
This petition as such is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.