GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Inspector of Police on compassionate grounds in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular letters dated 851995 and 3181995.
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that Shri Mehtab Singh, father of the petitioner, died on 21.1.1998 while he was serving as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Haryana.
Immediately thereafter, the petitioner's mother applied for his compassionate appointment in accordance with the instructions issued by the government.
Vide Annexure P-4, the petitioner was communicated the decision of the respondent No. 3 that he can be appointed on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector under the ex-gratia scheme.
He joined the post offered by the respondents and then filed this petition for grant of relief in accordance with the policy framed by the Government of Haryana to appoint the dependent of deceased employee one step lower than the post held by the deceased.
He has pleaded that in terms of the policy enshrined in the two circulars, the respondents should be directed to offer him the post of Inspector of Police which carries one step lower than the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police held by his father.
3.
In the written statement filed today, the respondents have referred to the instructions issued by the government in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(3) SC 525 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) and have pleaded that the petitioner cannot be appointed on the post of Inspector because no post is available in that cadre.
For the sake of precision and clarity, we may reproduce the averments made in paragraphs 6(i) and (ii) and (iii) and (iv) of the written statement :-  6.
That the contents of para 6 are wrong and hence denied.
It is further submitted that the case of the petitioner for ex-gratia appointment was considered in view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in Umesh Kumar Nagapl case and government instructions dated 851995 and 3181995 and he was offered the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector.
Hence, the action of the respondents is legal, just, fair and in accordance with the law.
It is further submitted that in view of Hon'ble Supreme Court findings in Umesh Kumar Nagapal case, petitioner cannot claim as a matter of right to be appointed as Inspector.
[(i) and (ii)] In reply to sub para (i) and (ii), it is submitted that case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment was considered as per government instructions dated 851995 and 3181995.
He was rightly offered the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector.
Hence, the petitioner cannot claim the post of Inspector as a right, as submitted in the preliminary objections.
The interpretation given by the petitioner to the instruction regarding appointment to one rank below is incorrect as the said instruction only indicates the highest level at which an appointment can be offered under the ex-gratia scheme.
Thus the said clause limits the highest level at which an ex-gratia appointment could be offered and in no way it bestows a right on the dependent of a deceased govt. official to be appointed to a post one rank below and the department can offer him any lower post which is considered adequate for the petitioner to tide over the financial crisis and it is upto the petitioner to reject the same if the same is not upto his status.
Further higher qualifications etc. do not help the petitioner in any way as he is being given a special benefit under the ex-gratia scheme as a favour and he is not being appointed under the general rule of competition through an open exam.
[(iii) and (iv)].
In reply to sub-para (iii) and (iv), it is submitted that there are total number of 257 posts of Inspectors both permanent and temporary including the posts of Inspector meant for Telecommunication Wing of Haryana Police.
It is further submitted that six posts of Inspector were sanctioned for two newly created districts (3 posts each) of Fatehabad and Jhajjar.
Thus the total sanctioned strength of Inspectors comes to 263.
Out of 263 posts 10% posts i.e. 26 Inspectors are recruited under direct recruitment quota.
As on date all the 26 posts of directly recruited Inspectors have been filled as explained below.
Hence, at present no post of Inspector is lying vacant under direct recruitment quota.
Moreover, the petitioner cannot claim as a right to be appointed to the post of Inspector as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal case.
While 22 directly recruited Inspectors whose names find mention in para 6(iii) of writ petition are in position, 4 directly recruited Inspectors whose names are given in para 6(iv) of the writ petition have been promoted as Deputy Supdt.
of Police but these 4 posts cannot be treated as vacant as these recently promoted DSP still have lien on their substantive posts because they have not been confirmed in the rank of DSP so far.
It is further submitted that as per the rule 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-I, two or more Government employees cannot be appointed substantively to the same post at the same time and Government employee cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another Government employee holds a lien.
Rule 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-1 is produced as under :- 311 (1) : - Two or more Government employees cannot be appointed substantively to the same permanent post at the same time.
(b) A Government employee cannot be appointed substantively as a temporary measure, to two or more permanent posts at the same time.
(C) A Government employee cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another Government employee holds a lien.
As the 4 Inspectors who were promoted to the rank of DSP still hold their lien on their substantive post of Inspectors because they are not confirmed in the rank of DSP so far, hence the contention of petitioner for appointment as Inspector against these posts of Inspector is not sustainable in view of the clear cut provisions of rule (sic) Pb.
C.S.R.
Vol. 1 mentioned above.
It is further submitted that even if there had been a vacancy in the direct recruits quota even then the petitioner had no right to the same for the reasons mentioned in reply to para 6(i&ii) above.
In the replication, which has also been filed today in the Court, the petitioner has controverted the above extracted averments made in the written statement by making the following statement :-  6.
(i&ii).
That in reply to ground No. i&ii the contents of ground No. i&ii are reiterated.
It is further submitted that if the respondents would have acted in accordance with the policy decision P/2 and P/3, the petitioner was entitled to be considered as Inspector.
(iii&iv).
That in reply to ground No. iii & iv, the contents of ground No. iii & iv of the writ petition are reiterated.
The official respondent has not placed true facts before the Hon'ble High Court.
Before 21111997 the sanctioned strength of the Inspectors was 257.
Vide letter dated 21111997 three posts of Inspectors were created in New District Jhajjar and three posts of Inspectors were created in New District Fatehabad.
So, the strength has been increased from 257 to 263.
It is further necessary to mention here that on 4th September, 1998 four posts of Inspectors were created and informed to the Director General of Police for newly created police stations Saran (Faridabad), Sector 7 Police Station, Faridabad, D.L.F.
Kutab Enclave, Police Station (Gurgaon), Udyog Vihar, Police Station (Gurgaon).
The letter to this effect is attached as Annexure P/6.
It is further necessary to mention here that vide letter dated 3091998, 19 posts of Inspectors were upgraded.
The letter to this effect is attached as Annexure P/7.
So in this manner the strength has been increased from 257 to 257+6+4+19=286.
So out of 286 the share of direct recruits comes to 29.
The respondents has admitted in the written statement that only 22 Inspectors of direct recruits are in position and in this manner 7 pots of Inspectors meant for direct quota are lying vacant.
It is further necessary to mention here that there are 4 other candidates namely Sukhwinder Singh, Sanjeev Kumar, Deepak and Shakti Singh had applied for compassionate appointments and it is necessary to mention here that Sukhwinder Singh after completing 11 months of training of ASI has left the job at his own and remaining above-mentioned three voluntarily accepted the offer of ASI and made no protest.
However, even if their claim would have been considered as Inspectors there are sufficient posts and still petitioner could be appointed as Inspector.
As regard the lien of 4 D.S.P.s is concerned, it is nowhere prescribed that till confirmed Inspectors are confirmed as D.S.Ps.
those posts cannot be filled up.
The petitioner is not claiming that he may be appointed Inspector on substantive basis.
The petitioner could be appointed subject to their confirmation.
The said direct recruits Inspectors were promoted as DSPs on 18121995, 2621997, 2221997 and 2221997, respectively.
Many other DSPs were promoted after the above 4 persons in the year 1997-1998.
This clearly demonstrates that there are no remote chances of their reversions from DSPs to Inspectors.
We have heard Shri Malik, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Deputy Advocate General and have carefully perused the averments made in the respective pleadings.
A look at the instructions issued vide circular letter dated 851995 shows that dependent of the deceased employee is eligible to be employed on compassionate grounds on a post which is at least one step lower than the post held by the deceased employee.
The expression `one step lower' has been clarified in para 6 of the circular letter dated 3181995.
The same reads as under :-  One Step Lower employment is interpreted as one Pay Scale below that of the deceased employee.
It is further clarified that appointment on compassionate grounds under ex-gratia scheme can be offered only on a post in a Pay Scale lower than that of deceased employee.
In our opinion, the plain language of these circulars do not admit of the interpretation suggested by the respondents, namely, that the dependent of deceased employee does not have the right to be appointed on a post which carries one pay scale lower than the post held by the employee at the time of death.
Though the right of the dependent to be appointed in accordance with the policy framed by the government is subject to the availability of post, the respondents cannot arbitrarily decline appointment or follow the method of pick and choose from among eligible applicants and deny appointment to an applicant notwithstanding the availability of appropriate post.
In our opinion, the dependent has the right to be considered for appointment on compassionate ground on a post which carries one pay scale lower than the post held by the deceased, subject of course to the availability of post, his fulfilling the qualifications and his seniority among applicants.
The admitted facts of this case show that late Mehtab Singh was drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 at the time of his demise and the pay scale lower than the post held by Shri Mehtab Singh is Rs. 2000-3200.
It is also the admitted fact that the post held by Shri Mehtab Singh was a Class II post and all the posts carrying the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 are Class III posts.
Therefore, the petitioner has the right to be considered for appointment on an appropriate post in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 and if the post of Inspector of Police is one such post, We do not see any impediment in his being considered for appointment on that post.
The respondents have pleaded non-availability of the post as the main ground for denial of such consideration.
However, after perusing the averments made in the written statement and the replication, we are convinced that the reason assigned by the respondents is wholly untenable.
The averments contained in pleadings show that 4 posts of Inspectors meant for direct recruits are lying vacant.
The mere fact that 4 persons promoted on the higher posts of Deputy Superintendents of Police have lien on these posts cannot be a valid ground for not making temporary appointments on these vacant posts.
The consequences which may ensue due to the reversion of the persons who hold lien on the posts of Inspectors cannot be countenanced at this stage.
If at all, senior persons are reverted from the post of Deputy Superintendents of Police due to unsatisfactory work or on any other valid ground, the junior persons holding the lower posts of Inspector may have to make room for such senior persons.
However, that does not confer legitimacy to the stand taken by the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to be considered for appointment to the post of Inspector even though 4 such posts are lying vacant.
Fro the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the petitioner's case for appointment on the post of Inspector and pass appropriate order within a period of three months.
While doing so, the respondents shall keep in view the seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis other dependents of government servants who may have applied for such posts and who qualify for such appointment.
This direction is necessary to be given in view of the decision of this Court in Surinder Pal v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(3) RSJ 65.
Petition allowed.