HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner took admission in the Bachelor of Engineering, Civil Engineering Trade, in Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering and Technology, Bathinda in 1993.
He appeared in the First and Second Semester Examinations in November, 1993 and April 1994, respectively, and passed the two examinations.
He then appeared in the Third Semester Examination in November, 1994 and was declared as a re-appear case in most of the papers.
In May 1997, the petitioner took the examination as a re-appear candidate for the Third Semester and passed all the papers except Mathematics (III).
The petitioner, however, continued to study for the higher semesters as permitted by the Rules and completed the course of study for the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Semesters and in November, 1997, appeared in the Seventh Semester Examination as also the Mathematics (III) paper of the Third Semester which he had not cleared in the re-appear examination in May 1997.
Vide receipt dated 3rd February, 1998 (Annexure P-1) the petitioner deposited the fee for the Eighth (Final Semester) and also attended classes for a few days thereafter.
It is the petitioner's allegation that the Principal of the College circulated a notice to the teaching staff that the petitioner should not be allowed to attend classes for the Eighth Semester as his admission to the Seventh Semester Examination in November 1997 had not been in order as on that date he had not cleared the Third Semester Examination in toto and that steps were being taken for the cancellation of his Seventh Semester result as well.
The petitioner thereafter submitted an application dated 11th February, 1998 (Annexure P-2 to the petition) requesting the College Authorities to permit him to attend the Eighth Semester classes, but the same was declined.
The present writ petition has accordingly been filed.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in the case on the 19th February, 1998 and, by an interim order of the Division Bench made on that date, the petitioner was allowed to attend the Eighth Semester classes till further orders.
The writ petition was admitted on 11th May, 1998 and ordered to be listed for today for final disposal.
In the interregnum, the petitioner moved Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 10814 of 1998 praying that as he had been attending the Eighth Semester classes under the orders of this Court, he be permitted to take the examination for the Eighth Semester as well.
Notice of the application was issued to the respondents and vide order dated 14.5.1998 the petitioner was allowed to appear in the Eighth Semester Examination provisionally with a stipulation that the result of the petitioner would not be declared till further orders.
The application was thereafter taken up on 17th July, 1998, and after hearing both the petitioner as well as the respondents' counsel, a direction was issued that the petitioner's result pertaining to the various semester examinations be declared, subject to the outcome of the petition.
Mr. Arun Nehra, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has today stated at the bar that as of now the petitioner has cleared the Third and Fourth Semester Examinations as well.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the contesting respondent No. 1 alone and the stand taken is that the petitioner had been inadvertently granted admission to the Seventh Semester course and allowed to appear in the Seventh Semester Examination despite the fact that he did not fulfil the qualifying condition of having passed the Third Semester Examination.
It has further been urged that as per Ordinance 18 of the Punjabi University (which admittedly applied to the petitioner's case) his admission to the Eighth Semester course was also not in order as he had cleared only seven papers out of the 19 theory and practical papers of the third academic year consisting of the Fifth and Sixth Semesters instead of 50% of the total 19, and as such he was not entitled to attend the classes for the Seventh and Eighth Semesters.
4.
Mr. Arun Nehra, the learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two- fold argument before me.
He has first submitted that at the time when the petitioner had been permitted to attend classes for the course of study in the Seventh Semester and thereafter allowed to sit in the examination as well and to attend classes of the Eighth Semester, he had admittedly not cleared the Third and Fourth Semester Examinations and as this fact was well-known to the respondents and no information had been withheld by him, his admission to the Seventh and Eighth Semester Examinations as also the result of his examination for the Seventh Semester could not be subsequently cancelled.
In this connection, Mr. Nehra has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this court in C.W.P.
No. 3607 of 1996 (Shery Sain v. The College of Engineering and Technology Bhatinda decided on 1051996 (a copy whereof has been annexed as Annexure P-4 to the petition) as also a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1981(1) Judicial Reports (Labour and Service) 27 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H).
Mr. Nehra has finally argued that as per ordinance 18 ibid, a candidate was required to pass 50% of the theory and practical papers in order to study in the higher class, and as the petitioner had admittedly cleared more than 50% of the practical papers of the Fifth and Sixth Semesters, the petitioner's admission to the Seventh Semester could not be barred.
For this argument Mr. Nehra has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 17397 of 1997 (Ravi Pal Singh and another v. Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering and Technology, Bhatinda and others) decided on 1911998.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The Division Bench of this Court in Shery Sain's case (C.W.P.
No. 3607 of 1996) while relying upon a number of judgments of the Supreme Court and other High Courts and while dealing with ordinance 18 (ibid), held as under :  "Before issuing the admission card to a student to appear at part I Law Examination in April, 1972 it was the duty of the University authorities to scrutinise the admission form filled by the student in order to find out whether it was in order.
Equally it was the duty of the Head of the Department of Law before submitting the form to the University to see that the form complied with all the requirements.
If neither the Head of the Department nor the University authorities took care to scrutinise the admission form, then in not disclosing the shortage of percentage attendance the question of candidate committing a fraud did not arise.
Similarly, when the candidate was allowed to appear at Part II Law Examination in May, 1973, the University authorities had no jurisdiction to cancel his candidature for that examination.
If the University authorities acquiesced in the infirmities which the admission form contained and allowed the candidate to appear in the examination, then by force of the University Statute the University had no power to withdraw the candidature of the candidate."
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had not withheld any information from the respondents and it is, in fact, the stand of respondent No. 1 in the written statement that the petitioner had been allowed to take the Seventh Semester Examination and also to attend the Eighth Semester classes for a short period due to a mistake.
The mistake alluded to was admittedly on the part of the respondents and no liability on that score can be fastened on the petitioner.
6.
The second argument advanced by Mr. Nehra has equal merit.
While construing Ordinance 18 (ibid), the Division Bench held in Ravi Pal Singh's case (supra) as under :  "It provides that a candidate who fails to pass a minimum of 50% of theory papers and 50% of practical papers in each academic year will have to repeat the course of failed papers by attending regular classes and will not be allowed to study in the higher classes.
Admittedly, the petitioner No. 1 has failed to clear one theory paper but has cleared the practical paper of Ist semester.
He has failed in 6 theory papers of 2nd semester but out of 5 practical papers he has failed only in one practical.
The petitioner No. 2 has failed in 3 theory papers of Ist semester but has cleared all the practical papers.
He has failed in 3 theory papers and 3 practical papers out of 5 in the 2nd semester.
In clause (i) of Regulation 18 word 'and' has been used between the expressions "50% of theory papers" and "50% of practical papers" in each academic year.
This shows that only that candidate who fails to pass minimum of 50% of theory papers as well as 50% practical papers in each academic year will not be allowed to study in higher class.
The petitioners do not fall in that category.
Therefore, they cannot be debarred from prosecuting their studies of 3rd semester.
Any other interpretation of clause (i) of Regulation 18 would require the substitution of the word "and" with the word "or" in that clause and, in our opinion, there is no justification to do so.
This is also the view taken in C.W.P.
No. 13457 of 1997."
As already noted above, the petitioner has cleared more than 50% of the practical papers but has defaulted in clearing 50% of the theory papers, but in the light of the observations of the Division Bench, the petitioner could not be debarred from taking the Seventh or the Eighth Semester examination on this account.
7.
No other point has been urged.
8.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued that the result of the petitioner of all the semesters be declared forthwith.
It has been pointed out by Mr. Nehra that the petitioner had not been permitted to take the examination in one paper of the Eighth Semester for the reason that his attendance had run short as his admission to the said semester had been cancelled.
It is accordingly directed that the petitioner's attendance for the Eighth Semester will be tabulated from the date that he got admission into it under the interim orders of this Court dated 19th February, 1998.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.