Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - In this writ petition the petitioners have approached this Court for the following grievances and redressal therefor :  Because of the terms being clauses 10 and 11 of the letter of appointment petitioners' right of being considered for their promotion from the post of sub-staff to clerical cadre has been denied.
Despite repeated representation the respondent-Bank has not withdrawn and/or cancelled the aforesaid two terms.
The said 2 clauses of the letters of appointment are unfair, unjust and further the same were forced to be agreed upon by the petitioners taking advantage of the unequal bargaining power of the petitioners at the time of their appointment.
The fact of the case of summarized as follows :  The writ petitioner prior to 1991 were engaged by the respondent Bank temporarily as Canteen Boys-cum-Cooks in its staff canteen.
Despite their continuous services being rendered, the respondent No. 1 Bank did not regularise and/or absorb.
Naturally in the year 1991 the writ petitioners herein previously made an application in a pending writ petition being matter No. 3312 of 1991 of this Court.
By an order dated 13th December, 1991, His Lordship the Hon'ble Mr. Justice MR Mallick (as His Lordship then was), was pleased to dispose of the said application by directing the respondent Bank amongst others as follows :  "However, if the present petitioners are similarly situated and circumstanced with the writ petitioners of the above writ petition then the Bank shall treat this memorial sympathetically and on taking proper interview may consider as to whether they can also be absorbed provided there are existing vacancies and consider their appointment after observing necessary formalities."
2.
In deference to the said order it appears that the respondent Bank had invited applications from the writ petitioners were to take examination.
The writ petitioners were found to be suitable and they were given appointment by issuing a letter dated 29th October, 1991.
The said letter of appointment being annexure "D" to the writ petition speaks so far as it relates to para 1 thereof as follows :  "With reference to your application for employment in the Bank and subsequent selection by regular test.
We are pleased to offer you an appointment in the Bank's service exclusively as Canteen Boy-cum-Cook in subordinate staff cadre with effect from the date you join in the Bank's service which should not be earlier than 1111991 but not later than 30.11.1991."
3.
There are various terms and conditions numbering 25 provided in the said letter of appointment.
It is the admitted position that this letter of appointment has been accepted by the writ petitioners.
So admittedly those terms and conditions became the governing factor of the concluded contract of service.
Some of the relevant and material terms and conditions may be quoted for the purpose of this case, as follows :  (a) Clause 7 : You will be required to work either as canteen boy or as canteen cook or both at any part of the day or may be decided by the bank/canteen committee.
The Bank has the liberty to post you and utilise your services in any other assignment suitable to your status, qualification and experience as well.
(b) Clause 10 : You will not be entitled to any additional increment benefits for acquiring higher qualification.
(c) Clause 11 : You will not be eligible for assignments of duties carrying special allowances, change of cadre/designation, promotion from sub-staff to clerical cadre etc. etc. 4.
It is the case of the writ petitioners that the aforesaid terms and conditions of Clauses 10 and 11 of the letter of appointment are standing in the way of petitioners' getting promotional opportunity in terms of the service rules.
It has been averred in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the writ petition that in spite of repeated and successive representations to the bank authorities the petitioners have been deprived of being considered for promotion although the other sub-staff who are similarly situated and circumstanced are being considered for the promotion from the post of sub- staff to clerical cadre.
So the writ petitioners in substance asked for deletion and/or striking out the said clauses.
5.
Mr. Banerjee, the learned Senior Advocate, appearing with Mr. S Sen for the petitioners submits that it is settled law that any clause or clauses which is (are) on the face of it unfair, unreasonable and arbitrary unconscionable, in the terms and conditions of service, can be struck down and/or made inoperative and in other words the same be treated as non- existent.
Therefore, he submits that the petitioners should be treated at par with other sub-staff as if the said clauses 10 and 11 were not there.
Accordingly, in terms of the rules for granting promotion the petitioners' candidatures are also to be considered.
He relies upon a decision of the Supreme Court reported in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, AIR 1986 SC 1971.
6.
Mr. Saha for the respondent Bank submits that the background of the petitioners' appointment with other sub-staff are different.
So they cannot be treated as per (at par ?)
with the other sub-staff of the Bank who are similarly placed and circumstanced.
He further submits that the petitioners have accepted the appointment without any reservation in relation to the terms of employment.
They have already worked after appointment for a period of at least 4 years without any reservation and objection whatsoever.
Now having acted upon in terms of the said letter of appointment the petitioners are estopped from challenging those clauses as being unfair, arbitrary and result of unconscionable bargain.
The rules relating to promotion to other sub- staffs are not applicable to the case of the petitioners.
7.
I have heard the respective submissions of the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
At later stage, I shall deal with the question of estoppel raised by Mr. Saha the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent Bank.
In order to deal with the question I am to examine the terms and conditions contained in the letter of appointment.
I have quoted the relevant terms and conditions from the appointment letter.
One of the terms empowers the Bank to utilise the services of the petitioners to any other post according to qualification without making any corresponding provision for payment of remuneration therefor.
In other words if one of the petitioners is having skill and qualification of steno typing then he can be utilised on the strength of the aforesaid terms and in that case the petitioners will have no right to object to the same.
By the said clauses 10 and 11 the petitioners' right of being considered in the promotional avenue has been sealed and in my view this provision are unfair, unreasonable if not one sided and disadvantageous to the petitioners' service condition which cannot be allowed to remain in the said document.
Therefore having regard to nature of the documents a harmonious construction has to be given to the same.
I find that the intention of the Bank was to engage the petitioners in the sub-staff cadre but in different designation, i.e., canteen boy-cum-cook.
The intention of the Bank is also to utilise their services in another capacity also if they are otherwise suitable.
In my view by a document one cannot be treated to be eligible for any incumbency debarring him from getting promotion or increment for ever, as in case of utilization of such person in superior post to that of existing one, payment of commensurate remuneration would be called for in tune with settled law of equal pay for equal work.
This apparent inconsistency and/or contradistinction cannot be accepted.
8.
So if the two clauses being Nos. 10 and 11 are deleted then the document can be made a meaningful instrument and/or be made effectively operative.
But if the document is made operative keeping the said two clauses in tact then utilization of the petitioners in any other superior incumbency to that of existing one would be contrary and/or opposed to law "equal pay for equal work".
So, I hold that those documents being the letters of appointment should be accepted and be read bereft of clauses 10 and 11.
9.
So far the question of estoppel is concerned the same does not apply here because those clauses 10 and 11 will come into operation only at the time when the petitioners opportunity of getting promotion doth come.
In terms of the rules the petitioners cannot have any chance of being considered for promotion unless they complete three years of service.
The petitioners after having completed three years of service in 1995, approached this Court at the first available opportunity for redressal of their grievance.
Moreover, the principle of estoppel does not apply even when a party acts on misapprehension of legal right nor even in case where parties have knowledge about correct position.
This law has been settled long ago by the various decisions of various Courts right from the Privy Council to High Court, viz., (ILR 30 Cal 530) Mohori Bibee v. Dharmadas Ghose, AIR 1967 All 405.
The aforesaid famous case of Dharmadas Ghose v. Mohori Bibee, has settled that law that estoppel does not apply as against statute.
In this case, petitioners acted at the time of their appointment under misapprehension of their legal right of having opportunity to get promotion.
10.
In a service jurisprudence it is settled law that an employee has right of having promotion during his life tenure under the employment of `State'.
Therefore, it any terms and conditions imposed intending to take a way the employees right of having promotion such terms and conditions are contrary to law and are opposed to public policy.
The Contract Act does not permit any act which is opposed to public policy and result of unconscionable bargain.
In my view, the aforesaid two terms, viz., clauses 10 and 11 as I have already said are clearly standing in the way of the petitioners' right of having promotion of future are opposed to Public Policy and result to unconscionable bargain.
11.
It appears that the allegations made in the writ petition that the petitioners had no option but to accept those terms and conditions in getting the appointments and this averment have not been denied by the respondents.
So, I hold that the letters of appointment were not to be signed on the admitted fact and situation as stated in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the writ petition.
So, I have no hesitation to hold that the ratio and/or principle decided in the aforesaid Supreme Court case cited and relied on by Mr. Banerjee in the AIR 1986 SC 1571 (supra) are squarely applicable in that case.
In that case it is held amongst others that any terms and conditions in the employment which are opposed to public policy and being opposed to public policy is (are) void under section 23 of the Contract Act.
In this case, therefore, I hold that the aforesaid two terms and conditions being Clauses 10 and 11 are void and non-existent and the same are not enforceable.
Accordingly the submission of Mr. Saha that the petitioners are bound by the terms and conditions of the letters of appointment as they themselves have chosen not to avail of any opportunity of promotion, is not accepted by me for the reasons stated above.
12.
On the facts and circumstances of the case as stated above I hold and declare that the writ petitioners are entitled to get all the benefits as permissible under the rules alongwith other sub-staff who are similarly placed and/or circumstanced.
From the letters of appointment I do not find any material to hold that the petitioners are treated and shall be treated separately from the other sub-staffs.
I direct accordingly all the respondents not to act upon on the basis of the aforesaid two clauses being Nos. 10 and 11 of the letters of appointment and further to afford opportunities to the writ petitioners for being considered in promotion in accordance with the rules.
In the event the writ petitioners or any of them (is) are selected and/or being considered in such promotional process then they (he) shall be given retrospective effect notionally from the date of giving promotion to any other sub-staff if done during the pendency of this writ petition.
So far the financial benefit is concerned the same shall be given from the date of joining in the promotional post.
13.
Let a plain copy of this order duly counter-signed by Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
Petition allowed.