GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the order dated November 22, 1998 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant for quashing the departmental enquiry.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding whether the learned Single Judge has erred in declining interference with the pending enquiry, are that while he was posted as Patwari in the Department of Colonisation, charge-sheet dated 1811972 was served upon the appellant.
The Enquiry Officer appointed by the government recorded the evidence and held that charge levelled against the appellant of having supplied a fake copy of jamabandi of 1954-55 to Dalip Chand son of Shri Ditta Ram resident of village Lodhipur, Tehsil Anandpur Sahib, District Ropar is proved.
The government accepted the report of the Enquiry Officer and issued notice dated 2871975 to the appellant requiring him to show cause against the purposed penalty of dismissal from service.
It, however, appears that no final decision was taken by the government for a considerably long period.
Therefore, the appellant filed writ petition for quashing of the departmental enquiry and the order dated 24.12.1987 passed by the Director, Colonisation, Punjab.
He also prayed for issuance of a mandamus directing the respondents to consider him for promotion as Kanungo from August 8, 1982 and then as Naib Tehsildar.
The respondents contested the claim of the petitioner.
After hearing the parties, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition but directed the State to take decision in the matter, preferably within four months.
3.
Shri Sarwan Singh relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and another, AIR 1990 SC 1308 and argued that the order passed by the learned Single Judge should be set aside because of the error apparent on the face of it.
Learned counsel submitted that after having found that the government had not offered any satisfactory explanation of delay in the completion of enquiry, the learned Single Judge should have quashed the proceedings.
Shri Sarwan Singh further submitted that the order of the learned Single Judge should be set aside because it does not deal with the petitioner's claim for promotion as Kanungo and the next higher post of Naib Tehsildar.
Shri Sarwan Singh also pointed out that during the pendency of this appeal the appellant has retired from service on reaching the age of superannuation and vide order dated 16.6.1992, the government has imposed a cut of 10% in the pension payable to the petitioner.
He placed on record a vernacular copy of the order dated 16.6.1992 alongwith its true translation.
Shri Rupinder Khosla argued that enquiry proceedings validly initiated against the appellant should not be nullified merely because of the time gap between its initiation and finalisation.
He further submitted that the appellants' case for promotion was duly considered from time to time but he was not found suitable for retrospective promotion.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and have perused the record of the case.
At the outset we deem it necessary to mention that on December 16, 1988, the Motion Bench had, while admitting the appeal, granted stay to the appellant in terms of the prayer made by him.
This means that the direction given by the learned Single Judge to finalise the enquiry proceedings within four months remained stayed.
Therefore, the respondent- government could not have finalised the enquiry proceedings without the permission of the Court.
Notwithstanding this, the respondents finalised the proceedings and passed the order dated 16.6.1992 without seeking Court's permission.
Therefore, that order will have to be ignored while deciding this appeal.
5.
In BC Chaturvedi v Union of India and others, 1995(5) SLR 778 : 1996(1) SCT 617, a three judges Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question whether delay in the initiation of proceedings can be made a ground for quashing the inquiry on the ground of violation of Articles 14 to 21 of the Constitution and held that each case is required to be decided upon its own facts.
In that particular case the Apex Court refused to quash the proceedings even though there was considerable delay in the finalisation thereof.
6.
In the light of this judgment, it is to be seen whether the proceedings of inquiry held against the appellant should be quashed on the ground of delay.
Admittedly, the appellant had been charged with the allegation of issuing fake jamabandi to Dalip Chand son of Shri Ditta Ram of Village Lodhipur.
It was also alleged that for issuing fake Jamabandi, the appellant had taken bribe from Dalip Chand.
The charge-sheet was issued to the appellant on January 18, 1972 and on the basis of inquiry report, show cause notice dated 2871975 was served upon him.
However, no final decision was taken for a long time.
The explanation offered by the respondents for the delay in the finalisation of the inquiry is contained in paras 3 and 4 of the reply to the writ petition, which are extracted below :-  "Para No. 3 : In reply to para No. 3 of the writ petition it is submitted that enquiry No. 5 of 1970 was instituted against the petitioner as he had supplied a false copy of Jamabandi of 1954-55 on 111970, to Shri Dalip Chand s/o Sh. Ditta Ram, resident of V Lodhipur, Tehsil Anandpur Sahib, District Ropar.
The Enquiry Officer (Settlement Officer, Consolidation of Holdings, Jalandhar) in his enquiry report came to the conclusion that the petitioner has supplied a false copy of jamabandi of 1954-55, in respect of Khasra No. 910-911, to Shri Dalip Chand, with mala fide intention.
It may be submitted here that if a Govt. employee commits some wrong or mala fide act in the discharge of his duties, he cannot evade the enquiry simply because the complainant withdraws his complaint or is won ever.
After the enquiries mentioned above a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner by the government when he was serving in the Colonisation Department.
The reply of the petitioner was forwarded to the government on 22101975 for further necessary action.
However, it appears that the relevant Govt. file somehow was got misplaced by the interested person to avoid final decision against him on the basis of the findings of the Enquiries Officer.
Later on, the Govt. file was reconstructed and the matter was referred to the Punjab Public Service Commission under Regulation (b) of the Punjab Public Service Commission Limitation of Functions, 1955 for its concurrence for awarding the penalty of dismissal upon the petitioner.
The copies of the charge-sheet served upon the petitioner, enquiry report of the Enquiry Officer and show cause notice given to the petitioner for imposing penalty of dismissal upon him were also sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission along with the above stated reference.
The Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commission called for the reply to the show cause notice which was given by the petitioner.
Because the reply given to the show cause notice by the petitioner was also misplaced along with the above mentioned Govt. file a copy of the same had to be obtained from him.
As such the petitioner was asked several time to supply his reply to the show cause notice.
However, now the petitioner evaded by intimating that no copy of the reply given to the `Show Cause Notice' was available with him, as the same was not kept by him.
Due to non-supply of the copy of the reply to the `Show Cause Notice' the case could not be finalised.
This shows that the petitioner himself is deliberately delaying the finalisation of action on the findings of the Enquiry Officer's report.
The averment made by the petitioner regarding the earning of his regular annual increments and crossing of his efficiency bar with effect from 141977 and 8.2.1978 are admitted.
However, it is submitted that bar was allowed to be crossed without prejudice to the result of the enquiry pending against him.
Para No. 4 : In regard to para No. 4 of the writ petition, is submitted that it is incorrect to say that enquiry against the petitioner is being kept pending.
In fact, the enquiry have since been finalised and on the basis of the findings of the Enquiry Officer's report a `Show Cause Notice' for the dismissal of the petitioner was served upon him and matter has since been referred under the rules to the Punjab Public Service Commission for its concurrence in the matter which is awaited.
As already explained in para No. 3, the Govt. file was somehow misplaced together with reply of the petitioner given to the Show Cause Notice and Punjab Public Service Commission asked for that reply the same was demanded from the petitioner.
The petitioner now evaded by intimating that no copy of the reply given by him the Show Cause Notice was available with him, as he kept no copy of the same.
Under these circumstances, the final action against the petitioner could not be finalised for want of the concurrence of the Punjab Public Service Commission for his dismissal as required under rules.
In fact, the petitioner is deliberately delaying the finalisation of action against him on the basis of the finding of the Enquiry Officer report as he is not supplying the copy of reply given by him to the `Show Cause Notice'."
7.
In our opinion, the explanation offered by the respondents, though not very satisfactory deserves to be accepted and mere delay in the finalisation of the enquiry cannot be made a ground to give a clean chit to the appellant, particularly, when the delay in the finalisation did not result in postponing the annual increments of the appellant which were regularly granted to him and he was allowed to cross efficiency bar due on 141977 and 3061980.
Therefore, we are not inclined to agree with Shri Sarwan Singh that the proceedings of inquiry are liable to be invalidated because of the lapse of the departmental authorities to finalise the same.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Bani Singh's case (supra) turned on its own facts and the same cannot be made basis for quashing the departmental inquiry in each and every case de hors the facts of that case.
8.
The instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular letter No. 1497-4 GS-62/4059 dated 1321962 (Annexure P-12) and circular letter No. 7543-SII(3)-71/30893 dated 26th November, 1971 (Annexure P-11) on which reliance has been placed by Shri Sarwan Singh cannot be made basis for quashing the inquiry proceedings.
The executive instructions issued by the government for expeditious finalisation of departmental inquiries against the government employees are meant for the guidance of the departmental authorities but the same do not create a right in favour of the employee to seek invalidation of the proceedings on the ground that the time schedule prescribed by the government has not been adhered to by the inquiring authority or the disciplinary authority.
We also do not find any merit in the argument of the learned counsel that the petitioner has been illegally deprived of promotion on the post of Kanungo in view of the departmental proceedings.
The averments made in the writ petition and the reply shows that the petitioner was promoted as Kanungo vide order dated 31st December, 1985 and his representation for retrospective promotion was rejected as early as on 24.12.1986.
Moreover, the representation made by Shri Mohinder Singh was accepted by the Director, Colonisation on 24.12.1987 on the ground that he was senior to the petitioner.
In the written statement, the respondents have averred that the case of the petitioner was duly considered from time to time for the purpose of promotion but he was not found suitable.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner has been denied promotion due to the pendency of the departmental inquiry.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is disposed of by directing the government to pass appropriate order in the departmental inquiry pending against the appellant within a period of three months of the submission of certified copy of this order by the appellant after giving opportunity of personal hearing.
We also direct that while passing the fresh order, the government shall not take into consideration the order dated 16.6.1992 which was passed in disregard of the stay order passed by the High Court on 16.11.1988.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment of prescribed fee.
Appeal disposed of.