Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - Petitioner in this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has sought a writ of mandamus, directing the respondents to consider his candidature for admission to the Government College of Education, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh, and admit him in B.Ed.
course on the basis of marks/merit secured by him in the Joint Entrance Test.
2.
Admitted facts of the case are that Government of Punjab issued Notification No. 15/53/92-3 Edu.
6/1152, dated April 28, 1992, whereby it was formulated that admission to B.Ed.
course in all the Colleges of Education affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjabi University, Patiala and Panjab University, Chandigarh, shall be made on the basis of Joint Entrance Examination.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, was assigned the job of conducting all procedural formalities on behalf of above-mentioned Universities for conducting Joint Entrance Test and preparing merits of the candidates.
3.
The eligibility criteria/qualifications for admission to Colleges of Education affiliated to Panjab University, Chandigarh, was that a candidate must have a first degree in any faculty of the University obtaining not less than 45 per cent marks in the aggregate.
The petitioner is a Graduate from Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla, having secured 50 per cent marks in his graduation.
Thus, being eligible, he submitted his application for the Joint Entrance Test alongwith all relevant documents; he appeared in the said Test on July 3, 1994; the result was declared by the Guru Nanak Dev University on July 23, 1994, for admission to B.Ed.
course, and the result-sheet was despatched to him on July 26, 1994 by the Co-ordinator, Joint Entrance Test BEd.
1994 Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, vide registered letter dated July 26, 1994 (Annexure P-1).
4.
After declaration of the result of Joint Entrance Test, the petitioner was required to make a fresh application to the University of his choice for placement and admission in a College of Education affiliated to that University in view of note 72 on page 17 of the Prospectus for Joint Entrance Test for B.Ed.
1994-95.
Accordingly, the petitioner despatched his admission form (Annexure P-3) duly completed in all respects along with necessary certificates to the Co-ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, Chandigarh (Respondent No. 2) on July 29, 1994, vide registered letter (Annexure P-2), i.e. well within 10 days from the date of declaration of the result of Joint Entrance Test.
The registered letter (Annexure P-2) came back to the petitioner on August 9, 1994.
On August 10, 1994, the petitioner enquired from the respondent-University as well as Government College of Education, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh, where the petitioner wanted to seek admission.
The office of respondent No. 2 informed the petitioner that registered letter (Annexure P-2) did not reach in the office in time; therefore, petitioner's name was not considered.
The petitioner contended that the time spent in transit or lapse on the part of the postal authorities does not come in the way of his entitlement, especially when he had received the result card on July 28, 1994 and despatched his admission form, complete in all respects, by registered post on the following day itself, while the result was declared on July 23, 1994.
Hence, he prayed that the impugned action of the respondents in ignoring his candidature for B.Ed.
is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
According to the petitioner, delay in transit or lapse on the part of the postal authorities is not attributable to him and the action of the respondents is violative of the principles of equity, fair play and natural justice.
Hence the petition.
5.
During the pendency of the writ petition, respondent No. 3 filed the reply and pleaded that the result of the Joint Entrance Examination for B.Ed.
was declared by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, on July 22, 1994.
An advertisement was issued by respondent No. 3 in 'The Tribune' as well as in the Indian Express on July 23, 1994, wherein it was clearly pointed out that the applications were to be submitted by the eligible candidates to the respondent-College for admission to the B.Ed.
course being conducted by the respondent-College, within ten days of the declaration of the result of Joint Entrance Examination.
Copy of said advertisement is Annexure R-3/1.
Petitioner's application for admission was never received by respondent No. 2.
In view of the Prospectus as also in view of the said advertisement (Annexure R-3/1) issued in `The Tribune' on July 23, 1994 the eligible candidates were required to submit their application forms for admission to the B.Ed.
Course to the respective respondent-College within 10 days of the declaration of the result of Joint Entrance Examination.
It is further averred that the forms from different eligible candidates seeking admission to the B.Ed.
course being conducted by the respondent-College received by the Panjab University, Chandigarh, were sent to the respondent-College and those forms which were received in the office of the respondent-College within the prescribed period in that behalf were considered for the purpose of grant of admission to the B.Ed.
Course.
The form alleged to have been sent by the petitioner to respondent No. 2 was never received by respondent No. 3.
As petitioner's admission form was not received either by respondent No. 2 or by respondent No. 3 within 10 days of the declaration of the result, the question of consideration of the petitioner for grant of admission to the B.Ed.
Course did not arise.
The averments made in the writ petition are wholly mis-conceived.
No cause of action has arisen in favour of the petitioner to file this petition.
6.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner was provisionally admitted to the respondent No. 3-College, under the orders of this Court passed on September 19, 1994, to undergo the B.Ed.
Course.
His result of B.Ed.
Examination is not yet declared, though under the orders of this Court dated July 12, 1996, a provisional migration certificate is also to be given to the petitioner by the respondent-University.
7.
Petitioner's learned counsel valiantly argued that under note 72. of B.Ed.
Entrance Test (1994-95) Prospectus, the candidates were informed that after the declaration of Joint Entrance Examination result, all those candidates who qualify for admission to B.Ed.
Course will have to apply afresh to the Co-ordinator of the concerned University in whose jurisdiction he/she wants to seek admission.
For this purpose, three separate Admission Forms marked 'B' pertaining to each University attached with the Prospectus must be submitted to the Co-ordinators of the respective Universities within ten days of the declaration of the result of the Joint Entrance Examination.
Therefore, in compliance of this note, after the receipt of the result card, the petitioner sent his admission form to the Co-ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, Chandigarh (Respondent No. 2) by registered post (Annexure P-2), but he received it back.
Thereafter when he enquired from the office of Respondent No. 2, he came to know that such admission forms were not required to be sent to the Co-ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, but to the concerned College.
Immediately thereafter, the petitioner filed this petition and he was provisionally given admission in B.Ed.
Course in Government College of Education, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh (Respondent No. 3) under the orders of the High Court.
8.
The petitioner's counsel also submitted that the petitioner is a resident of Himachal Pradesh.
He never came to know that such admission forms were to be sent to respondent No. 3 and not to respondent No. 2.
Therefore, it cannot be said that he committed any default in not sending the admission form within ten days of the declaration of the result of Joint Entrance Examination.
9.
The respondent's learned counsel vehemently argued that note 72 of the said Prospectus was modified by the Syndicate of the Panjab University, Chandigarh, wherein it was decided :-  "Candidates seeking admission to the B.Ed.
Course in the colleges affiliated to the Panjab University, on the basis of the Entrance Test conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, are advised to apply immediately to the Colleges where they intend seeking admission, as per dates notified by the Colleges.
The Panjab University will not entertain any application form for admission to this Course direct.
The interviews for B.Ed.
Course in the Colleges are scheduled to be held between 8th August and 16th August, 1994.
The candidates are advised to contact the Principals of the Colleges, where they want to seek admission, for further details."
Pursuant to this amended provision, in the daily 'Tribune' as well as the 'Indian Express' dated July 28, 1994, it was advertised tht the candidates who had become eligible for admission on the basis of the result of Joint Entrance Examination for B.Ed.
conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar should send their applications for admission to the B.Ed.
Course to the College concerned directly within ten days after the declaration of the Entrance Test result conducted by GND University.
Despite that advertisement, the petitioner failed to send his application for admission to B.Ed.
Course to the respondent No. 3 College within the prescribed period.
The result was declared on July 22, 1994 and not on July 23, 1994.
10.
Learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 also submitted that this period of ten days was extended from August 6, 1994 to August 12, 1994, but even during this extended period, the petitioner failed to send his admission form to respondent No. 3.
Thus, this petition is liable to be dismissed.
11.
After hearing the rival contentions, I am of the considered view that the petitioner is entitled to the relief claimed in the writ petition.
Admittedly, the petitioner appeared in the B.Ed.
Joint Entrance Examination held by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, for the year 1994-95, in compliance of the rules contained in the prospectus for Joint Entrance Test for B.Ed.
(1994-95) issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
Under note 72 of the said Prospectus, all those candidates who qualify for admission to B.Ed.
Course were required to apply afresh to the Co-ordinator of the concerned University in whose jurisdiction he/she wants to seek admission and the admission forms were to be submitted to the Co-ordinators of the respective Universities within ten days of the declaration of the result of the Joint Entrance Examination held by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The Joint Entrance Test was held on July 3, 1994.
The petitioner had received his result card on July 28, 1994.
In compliance of note 72 of the said Prospectus, he had despatched his admission form by registered post cover (Annexure P-2) to the Co-ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, Chandigarh, (Respondent No. 2) on July 29, 1994, but the same was received back by him, without any endorsement, on August 9, 1994.
Respondent No. 2 has denied that any such registered post cover was offered for acceptance.
However, from Annexure P-2, it is evident that the petitioner had sent his admission form by registered post, but the registered post cover was returned to him.
The petitioner has specifically averred so in the writ petition.
There is no reason to disbelieve him on this count.
The case of the respondents is that on July 27, 1994, the Panjab University's syndicate modified note 72 of the said Prospectus and decided that the candidates seeking admission to the B.Ed.
Course in the Colleges affiliated to the Panjab University, on the basis of the Entrance Test conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, were advised to apply immediately to the Colleges where they intend to seek admission, as per dates notified by the Colleges.
This decision of the Syndicate was notified by the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh, to all the Principals of the Colleges affiliated to the University, through Press Release dated July 27, 1994.
On the basis of the Press Release, news-item appeared in 'The Tribune', 'Indian Express', 'Punjabi Tribune', 'Dainik Tribune' and 'Jan Satta' on July 28, 1994, copies of which were produced in Court at the time of arguments.
From a bare perusal of these news-items, it is evident that it does not say that note 72 of the said Prospectus has been amended by the Syndicate of the Panjab University; therefore, in view of the said amendment, all the eligible candidates were required to send their admission forms to the Principals of the concerned Colleges directly where they wanted to seek admission and not to the Panjab University.
The petitioner is a resident of Himachal Pradesh.
There is no averment in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 that the petitioner came to know of the amendment made in note 72 of the said Prospectus by the Syndicate of the Panjab University or he came to know of the news-items which appeared in various newspapers on July 28, 1994.
It is pertinent to mention that in the written statement filed by respondent No. 3, it is specifically pleaded in paragraph 6 :-  "However, it may be pointed out here that the forms from the different eligible candidates seeking admission to the B.Ed.
Course being conducted by the answering respondent received by the Panjab University, Chandigarh, were sent to the respondent-College and those forms which were received in the office of the answering respondent "within the prescribed period in that behalf were considered for the purpose of grant of admission to the B.Ed.
Course."
Thus, it is apparent that not only the petitioner but even other eligible candidates had sent their admission forms to Respondent No. 2, which were duly transmitted to Respondent No. 3.
However, the admission form sent by the petitioner by registered post cover (Annexure P-2) was not received by the respondent No. 2 and, thus, was not transmitted to respondent No. 3 but it was returned to the petitioner for the reasons best known to the officials of respondent No. 2.
12.
From the reply filed by respondent No. 3, it is evident that many students were not knowing about the news-item which appeared in 'The Tribune'/Indian Express, etc. on July 28, 1994 on the basis of the Press Release dated July 27, 1994, issued by the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh.
Accordingly in compliance of note 72 of the Prospectus, many other eligible candidates also sent their admission forms to respondent No. 2 and whose admission forms were transmitted to respondent No. 3.
The petitioner also followed the same suit and sent his admission form to respondent No. 2.
It cannot be said that he was at fault or on this count he was not eligible to be considered for admission to the B.Ed.
Course, in Government College of Education, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh (respondent No. 3).
13.
No doubt, the respondent learned counsel argued that respondent No. 3 had extended the period for receipt of admission forms from August 6, 1994 to August 12, 1994, but even during this extended period the petitioner never submitted his admission form to respondent No. 3; therefore, he is not entitled to be admitted to the B.Ed.
Course.
The petitioner filed this writ petition on August 31, 1994, and on September 19, 1994, the Division Bench of this Court ordered that the petitioner be granted admission by respondent No. 3, provisionally, to the B.Ed.
Course.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner ever came to know of the amendment made in note 72 of the said Prospectus made by the Panjab University's Syndicate on July 27, 1994, according to which he or any other eligible candidates were required to send their admission forms directly to respondent No. 3 or that respondent No. 3 had extended the period of ten days from August 6, 1994 to August 12, 1994.
14.
Thus, in my considered view, the petitioner had no knowledge that the Panjab University's Syndicate had already amended noted 72 of the Prospectus for B.Ed.
Entrance Test (1994-95) directing all the eligible candidates to send their admission forms directly to the concerned Colleges where they intend seeking admission and, therefore, in compliance of note 72 of the said Prospectus, he had rightly sent his admission form to the Co-ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, Chandigarh, within ten days of the declaration of the result of the Joint Entrance Examination.
There is nothing on the record to show that at any point of time, this amended provision was brought to his notice.
He is not a resident of Chandigarh.
He resides in a village in Hamirpur district of Himachal Pradesh.
This amendment was not indicated in the advertisement in the daily Tribune and Indian Express dated 23.7.1994, got published by respondent No. 3, whereby the candidates were directed to send their admission forms directly to the concerned College.
Even other eligible candidates had sent their admission forms to the Co- ordinator, B.Ed.
Entrance Test, Panjab University, Chandigarh, directly which were transmitted by the University to respondent No. 3.
Only because of this fault which has resulted on account of lack of knowledge of the amended note 72 of the said Prospectus, the petitioner cannot be denied his right to further education by getting admission in B.Ed.
Course.
15.
Resultantly, the writ petition is hereby allowed.
Under the orders dated September 19, 1994, passed by the Division Bench of this Court, the petitioner has already been given admission by respondent No. 3 in B.Ed.
Course.
He has already appeared in the B.Ed.
Examination held by the Panjab University, though his result is not yet declared.
Further, under the orders of this Court, provisional migration certificate has also been given to the petitioner.
The respondent University is hereby directed to declare petitioner's result of B.Ed.
Examination and also to grant him the migration certificate as he was eligible for admission in the B.Ed.
Course and he had duly sent his admission form in compliance of note 72 of the said Prospectus.
Petition allowed.