Bhawani Singh, J - The petitioner is the widow of late Shri Jagdish Chander Bakshi.
On May 24, 1975, Pratap Singh and Surat Singh had some altercation at Rajgarh Bus Stand.
During this time, Tulsi Ram Thakur and Krishan Kumar tried to intervene whereupon Surat Singh got enraged, took his double-barrel gun and ran after the three persons who rushed to the Police Station.
At this time, her husband (Jagdish Chander Bakshi) was taking lunch at his residence.
When these three persons came out of the residence of the petitioner after reporting the matter to her husband, Surat Singh fired at Tulsi Ram.
Hearing this, her husband rushed out of the residence and directed the other two persons to run back to his residence and hide themselves.
Meanwhile, Surat Singh re-loaded his gun and shot at Tulsi Ram.
In order to protect Tulsi Ram, her husband jumped in front of Tulsi Ram and tried to pacify Surat Singh and signalled Tulsi Ram to run away.
However, Surat Singh got enraged by this act and re-loaded his gun.
He shot her husband who was killed on the spot.
2.
The husband of the petitioner was directly recruited as Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police and was only 27 year old at the time of this occurrence.
He had brilliant career.
He was likely to go much higher in police since all his batch-mates have by now become Deputy Superintendents of Police or Additional Superintendents of Police.
Late Dr. YS Parmar, former Chief Minister of Himachal Pradesh, had recommended the case of her husband for the grant of President's Medal which was awarded posthumously on January 26, 1981.
At the time of the incident, the duration of petitioner's marriage with her husband was less than two years.
She had a ten month old son and another son was born after the death of her husband.
She was appointed Lower Division Clerk in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Sirmour at Nahan in 1975.
Family pension was initially fixed at Rs. 125/- per month which was later reduced to Rs. 100/- per month being the minimum family pension.
She was also allowed special allowance of Rs. 40/- per month for the award of President's Police Medal and this amount has now been increased to Rs. 60/- per month.
Thus, the total amount that was being paid to petitioner by way of pension and special allowance was only Rs. 435/- per month.
The petitioner had been approaching the respondents for grant of family pension equal to the last pay drawn as per the policy of the Government but it was rejected, consequently she filed Civil Writ Petition No. 638 of 1993 which was allowed by this Court.
She was held entitled to special pensionary benefits (full wages) till the normal superannuation of her husband.
3.
Family pension equivalent to the last pay drawn by her husband was released which was Rs. 52535 per month at the time of the death of her husband.
Pay scale of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police was Rs. 180-8-220/10-250.
This was revised on January 1, 1978 and the revised scale was Rs. 620-20-700/25-850/30-1000/40-1200.
This scale was again revised from January 1, 1986 to Rs. 1640-40-2000-50-2400-60-2700-75-2920 and further revised from January 1, 1993 to Rs. 1650-50-2000-60-2060-70-2550-75-2925.
The petitioner sent representation for fixation of her pension in accordance with the revised scales from time to time, but the same was rejected by the respondents.
She claims that she is entitled to the benefit of Dearness Allowance but the same has not been granted to her on the ground that she has been re-employed.
Petitioner's case is of employment and not re-employment.
She is getting the Dearness Allowance on the post being held by her but she is not being given relief of the Dearness Allowance on family pension being paid to her.
4.
Respondents 1 and 2 have stated that the petitioner has been provided employment on compassionate grounds and granted family pension in accordance with the rules.
Family pension equivalent to the last pay drawn by the deceased husband of the petitioner has been released in her favour by the Superintendent of Police, Sirmour vide order dated February 15, 1994.
The husband of the petitioner died on May 24, 1975 after which the pay scale was revised from January 1, 1978, January 1, 1986 and January 1, 1993 in respect of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police, therefore, revised scale cannot be paid retrospectively.
Claim of Dearness Allowance on pension cannot be permitted in view of the Apex Court decision dated December 8, 1994 in Civil Appeal No. 3542-46-90 reported in Union of India v. G Vasudevan Pillay, 1995 AIR SCW 891 : 1995(2) SCT 842 (SC).
By this decision, Rule 55-A of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 in its application to civilian Government employees has beenup held.
As per decision of the Court, the petitioner is being paid full salary.
5.
Respondent - 3 has also not accepted the claim of the petitioner.
6.
The sole question canvassed before us by the learned counsel for the petitioner was whether the petitioner was entitled to pension along with Dearness Allowance under rule 55-A of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
This Rule provides :  "55-A Dearness Relief on Pension/Family Pension .
(i) Relief against price rise may be granted to the pensioners and family pensioners in the form of dearness relief at such rates and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may specify from time to time.
(ii) If a pensioners is re-employed under the Central or State Government or a Corporation/Company/Body/Bank under them in India or abroad including permanent absorption in such Corporation/Company/Body/Bank, he shall not be eligible to draw dearness relief on pension/family pension during the period of such re-employment.
(iii) The Central Government employees who get permanently absorbed in terms of Rule 37 and opt for lump payment in lieu of pro rata monthly pension in terms of Rule 37, shall not be eligible for dearness relief".
7.
This matter came for consideration before this Court in Kamla Sharma v. State, 1995(1) Sim LC 388.
The claim for dearness relief on family pension was allowed.
We may refer to paras 12, 13 and 14 of the judgment :  "12.
The word used in clause (ii) of Rule 55-A of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules is `re-employed' and not `employed'.
Therefore, definitely when a Government servant is re-employed his pay is fixed under different set of rules and in so fixing the pension and pension equivalent to gratuity and other things are taken into consideration.
Therefore, rule makers have used this word that a pensioner does not get more than what is admissible under the normal rules.
If the intention of the rule makers would have been that the family pensioner should not be given dearness relief on the family pension if directly recruited or employed then definitely the rule makers would have used the word `employed' and not `re-employed'.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that Clause (ii) of Rule 55-A of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules is applicable only in case a person is re- employed and this rule cannot be invoked in the case of a person employed for the first time.
On this ground we are of the opinion that the writ petitioner shall also be entitled to get dearness relief on the family pension in addition to her pay and dearness relief she is getting in the post she is employed."
"13.
Let us look at it from another angle.
A Government employee may leave behind more than one widow.
If both the widows are getting family pension and only one of them is employed on compassionate ground by not allowing the dearness relief on the family pension it is will deprive the other widow who is without any job.
This will be an arbitrary action on the part of the Government.
Keeping in view this principle, the rule makers have definitely used the word `re-employed' in case of the pensioner in Clause (ii) of Rule 55-A" "14.
In view of what has been stated above in respect of dearness relief we are of the opinion that any executive instruction given by the State Government by which the present petitioner has been deprived of her dearness relief on the family pension is contrary to the rules and liable to be set aside which we hereby do.
We direct that the petitioner shall be given dearness relief on the family pension in addition to the dearness allowance and other relief she is entitled to the post in which she is working."
8.
Rule 55-A (ii) came for consideration before the Apex Court in Union of India v. G Vasudevan Pillay, 1995(2) SCC 32 : 1995 AIR SCW 891 : 1995(2) SCT 842 (SC).
It was held that dearness relief on family pension on re-employment cannot be granted.
In para 10 of the judgment it has been held that :  "10.
In some of the cases, we are concerned with the denial of Dearness Relief on family pension on employment of dependants like widows of the ex-servicemen.
This decision has to be sustained in view of what has been stated above regarding denial of DR on pension on re-employment inasmuch as the official documents referred on that point also mention about denial of DR on family pension on employment.
The rationale of his (sic) getting of Dearness Allowance by the dependants on their pay, which is drawn following employment, because of which Dearness Relief on family pension can justly be denied, as has been done."
9.
Consequently, the law laid down by this Court in Kamla Sharma's case (supra) is no longer the good law and this position has been accepted by this Court in later decision in Chamba Devi v. Union of India, Civil Writ Petition No. 1162/95, decided on September 27, 1995.
In view of the legal position, it is not difficult to hold that the petitioner is not entitled to Dearness Relief on the family pension she is receiving after the death of her husband.
The object behind the Rule is clear and explicit, namely, that Dearness Allowance is payable for meeting the high cost of living.
When a person is already getting the same with his pay of the post to which he is appointed, there is no justification for him to receive this benefit on the family pension again.
10.
No other point was urged by the learned counsel for the parties.
11.
Consequently, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.