GC Garg, J - Plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration calling in question an order dated 15.9.1992 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur whereby he was dismissed from service.
Trial Court by judgment and decree dated 7101994 decreed the suit.
Aggrieved thereagainst the defendants filed appeal.
Since the appeal was barred by time, an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act seeking condonation of delay was also filed.
The application was considered by the learned District Judge who by his order dated 2031995 dismissed the application and consequently the appeal also stood dismissed.
Hence this is a revision at the instance of the defendants.
2.
In response to notice plaintiff-respondent has put in appearance.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the department was pursuing the matter with due care, but the delay occurred in filing the appeal on account of the fact that decision to file the appeal was to be taken at different levels.
Because of impersonal attitude of the officials of the State delay of 45 days in filing the appeal deserved to be condoned in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Special Tehsildar, Land Acquisition, Kerala v. KV Ayisumma, 1996(3) RCR(Civil) 583 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 275.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand submitted that the State stands on the same footing like a private litigant and is required to explain each day's delay in filing the appeal.
The State of Punjab having failed to show sufficient cause for condonation of delay, learned District Judge rightly dismissed the application under section 5 of the Limitation Act and there is hardly any scope for interference in exercise of jurisdiction under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
5.
On a consideration of the matter, I find that in this case, the District Attorney had initially opined that it was not a fit case for filing the appeal before the District Judge.
On receipt of copy of the judgment and the opinion of the District Attorney the Home Department referred the matter to the Legal Remembrancer who in turn directed the District Attorney Amritsar to file appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial court.
Necessary instructions in that behalf were issued by the Legal Remembrancer by letter dated 111995.
It was on this count that there occurred delay in filing the appeal.
In my opinion, delay in filing the appeal had been sufficiently explained and it occurred because of difference of opinion in filing the appeal and for taking a final decision in that behalf by the Legal Remembrancer and Home Department.
Thus in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the above referred case, I have no hesitation but to conclude that the delay that occurred in filing the appeal deserved to be condoned.
I thus allow this revision, set aside the order dated 2031995 and remit the case to learned District Judge, Amritsar for deciding the appeal on its own merits in accordance with law within a period of four months.
It will be open to the District Judge to either dispose of the appeal himself or to assign the same to any other court of competent jurisdiction.
Parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the District Judge, Amritsar on 2871997 for further proceedings.