GS Singhvi, J - In this writ petition, which was filed on 13111995, the petitioners have made the following substantive prayers :-  "(i) issue a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 2381995 (P.3) whereby the petitioners studying in Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana have been disowned and further ordered to be shifted to any other Engg.
College of the State of Punjab, being illegal, unjust, cryptic, bad in law, violative of Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India as also of the principles of natural justice; (ii) issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents 2 and 4 to allow the petitioners to complete their studies unconditionally and issue them the registration numbers and if necessary frame requisite rules/regulations in that regard; (iii) issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to declare the result of 3rd and 4th semesters of the petitioners; (iv) it is further prayed that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioners may kindly be allowed to appear in the 5th semester examination commencing from 21st of November, 1995 and the respondents be directed to issue roll numbers to the petitioners for that purpose."
2.
The facts which are necessary for the purpose of deciding the writ petition and which have remained uncontroverted due to the non-filing of reply by any of the respondents are that the petitioners took joint Lateral Entry Engineering Test, 1994 (for short `LEET-94') conducted by the respondent No. 5 for admission to third semester of the B.E.
(Civil/Mechanical/Electrical/ Electronics and Communication/Production) in Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College.
All the petitioners, who were already having Diploma in the respective branch of Engineering were admitted to the third semester on being successful in LEET-94.
After completing the course of the third semester they appeared in the examination held in the month of November 1994.
Immediately thereafter they were promoted to fourth semester in their respective courses.
The result of third semester was declared by the Punjab University in April/May 1995.
Against the roll numbers and and names of the petitioners, the following remarks came to be entered in the resultsheet :-  `RLA' - (Result later for non-receipt of awards) OR  `CS' - (Candidature suspended for want of registration No. or other documents) or both.
3.
The petitioners represented to the College and the University but they did not get any reply.
The fourth semester examination was held in May 1995.
All the petitioners appeared in the examination on the basis of the roll numbers issued by the University.
Result of this examination was declared in October 1995.
However, against the names of the petitioners remarks similar to the one entered qua the examination of third semester came to be incorporated in the resultsheet.
Due to the non-declaration of the result of the third and fourth semesters examinations, the petitioners were not issued roll numbers by the university and apprehending that they may be deprived of the fruits of their labour, the petitioners approached this Court and made the aforementioned prayers.
4.
Notice of motion was ordered to be issued on 14111995.
On 17111995, a Division Bench consisting of SP Kurdukar, CJ, as he then was, and VK Bali, J, passed the following order :-  "Counsel for the petitioners states that the respondents have been served by dasti and he tenders on record the summons.
Taken on record.
Despite service, none present for the respondents.
In the circumstances, we direct the second respondent to grant permission provisionally to the petitioners to appear for the fifth semester examination of B Engineering as per branch of the petitioners.
Needless to add that the roll numbers will also be issued for the said examination.
The petitioners are taking examination at their own risk and subject to the interim order that may be passed in the writ petition.
Adjourned to December 11, 1995.
Order dasti .
SP Kurdukar, CJ VK Bali, J" November 17, 1995.
5.
On 11121995, the writ petition was admitted for hearing.
The Court also directed that the petition be listed for hearing within three months.
However, the Court could not hear the petition for almost one year and two months.
This prompted the petitioners to file CM No. 9924 of 1997 with the prayer that the respondent No. 2 be directed to declare the result of the examinations of first to eighth semesters.
In this application the petitioners have asserted that they have completed all the semesters in their respective degree courses but due to the non-declaration of result irreparable injury is being caused to them.
6.
I have heard Shri Gurpal Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Anupam Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No. 2.
7.
The facts which have been brought on record show that the petitioners were granted admission in the third semester after they passed the LEET-94.
The respondent No. 2 did not object to their admission.
Rather it allowed them to appear in the examinations of third and fourth semesters by issuing roll numbers.
After about a year and three months of their admission to the third semester, the university decided that a separate degree may be designed for the diploma holders.
The Vice-Chancellor ordered that the decision of the Faculty of the Engineering and Technology be communicated and the students admitted at the Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana under the Lateral Entry Scheme be shifted to the Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar or any other Engineering College in Punjab where the regulations permit the lateral entry of such students to third semester of the four years Bachelor of Engineering Degree Course.
8.
It appears to us that the decision taken by the university was not implemented and the petitioners not only appeared in the third and fourth semesters examinations but they also appeared in fifth to eighth semesters examinations.
It is thus clear that all the petitioners have completed their respective courses and have undertaken the examinations under the Court's order or otherwise.
And now it is impossible to shift the petitioners to any other Regional Engineering College.
9.
In the premise aforesaid the only appropriate course is to direct the respondent-University to declare the results of the petitioners of the various semesters examinations in which they have appeared under the Court's order or otherwise.
Any other course would jeopardise the career of 14 students who are not to be blamed for having taken admission on the basis of LEET-94.
10.
Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of by directing the respondent No. 2 to declare the result of the petitioners' examinations within 15 days of the submission of certified copy of this order.
However, this direction shall not be treated as a precedent for future for the purpose of granting admissions to the students who have passed diploma course, unless a policy decision is taken by the university for such admissions.