S Parvatha Rao, J - This Writ Appeal has been preferred by the respondents in Writ Petition No. 6558 of 1990 questioning the correctness of the judgment of the learned single Judge in that Writ Petition dated 1971995.
2.
The petitioner in the Writ Petition sought a writ of Mandamus declaring Memo No. DD/O/NDD/Adm/C1/D.
No. 65/90 dated 1341990 of the first respondent and the order of dismissal in Memo No. DEE/NDD/Adm./C1/D.
No. 70-90 dated 851990 confirmed by the second respondent's Memo No. AD/C.2/F/D.
No. 552/90 dated 1461990 as illegal, arbitrary and absolutely without jurisdiction.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as Helper and joined service as such on 1811959.
After that he was promoted as Wireman/Lineman and at the time of his dismissal he was working as Lineman.
The date of birth entered in his service record was 1571934 and that was as per the Transfer Certificate No. 872 of MRK Board High School at Veeravasaram, furnished by the petitioner himself.
According to the respondent, it was discovered that the said Transfer Certificate furnished by the petitioner was a false one and on that basis enquiry was initiated against him.
It is not necessary to go into those details because, admittedly, as there was no proper information as regards the petitioner's date of birth, he was referred to the Medical Board and the Medical Board gave a Certificate to the effect that he was aged 55 years as on 2121985 and on that basis, his date of birth should be taken as 1.7.1930.
That much is established by the record.
But, for reasons best known to the respondents, the said date of birth as ascertained by the Medical Board was not entered in the Service Register of the petitioner and obviously, because of that he was continued in service beyond 30.6.1988 which was the date on which the petitioner attained superannuation as per the date of birth fixed by the Medical Board.
After 30.6.1988, enquiry was conducted against him for not submitting proper certificate of his date of birth; and it is also the case of the respondents that on enquiry it was discovered that correct date of birth certificate was issued to him by his School and on the basis that the petitioner suppressed that Certificate, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him which resulted in the issuance of the Memo dismissing the petitioner, impugned in this Writ Petition, and the appellate order confirming the dismissal also impugned in the Writ Petition.
4.
The learned single Judge held that the respondents were bound by the age as given by the Medical Board, in view of the undisputed fact that the petitioner appeared before the Medical Board for ascertainment of his age as per the direction of the first respondent and the petitioner could not be held responsible for continuation of his service beyond 30.6.1988.
On that basis, the learned single Judge quashed the impugned order passed by the first respondent dated 851990 dismissing the petitioner and the appellate order dated 1461990 confirming the dismissal.
In the result, the learned single Judge observed that the petitioner should have been retired on 30.6.1988 and directed that he shall be entitled to all pensionary and retirement benefits in accordance with law, fixing the date of retirement as 30.6.1988.
5.
After hearing the learned Counsel on both sides, we do not find any reason for interfering with the order of the learned Single Judge.
The date of birth fixed by the Medical Board is binding on the respondents and as per the date of birth, the petitioner reached the age of superannuation on 30.6.1988 and, therefore, he retired on that date because the first respondent did not take any action to continue him in service or for conducting any disciplinary enquiry against him before that date.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner in the Writ Petition i.e., the respondent in this Writ Appeal, relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in CL Verma v. State of M.P. and another, AIR 1990 SC 463.
In that case, the Supreme Court considered the effect of Rule 29 of the MP State Municipal Service (Executive) Rules (1973), which provided for superannuation.
It is as follows:-  "29.
Superannuation - (1) A member the service shall attain the age of superannuation on the date he completes his 58 years of age and shall retire on such date: Provided that the State Government may allow a member of the service to continue in employment in the interest of Municipal Council or in public interest.
However, no member of service shall continue on service after he attains the age of 60 years".
The Supreme Court observed: "We are, therefore, of the view of that the appellant, in terms of Rule 29, ceased to be a Government employee on his attaining the age of 58 years, two days prior to the order of dismissal.
In view of the fact that he had already superannuated, Government had no right to deal with him in its disciplinary jurisdiction available in regard to employees.
The ratio of decision in RT Rangachari v. Secretary of State for India in Privy Council, 64 App.
40 : AIR 1937 SC 27 supports the position".
6.
We find that the principle laid in the above decision by the Supreme Court applies to the facts of the present case.
The relevant rule, regarding the age of retirement, applicable to the petitioner is Regulation 16 of the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board Service Regulations, which is as follows:  "16 (a)(i) The date of retirement on superannuation of an employee of the Board other than Class IV employees is the date on which he attains the age of 58 years and of a Class IV employee the date on which he attains 60 years.
(2) xx xx xx xx (b) An employee under suspension on a charge of misconduct should not be required or permitted to retire on his reaching the date of compulsory retirement, but, should be retained in service until the enquiry into the charge is concluded and final order passed thereon by the competent authority."
The language of regulation 16(a)(i) is in effect similar to the language of Rule 29 considered by the Supreme Court in CL Verma's case (supra).
Following the decision of the Supreme Court, we have to hold that as per regulation 16, the petitioner automatically retired on the date on which he attained the age of 58 years.
Unless there was some positive action on the part of the respondents retaining him in service, he would not continue in service after that date.
From this, it follows that the petitioner superannuated on 30.6.1988 and ceased to be an employee of the Board after that date, and, therefore, no disciplinary proceedings could have been initiated against him after he ceased to be an employee.
7.
The learned Standing Counsel, Mr. CV Nagarjuna Reddy, appearing for the respondents, sought to rely on State of Assam and another v. Daksha Prasad Deka and others, 1970(3) SCC 624, in support of his contention that unless the service record is altered, the petitioner cannot rely on the date determined by the Medical Board.
But, that decision does not support that contention.
Though the petitioner in that case sought alteration of his date of birth, that was rejected by the authorities concerned.
The Supreme Court upheld their decision on the ground that the application itself was not made in accordance with rules and, therefore, was not maintainable.
In the present case, on the other hand, the first respondent himself directed the petitioner to present himself before the Medical Board for ascertainment of his correct age and date of birth, and the Medical Board gave Certificate stating that his age was 55 years as on 2121985 and that his date of birth should be taken as 1.7.1930.
If the respondents for some reason failed to enter that date of birth in the Service Register as they ought to have done, that cannot in any manner affect the correctness of the date of birth as ascertained by the Medical Board and its binding effect as per the provision.
8.
In the result, the Writ Appeal is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.