THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition has been filed seeking a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to fill up the posts of Peons-cum- Chowkidars in the office of the Director, Employment, Punjab, in accordance with the selections made.
2.
In the year 1992, the Director of Employment, Punjab, sent a requisition to different Regional Employment Exchanges of Punjab, for filling fifteen posts of Peons-Cum-Chowkidars, Accordingly, the various Employment Exchanges in the State of Punjab sponsored the names of eligible candidates including the petitioners for appointment as Peons-cum-Chowkidars.
The Interview Board was constituted and all the candidates were interviewed and fifteen of them were selected.
It appears the petitioners were also among those fifteen candidates selected for appointment as Peon-Cums-Chowkidar.
Therefore, the petitioners have filed this writ petition in the year 1995 seeking a direction ot the respondents to fill up the post of as Peon-Cum- Chowkidars by appointing the petitioners also to the said posts.
3.
In the written statement filed by the State, it has been stated that originally the Departmenht of Finance had sanctioned fifteen posts of Peons- Cum-Chowkidars for the year 1991-1992 but the sanction order was received late and, therefore, the selection process could not be completed because of shortage of time.
They admitted that the requisition was given to the Employment Exchanges and petitioners and some others were interviewed and fifteen candidates were selected.
But according to the respondents, as the Finance Department did not sanction the said posts for the succeeding years ie 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 the appointment letters could not be issued to the petitioners as the posts had lapsed in the year 1992 and thereafter these have not been sanctioned.
Therefore, the respondents contended that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed as there are no sanctioned posts to be filled up by appointing the candidates selected.
4.
This matter is covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in UP Bhumi Sudhar Nigam Ltd v. Shiv Narain Gupta, 1994(4) SCT 1(SC) : 1994(4) RSJ 442 wherein it has been held as follows :  "We are of the view that the High Court fell into patent error in issuing the Mandamus in the facts and circumstances of this case.
This Court has authoritatively laid down that even if a vacancy is available and the employer bona fide declines to made an appointment, the candidate on the select list has no right whatsoever to claim appointment."
In the above decision, the Supreme Court has referred to the earlier decisions of the Apex Court wherein it has been held that the existence of vacancies does not confer any legal right on a selected candidate to be appointed unless the relevant rules provide specifically to the contrary.
The Supreme Court also observed that :-  "The State, of course, must all through act bona fide and not arbitrarily both in making appointments and in not filling the existing vacancies."
In the case in hand, the posts were originally sanctioned for the year 91-92 i.e. only for a period of one year.
The selection process could not be completed for administrative reasons, till the end of the financial year 1991-92.
Further, it is the case of the department that no further sanction has been accorded by the Finance Department for these posts.
Thus, the posts had not been sanctioned and they were not in existence.
When the posts themselves are not in existence, there is no question of appointment of the petitioners to the said posts.
As observed by the Supreme Court the candidates who are included in the select list, will not have any right to be appointed.
It may also be noted that one of the selected candidates filed C.W.P.
No. 1263 of 1994 which had been dismissed on July 25, 1994.
5.
I do not, therefore, find any ground for issuing a writ of Mandumus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners as Peons-cum-Chowkidars.
The Writ Petition is devoid of any merits.
6.
Writ Petition is, therefore, dismissed but without costs.