VK Bali, J (Oral) - Devinder Kumar, who was appointed as Clerk in the Irrigation Department, Punjab has filed this writ under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, praying that order of his dismissal, Annexure P-10, as also the appellate order that came to be passed in the wake of statutory appeal filed by him, Annexure P-12, may be quashed and that he be taken in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
In the wake of the limited prayer made during the course of arguments, at this stage there is no need to go into the detailed facts.
Suffice it, however, to say that the petitioner was charge-sheeted and departmental enquiry was held against him.
The basic charge against the petitioner was that he had procured the employment by mis-representing the fact that he was dependant upon his brother.
Obviously, the Enquiry Officer, after conclusion, of the proceedings held the charge to be proved.
In a statutory appeal preferred by the petitioner, the following order, Annexure P-12, was passed :-  "Regarding Civil Writ Petition No. 602/1992 and applicant appeal dated 2991992.
2.
Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court on 15992 while dismissing the Civil Writ Petition No. 602 of 1992 filed by Shri Devinder Kumar, Ex.
Clerk, directed the Department to decide the appeal made by the petitioner within six months and to obey the orders of the Court.
The appeal of Shri Devinder Kumar has been examined thoroughly and carefully and it has also been seen whether any new facts have been brought to the notice for the consideration.
Shri Devinder Kumar had been given an opportunity on 12.3.93 to explain the case personally in his favour but Shri Devinder Kumar had failed to bring any new fact neither in writing nor personally, on the basis he could prove himself dependent on his brother.
He tried to explain the case on the basis of his old submissions under which the Enquiry Officer has rejected his case because the unmarried brother of the applicant died on 14101986 whereas his father was working in the Irrigation Department on the post of Deputy Collector.
Therefore, according to the Rule/Instructions, Shri Devinder Kumar cannot be treated as dependent on his unmarried brother.
The appeal of the candidates after thorough consideration is dismissed."
It really surprises the Court that in a statutory appeal, in which questions, both on fact and law were debatable and in which directions number of ground were spelled out in the memorandum of appeal, totally a non-speaking order, bereft of any reasoning, came to be passed by the Appellate Authority and that too after this Court, in an earlier petition preferred by the petitioner, had directed to decide the appeal filed by the petitioner within six months.
This is by now settled proposition of law that even quasi-judicial orders have to contain reasons for reaching at a conclusion.
Order, Annexure p-12, thus, lacks the very essentials of a judicial or quasi-judicial order and for that reason alone the same deserves to be set aside.
So ordered.
3.
It is unfortunate but there is no way out for this Court but for to send the petitioner to the same authority with the direction to hear the petitioner or his counsel and give reasons for arriving at the conclusion either in favour or against the petitioner.
The Court is conscious of the fact that even now if the petitioner is unsuccessful, it would be a third bout of litigation before this Court but, as mentioned above, nothing can be done in the matter but for to burden the State with costs.
This petition is, thus, allowed to the limited extent as mentioned above with costs quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
A further direction is given to the officer concerned to dispose of this matter, as referred to above, by passing a speaking order within two months from the date a copy of this order is made available to him.
Orders be given dasti.