GS Singhvi, J - In view of the fact that almost identical reliefs have been claimed in all these petitions they are being decided by a common order.
2.
Som Dutt, who is petitioner in CWP No. 11837 of 1993, joined service as Laboratory Attendant on 23.9.1966.
Presently he is working as Senior Laboratory Attendant.
During his service, the petitioner has improved his academic qualification with the permission of the departmental authorities.
He has passed Prabhakar, OT and BA examinations.
On 1981974, he was appointed as Hindi teacher in the pay scale of Rs. 170-350 and in that capacity he has served in the Government Girls Higher Secondary School, Sector 3, Talwara, district Hoshiarpur, uptill 2711976 and again from 3111976 to 861976.
Thereafter, the petitioner was posted back as Senior Laboratory Attendant.
According to the petitioner, despite his posting as Senior Laboratory Attendant, the respondents have taken the work of Hindi Teacher from him and for the last about 26 months he has performed the duties of Hindi Teacher.
By placing reliance on government Memo No. 2561-41E (1) 77 dated 1131978, the petitioner has pleaded that he has a right to be appointed on the post of Teacher in view of the improvement in his academic qualifications, He has also made reference to a large number of orders issued by respondent No. 2 for appointment of Clerks and other subordinate staff to the posts of Teachers on the basis of their improved qualifications.
Reference has also been made by the petitioner to the notification dated 891987 issued by the President of India under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India for validation of the appointment of Masters and Mistresses made from amongst ministerial employees during the years 1974 and 1975.
He has also relied on an order dated 20.7.1993 passed by a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3669 of 1992 and has pleaded that in view of his long experience of teaching, he has acquired a right to be appointed on the post of Teacher.
3.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents on the ground that the petitioner belongs to non-teaching cadre and his service conditions are governed by he Punjab Education Department (Subordinate Officers) Clerical Rules, 1941 and that he can have no claim to be appointed as Teacher.
Though the respondents have admitted the averments made by the petitioner that he had served as Hindi Teacher from 1981974 to 21.1.1976 and again from 3011976 to 861976, they have further pleaded that the appointment of the petitioner on the post of Teacher was purely ad hoc and for a specified period.
Case of the respondents is that on the basis of such stop-gap arrangement, no right has accrued in favour of the petitioner to be appointed as a Teacher.
Reference has also been made by the respondents to the amendment made in the requirements of qualifications for the posts of Hindi/Punjabi Teacher w.e.f 111986 and it has been pleaded by them that the petitioner does not fulfil the existing qualifications prescribed for appointment on the post of Teacher.
4.
In CWP No. 11838 of 1993, Sham Sunder Bedi has stated that while working as Laboratory Attendant he has acquired higher academic qualifications of Giani, OT, BA and MA (Punjabi).
Petitioner pleaded that due to shortage of teaching staff, he was asked to teach Punjabi, Mathematics, English and Science subjects from Middle to 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes.
On the basis of experience certificate (Annexure P-1), the petitioner has claimed that he has worked as a Teacher for the last more than 25 years and has, thus, become entitled to be appointed as Teacher.
The petitioner has also pleaded that a large number of persons junior to him in the cadre of Senior Laboratory Attendant have been appointed as Teachers.
He has also made reference to the Government Memorandum dated 1131978 and the amendment made in the Rules of 1978 vide notification dated 891987.
His plea is that when other similarly situated persons have been given appointment as Teachers, there is no justification to deny similar appointment to him.
5.
In reply, the respondents have stated that the petitioner is working as Senior Laboratory Assistant and he cannot claim appointment on the post of Master, because he does not fulfil the minimum qualifications prescribed for that post.
Along with reply, the respondents have produced Annexure R-1 in support of their assertion that case of the petitioner was considered for appointment as Master and was rejected.
6.
In CWP No. 15484 of 1993, Sham Lal and fourteen others have prayed for issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to promote and appoint them as Teachers/Masters in the schools.
Petitioners have produced Annexures P-3 to P-5 in support of their assertion that they have acquired higher qualifications.
They have also produced Annexure P-6, P-7, P-8, P-9 and P-11 to substantiate their assertion that a large number of persons holding Class III and Class IV posts have been appointment as Teacher only on the basis of their academic qualifications.
Petitioners have produced certificates to show that they possess experience of teaching and that in fact they have been discharging the duties of Teachers for the last number of years.
Various instructions issued by the Government for appointment of Class III and Class IV employees on the posts of Teachers have also been produced in the form of Annexures P-1, P-18 and P-19 etc.  7.
The point which is required to be determined in these petitions is as to whether the petitioners, who are holding class-III posts of senior Laboratory Attendants (the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant has been declared as Class III post vide notification No. 22/12/79-8 Edu-5 (Annexure P-2) in CWP No. 15484 of 1993) are entitled to be appointed/promoted/adjusted as Masters only on the basis of their possessing certain 'academic qualifications.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have relied on administrative instructions issued by the Government from time to time as well as the orders passed by respondent No. 2 and other officers of the Government appointing Class III employees, including Clerks and Senior Laboratory Attendants, as also Class-IV employees (Peons) as Masters in support of their contention that after having acquired the requisite academic qualifications, the petitioners should have been appointed/adjusted as Masters.
Shri Dadwal and Shri Sharma laid emphasis on the fact that for the last 10 to 20 years, the petitioners have been performing the work of masters in spite of the fact that they belong to the cadre of Senior Laboratory Attendants.
Learned counsel argued that by the sheer dint of long experience, the petitioners should be appointed as Masters, more so when other similarly situated persons have been appointed/adjusted as Masters.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that in the absence of any provision for appointment on the posts of Masters from amongst Laboratory Attendants, Clerks or Peons, the petitioners cannot claim appointment/adjustment/promotion on the posts of Masters.
Mrs. Tuli argued that the petitioners cannot derive any benefit from the fact that in cases of some other persons, respondent No. 2 or any other officer of the Government has violated the provisions of the Punjab State Education Class-III (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978 (for short, the 1978 Rules).
She argued that in the year 1987 also, the rule-making authority had amended the relevant rules to only protect the appointments made in the years 1974 and 1975 and, therefore, the petitioners have no right to be appointed as Masters.
8.
The posts of Masters/Mistresses are encadred in the Punjab State Education Class-III (School Cadre) Services Rules, 1978, which have been enacted by the Governor of Punjab in exercise of his powers under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Rule 9 of these Rules lays down the methods of appointment.
Appendix 'B' contains qualifications for recruitment to various posts.
At serial No. 3 appears the posts of Masters, Mistresses and Block Education Officer.
These posts are required to be filled by direct recruitment and by promotion in the ratio of 75 : 25.
Unamended Rules contained the following qualifications for recruitment to the posts of Master, Mistresses or Block Education Officers :  3.
Master or Mistress or B.E.O.
Degree of a recognised University with BT or B.Ed.
B.Sc.
and SSTC or BT or B.Ed.
Senior Basic Trained with any two of the four subjects in B.Sc.
namely Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology.
OR BA with Mathematics A course and Physics or Physics and Geography with SSTC, BT, B.Ed.
or Senior Basic Trained."
Direct appointment 75% Promotion 25% from trained Graduates amongst J.B.Ts.
Vide notification dated 7121978, the 1978 Rules have been amended by the Punjab State Education, Class-III (School Cadre) Services Rules, 1988.
Under the amended rules the entry at serial No. 3 in so far as it relates to the posts of Masters/Mistresses reads as under :  "3.
(i) (a).
Masters or Mistresses Degree of a recognised University with BT or B.Ed.
B.Sc.
and SSTC or BT or B.Ed., Senior Basic Trained with any two of the four subjects in B.Sc.
namely, Physics Chemistry, Botany and Zoology 75% (i) 15% from trained Graduates amongst J.B.Ts.
and (ii) 10% from trained Graduates amongst C and V teachers 25% from Gradua OR BA with Mathematics A Course and Physics or Physics and Geography with SSTC or BT or B.Ed.
or Senior Basic trained.
A comparative reading to the unamneded and the amended extracts of Appendix 'B' shows that while under the unamended Rules promotion quota posts could be filled from amongst Graduate Trained J.BT Teachers, under the amended Rules Trained Graduates amongst C and V teachers have also been made eligible for promotion apart from Trained Graduate J.BT Teachers.
However, neither under the unamended Rules nor under the amended Rules, Clerks, Senior Laboratory Attendants, Peon could be appointed as Masters/Mistresses.
9.
Notification dated 8111987 to which reference has been made in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 11837 and 11838 of 1993, shows that the rule-making authority has amended Rule 20 by way of insertion of Sub-rule (2) to the said Rule.
This amended rule reads as under :  "2.
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules and the Punjab Education Service, Class III, School, Cadre Rules, 1955, all appointments of Masters/Mistresses made during the period commencing from the 1974 and ending on the 1975 from amongst the ministerial employees of the Department of Education shall be deemed to have been validly made and no such appointment shall be called into question merely on the ground that it was made in violation of provisions of Punjab Education Service, Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955."
A bare reading of the above quoted Rule shows that the rule-making authority has done nothing more than to protect some appointments which were made during the years 1974 and 1975 in contravention of the Rules.
Apparently, the departmental authorities had appointed ministerial employees of the Department of Education on the posts of Masters/Mistresses ignoring the fact that the existing Rules did not contemplate such appointments.
The rule-making authority thought that it would be unjust to deny a status of Masters/Mistresses to such illegally appointed persons and, therefore, it amended the Rules and regularised the illegal appointments made in the years 1974 and 1975.
That in my opinion cannot help the cause of the petitioners.
They cannot derive any strength from the amendment made vide notification dated 8111987.
It must, therefore, be held that the petitioners, all of whom are holding the posts of Senior Laboratory Attendants, are not eligible to be considered for appointment as Masters in the Education Department.
10.
The petitioners have made an attempt to derive strength from the fact that respondent No. 2 and other some departmental officers have made appointments on the posts of Masters from amongst Senior Laboratory Attendants, Clerks and Peons.
To my mind all such appointments are contrary to the statutory rules and, therefore, the petitioners cannot claim that the Court should issue a writ for their appointment as Masters even though such appointments may be contrary to the rules.
Similarly, the petitioners cannot derive any benefit from the administrative instructions or orders issued by the Government for appointments on the posts of Masters.
All such instructions and orders, which are inconsistent with the statutory rules, have to be treated as void and have to be ignored.
It is well settled that in exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court can issue an appropriate writ, order or direction for enforcing a legal and constitutional right of an individual or a body of individuals.
It can nullify any arbitrary action of the State or a Public authority.
It can also issue a mandate to the State and its officers to do a particular thing in accordnace with the provisions of law.
In a given case, the Court can restrain the State and public authority from committing a violation of Statute which may affect the right of the petitioner(s).
However, no writ can be issued with the avowed object of enforcing 'equality clause' enshrined in the Constitution if equality is claimed on the basis of an illegal action of the State or public authority.
The Court cannot exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 for perpetuating violation of the provisions of law.
In fact, issue of writs which result in perpetuation of an illegality is unknown to the system of administration of justice prevailing in the country.
Therefore, no writ deserves to be issued in favour of the petitioners for directing the respondents to appoint/promote/adjust them as Masters because as per the Rules of 1978, they are not eligible to be appointed as Masters.
11.
The petitioners are also not entitled to claim absorption as Masters only on the ground that they have physically discharged the duties as Masters/Teachers for a number of years.
In the absence of any provisions in the 1978 Rules for absorption of a person as Masters/Mistresses, the petitioner cannot get a writ issued from the court only on the ground that he/she has worked as Teacher/Master/Mistress while holding a different post and has, therefore, gained sufficiently long experience on such posts.
It is a matter for the Government to consider and decide as to whether those, who have gained experience of working as Teacher/Master/Mistress and who have discharged such duties in the interest of education of the children, should be absorbed in the service by amending the rules.
There may be some justification for the claim made by the petitioners for their absorption as Masters/Mistresses on the basis of their experience.
However, this is a matter which lies in the exclusive domain of the Government and the rule-making authority and it is for them to take a decision in the matter.
It is for these authorities to take into consideration as to whether it would be in the interest of education to make a provision for absorption of Senior Laboratory Attendants or others, who have gained long experience of teaching, particularly when there is no other revenue of promotion available to such persons.
12.
However, the above conclusions do not automatically result in rejection of Civil Writ Petition No. 11837 of 1993.
The admitted facts, which have come on record, show that petitioner Som Dutt had been appointed as Hindi Teacher on 1981974.
He served in that capacity at the Government Girls Higher Secondary School, Sector 3, Talwara, district Hoshiarpur, till 2711976 and again from 3011976 to 861976.
It is, thus, clear that he had served as a Hindi Teacher for almost two years.
His case, thus, falls within the ambit of notification dated 891987 (Annexure P-3 in CWP No. 11837 of 1993), Therefore, case of the petitioner Som Dutt does require consideration by respondent No. 2 in the light Annexure P-3.
In the result, the Civil Writ Petition Nos. 11838 and 15484 of 1993 are dismissed.
Civil Writ Petition No. 11837 of 1993 is partly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Teacher in view of the provisions contained in the notification dated 891987.
If petitioner Som Dutt is otherwise found entitled to be appointed as Master under the rules, appropriate order should be passed in his case within three months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.