T S Doabia, J - The petitioner was working with the Indo-Tibetan Border Police.
He absented himself.
This led to departmental proceedings being initiated against him.
Ultimately, an order of dismissal was passed.
Copy of this is Annexure P/4.
The petitioner preferred an appeal.
In appeal, the appellate authority altered the quantum of punishment and passed an order to the effect that the petitioner would stand reduced to rank of Nk/Gd.
This reduction was to operate only for a period of one year.
The period of absence of one year and 49 days was regularised by grant of leave of the kind due at the credit of the petitioner.
It is this order which is being challenged in the present petition.
2.
The basic argument which has been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that as punishment of reduction of rank has been imposed, therefore it was incumbent upon the respondents to hold departmental enquiry and for this reliance is being placed on the rules framed under the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.
It is not in dispute that these rules govern the service conditions of the petitioner.
Rule 27(7) is being reproduced hereinbelow as it is relevant :-  ``27.
Procedure for the Award of Punishments : xx xx xx xx xx (i) In case it is proposed to impose the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank on a member of the force, the authority competent to impose the penalty shall supply the member concerned with a copy of the report of the enquiry and call upon him to show cause within a reasonable time not less than one week and not exceeding one month against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted.
Any representation made by him shall be taken into consideration before passing the final orders.''
3.
The petitioner may be right in contending that where an order of reduction in rank is passed, then enquiry is required to be held but the question is whether this punishment has in fact been imposed in this case or not.
Even though the term used in the order Annexure P/6 is ``reduction in rank'' it be seen that it has been mentioned in Annexure P/6 that this will operate for one year only.
Virtually it amounts to forfeiture of one year service on the higher post.
It will not be reduction in rank as the term is commonly understood under the Constitution or in service jurisprudence.
As such, I am of the view that no fault can be found with the procedure adopted by the respondent authorities.
4.
Apart from this, it may be seen that this Court exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 is not to mechanically quash an order merely because there is some technical omission.
It has to apply its mind and examine as to whether lapse in the procedure has resulted in miscarriage of justice.
See Managing Director, ECIL v. Karnukaran, AIR 1994 SC 1074.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was not attending to his duties.
The explanation given is that he was not keeping fit and was under medical treatment.
It is not the case of the petitioner that he informed his superior authority that he was ill and was admitted in the hospital.
It is this lapse which prevailed with the appellate authority in awarding the punishment.
The appellate authority's order Annexure P/3 takes note of this fact and for facility of reference this observation of the appellate authority be noticed.
This reads as under :-  ``The second charge levelled against the appellant is that he did not bother to inform either to his parent unit viz. Spt.
Bn or the Commandant, VIII Bn.
ITB where he was attached regarding his absence.
Since the appellant was under medical treatment, the charge does not constitute a serious offence on the part of appellant warranting his dismissal from the service.''
Thus, it is not the case of the petitioner that this finding is in any way incorrect or is contrary to the record.
Thus, even if no enquiry was held and no hearing was given, I am of the view that the things would not improve and therefore, in line with the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the aforementioned case, I am of the view that the non-holding of an enquiry has not prejudiced the case of the petitioner.
Even if enquiry is held the finding as recorded in the appellate order, would remain the same.
5.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the petitioner is a member of a disciplined force.
He has to abide by the Rules.
His conduct of not informing his superiors about the cause of his illness was rightly commented upon.
The appellate authority has only passed an order which has the effect of reduction in rank of one year.
What was said by the Supreme Court in the case of Gouranga Chakraborty v. State of Tripura, AIR 1989 SC 1321, in para 24, would apply to the facts of this case also.
It was observed :-  ``We have scrutinised the relevant provisions of the BSF Act as well as the BSF Rules framed thereunder and we have no hesitation to hold that the power under Section 11(2) of the Act empowering the prescribed authority, i.e. the Commandant to dismiss or remove from service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer read with Rule 177 of the said Rules is an independent power which can be validly exercised by the Commandant as a Prescribed Officer and it has nothing to do with the power of the Security Force Court for dealing with the offences such as absence from duty without leave or overstaying leave granted to a member of the force without sufficient cause and to award punishment for the same.
The provision of sub- section (4) of Section 11 which enjoins that the exercise of the power under the aforesaid section shall be subject to the provisions of the Act and the Rules does not signify that the power to dismiss a person from service by the Commandant for his absence from duty without leave without any reasonable cause or for overstaying leave without sufficient cause and holding him as undesirable cannot be exercised unless the Security Force Court has awarded punishment to the person in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
The prescribed authority i.e. the Cammandant is competent to exercise the power under Section 11(2) of the said Act and to dismiss any person under his command as prescribed under Rule 177 of the BSF Rules.
It is also to be noticed in this connection that Rule 6 of the said Rules has specifically provided that in regard to matters not specifically provided in the Rules it shall be lawful for the competent authority to do such thing or take such action as may be just and proper in the circumstances of the case.
In this case though and procedure has not been prescribed by the Rules still the Commandant duly gave an opportunity to the appellant to submit his explanation against the proposed punishment for dismissal from service for his absence from duty without any leave and overstaying leave without sufficient cause.
The appellant did not avail of his opportunity and he did not file any show cause to the said notice.
Thus the principle of natural justice was not violated as has been rightly held by the High Court.
No other point has been urged before us by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.''
As such, I do not find any merit in this petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Security, if deposited, be refunded.