V K Jhanji, J. (Oral) - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 471984 whereby services of the petitioner were dispensed with.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as JBT Teacher on 8101970.
During the period from 1976 to 1979, the petitioner had been working as JBT teacher in Govt. Primary School, Kandhar Garh in Block-Malerkotla-2, where Madhuri Devi (respondent No. 5 herein) was also employed as JBT Teacher.
Bal Krishan, husband of respondent No. 5 filed a divorce petition before the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, making allegation that respondent No. 5 was having illicit relations with the petitioner.
Vide judgment and decree dated 681981, learned Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, found that Madhuri Devi (respondent No. 5) was living in adultery with the petitioner.
In view of this finding, divorce petition filed by Bal Krishan was allowed and a decree of divorce was passed.
Petitioner too was a party to the divorce petition, but he had been proceeded ex parte.
Against judgment and decree dated 681981, respondent No. 5 filed F.A.O.
No. 606 of 1982, which was dismissed by this Court on 311983.
Since the petitioner had been proceeded ex parte, he filed an application for setting aside the ex parte decree, but that application was dismissed on 2551984 having been filed after the period of limitation.
As a result of finding given in the ex parte order of divorce, departmental proceedings were started against the petitioner and vide show-cause notice he was called upon to explain as to why his services be not terminated as provided under Rules 13 and 5(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (in short, 1970 Rules).
Petitioner submitted his reply to the show-cause notice dated 2651984, in which he stated that the matter is pre-mature because the finding was given in an ex parte judgment in which he was not served.
The District Education Officer, Sangrur, having considered his reply to the show-cause notice, vide his order dated 471984 (Annexure P-3) dispensed with the services of the petitioner with immediate effect.
Petitioner impugned this order in Civil Writ Petition No. 2981 of 1984, which later on was withdrawn on 2091985 when counsel for the petitioner submitted that he be permitted to withdraw the petition with a liberty to file fresh one as and when a decision is taken by the appellate Authority regarding the setting aside of ex parte decree.
It may also be noticed at this stage that in the meantime, petitioner had also filed an appeal against his termination order (Annexure P-3) before the DPI (Primary Schools) under Rule 15 read with Rules 16 and 18 of the 1970 Rules.
Against the order dismissing his application for setting aside the ex parte judgment and decree, petitioner preferred F.A.O.
No. 1143 of 1986.
The same was decided on 16101986.
The relevant paragraph of order dated 16101986 may be noticed :  ``So far as Hardev Singh is concerned, the finding recorded by the Court below that he was not served in the divorce petition, would serve his purpose because without service he had no opportunity to defend himself.
Therefore, any finding recorded while granting divorce would not affect his rights although it would bind the husband and wife.
The necessity of filing application by Hardev Singh arose because the departmental proceedings were started on the basis of ex parte decree.
Since he was not served in the divorce petition and had no opportunity to defend himself, it is open to him to contend in the departmental proceedings or in appeal against the order of termination, that the order does not affect his rights so far as his service is concerned.
If there is independent evidence in the departmental enquiry about his being immoral or leading an adulterous life, the matter would be different; but because of the judgment and decree dated 681981, he should raise the argument that no order of termination of his services could be passed against him.''
It is clear from a reading of the aforementioned observations that this Court while deciding the F.A.O.
left it open to the petitioner to contend in the departmental proceedings or in appeal against the order of termination that he had not been served in the divorce petition or had no opportunity to defend his case.
The grievance of the petitioner in this petition is that after decision of F.A.O., he in the last week of December, 1986, approached the concerned Superintendent in the office of DPI (Primary Schools) Chandigarh, for enquiring as to how his services have been dispensed with, and also about the decision of his appeal which he had filed on 971984.
According to the petitioner, no reply was given and, therefore, he had no alternative but to file the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Respondents in their written statement is stated that ``the appeal filed by the petitioner as stated in para No. 11 of the writ petition was pre- matured, so no action was required.
He should file an appeal within 45 days from receiving the orders of termination under Pb.
C.S.R.
Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970.
Moreover, as per decision of Hon'ble High Court (Annexure 5) the petitioner should file an appeal but no appeal was filed by the petitioner.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that action of the respondents in not deciding the appeal filed by the petitioner, cannot be sustained.
The order dispensing with the services of the petitioner was passed on 471984.
Before the order could be served on the petitioner, petitioner filed an appeal on 971984, in which he prayed for stay of order dated 471984.
Rule 17 of the 1970 Rules which deals with the period of limitations of appeal, provides that no appeal preferred under this part shall be entertained unless it is so preferred within a period of 45 days from the date on which a copy of the order appealed against is delivered to the appellant.
Under the proviso to Rule 17, the appellate Authority can entertain the appeal after the expiry of said period, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time.
Under this rule, appeal could have been filed by the petitioner within 45 days from the date the order was communicated to him.
It does not mean that if the person aggrieved comes to know about the order without the same having been served upon him, he cannot prefer an appeal.
The Rule only provides that appeal should be filed within 45 days of the communication of order of termination.
It nowhere bars the filing of an appeal before the order is communicated to the concerned employee.
The appeal was not pre-mature as stated by respondents in their written statement.
The contention of Mr. Bhanot that the order was not attached with the appeal, is also of no consequence because when the appeal was filed, the same had not been communicated to the petitioner.
The best course for the respondents was to ask the petitioner to file copy of order.
In any case, when this Court in F.A.O.
No. 1143 of 1986 left it open to the petitioner to contend in the departmental proceedings or in appeal against the order of termination, that the decision in divorce petition does not effect his rights so far as his service is concerned, the appellate Authority ought to have decided the appeal keeping in view the observations made by this Court in F.A.O.
5.
Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to respondent No. 2 to decide the appeal of the petitioner within three months from the date of communication of order from this Court.
Meanwhile, the petitioner shall file another copy of appeal and also order terminating his services with the appellate Authority so that the matter is not delayed any further.
Order accordingly.