GS Singhvi, J - This case is yet another illustration of the casual attitude adopted by the administrative authorities towards the claims of a retired employee/his family.
The petitioner is the wife of late Shri RP Virmani who died on 6.12.1988 while working as a Lecturer, Government College Cadre.
She has been compelled to file this petition only on account of total apathy shown by the respondents in settling her claim regarding GPF Gratuity, and Leave encashment in lieu of the services rendered by her husband.
2.
A look at the writ petition shows that Shri RP Virmani had joined the Government service on 12101961 in the then State of Punjab, After reorganisation of State of Punjab, he continued to be an employee of the State of Punjab.
As per the policy of the Government, he was posted in the State Institute of Science Education, Punjab, Chandigarh where he served from 1071979 to 931986.
After his death, during the course of service, the petitioner claimed the benefit of leave encashment, gratuity and GPF For leave encashment, the petitioner submitted an application as early as in January, 1989 and continued to remind the authorities of the Government of Punjab as well as the Chandigarh Administration to settle her claim.
Her demand for the GPF was partly fulfilled in April, 1989.
However, when she received the sanction letter dated 641989, it was revealed to her that instead of paying her a sum of Rs. 72,799/-, the Government has paid her only Rs. 59,065/-.
She once again entered into correspondence with the respondents 1 to 3 and finally, the payment of Rs. 22,802/- was sanctioned to her on 17.7.1990.
Regarding death-cum-retirement gratuity, the papers of the petitioner were submitted by the Director, Public Instructions Chandigarh Administration to the Director, Public Instructions, Punjab, as early as on 2031989.
However, the actual payment of the amount of gratuity was made to the petitioner in January, 1991.
3.
Respondents have filed contradictory replies which show that each one of them has made an attempt to shift burden on the other respondents.
In regard to the delay in payment of GPF amount of Rs. 22,802/- no extianation has been offered by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
On the issue of leave encashment, respondents 1 and 2 have taken - the stand that the benefit of leave encashment is not payable by them.
Respondent No4 has taken the stand that late Shri RP Virmani was an employee of Government of Punjab and therefore, benefit of leave encashment has to be paid by the Government of Punjab.
On the question of delay in the payment of gratuity, respondents 1 and 2 have pleaded that there was delay on the part of Chandigarh Administration in sending the papers of the petitioner.
It has been stated that the complete papers relating to the petitioner's husband were received as late as in May, 1990.
Immediately thereafter, the Government submitted the case to the Accountant General, Punjab.
Respondent No.3 has stated that the entitlement of gratuity was reported by the respondent No2 vide his letter dated 19.6.1990 and on receipt of No Dues certificate from the department on 411991, the gratuity amounting to Rs. one lac was released to the petitioner vide letter dated 1511991.
4.
From the above, it is clear that there has been unexplained delay in the payment of remaining amount of GPF, and of gratuity and there is no justification for withholding of benefit of leave encashment which was admissible to the petitioner in lieu of service rendered by her husband.
On the question of entitlement of an employee of the Government of Punjab to the benefit of leave encashment even though, he/she may be serving the Chandigarh Administration, this Court has in Civil Writ Petition No. 2695 of 1992 Mrs. Padma Vig v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(3) SCT 703 (P&H) held that the Government instructions which have been issued after the date of retirement of an employee are not applicable to those cases.
A similar view has been expressed in Civil Writ Petition No. 7838 of 1993 BL Talwar v. The State of Punjab and others, decided on 2241994.
In view of these two decisions, I am of the view that there is no justification for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to withhold the payment of benefit for Leave encashment.
Mrs. Tuli submitted that the instructions issued by the Government of India on 31.12.1986 were operative at the time of death of late Shri RP Virmani and therefore the Government of Punjab had written a letter on 1121990 to the Administration of Union Territory, Chandigarh, but no reply has been received by the Government and therefore the payment could not be made.
In my opinion, on the basis of the instructions issued by the Government of India, the Government of Punjab could not withhold the benefit of Leave encashment admissible to the petitioner.
A dispute between the two Administrations, namely, the Government of Punjab on the one hand and the Union Territory, Chandigarh, on the other hand, may be resolved by them inter se.
However in so far as the petitioner is concerned, she cannot be denied the benefit of leave encashment on that ground.
Shri Virmani was undoubtedly an employee of the Government of Punjab and despite the fact that at the time of his death, he was serving in a college controlled by the Administration of the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
The petitioner is entitled to an appropriate relief in the matter of leave encashment.
The dispute between the two Administrations can be left to be resolved by them.
5.
The explanation offered by the respondents on the issue of payment of gratuity is wholly unacceptable.
A look at Annexure R-1 clearly shows that the respondent No4 had forwarded the papers of late Shri RP Virmani - petitioner to respondent No2 as early as on 2031989.
May be that the respondent No2 could not finalise the case on account of some correspondence between the respondents.
However, for this delay the petitioner cannot be deprived of her right to get interest on the amount of gratuity payable to late Shri RP Virmani which was to be paid by the respondents immediately after his death.
By withholding that amount, the respondents have gained advantage.
If the amount had been paid to the petitioner immediately after her making claim for the same, she would have earned the interest on the same.
It is, therefore, reasonable and logical to issue direction to the respondents to pay interest to the petitioner on the amount of gratuity.
6.
In State of Kerla and others v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR.
1985, Supreme Court, 359, the Supreme Court has held that an employee is entitled to the payment of interest on account of delay in the payment of retirement dues.
This Court and the various other High Courts have consistently held that if the amount payable to a retired employee or his family is not paid on due date, such employees or the members of his/her family are entitled to interest.
7.
Keeping in view the law laid down by the Supreme Court and by this court, this writ petition is allowed.
Respondents 1 and 2 are directed to pay interest to the petitioner at the rate of 12 per cent per annum on the amount of Rs. 22,802/- between the period from 641989 to 17.7.1990.
On the amount of gratuity, respondents 1 and 2 are directed to pay interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum w.e.f.
1st May, 1989 to the date of actual payment.
This date has been fixed keeping in view the fact that the papers had been forwarded by the respondent No4 to respondent No2, vide letter dated 2031989.
Respondents 1 and 2 are also directed to make payment of leave encashment in lieu of the service rendered by late Shri RP Virmani.
8.
The payment of interest as aforesaid as well as the amount of leave encashment shall be made to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
The respondents 1 and 2 are left free to recover the amount of leave encashment payable to the petitioner from the Administration of Union Territory, Chandigarh, in case they feel that it was the liability of respondent No4 to pay the amount of leave encashment.
9.
Since the petitioner has been compelled to file a writ petition on a matter which ought to have been decided by the administrative authorities at their own level and the explanation given by the respondents for delay in making of the payment has not been found satisfactory, the petitioner shall get costs of Rs. 1,000/- from respondent Nos. 1 and 2.