GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - In response to an advertisement issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, for recruitment against 25 posts of Art and Craft Teachers, the petitioner applied.
She was interviewed at Hissar on 1881991.
The selections made by the competent authority were quashed by this Court.
On appeal, the Supreme Court directed that candidates who have already been appointed may not be disturbed but those who had applied and were not selected may be reinterviewed.
In compliance with the directions given by the Supreme Court, the petitioner was again interviewed on 17111992.
2.
According to the petitioner, she is one of the candidates selected on the basis of re-interview.
However, before she could be appointed, respondent No. 3 directed her to appear before him alongwith all her original certificates.
The petitioner appeared before respondent No. 3 and produced her original certificates.
Thereafter, respondent No. 3 sought some clarification from the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, about the eligibility of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 2 is said to have informed respondent No. 3 that the petitioner is not qualified to be appointed as Art and Craft Teacher because she has not passed the Matric examination in full subjects from the Haryana School Education Board and on that premise the petitioner has been denied appointment to the post of Art and Craft Teacher.
Petitioner has alleged that she passed her Matric Examination from Madhymik Shiksha Parishad, UP, with the subjects of Hindi, Mathematics/Household, Economics, Political Science and Art & Craft (Drawing).
She has also passed Intermediate examination from the Board of High School and Intermediate Education, UP with the subjects of Hindi, Political Science, Drawing, Economics and Education.
In addition to these two examinations, she has also passed Prabhakar from the Panjab University and 10+1 examination from the Haryana State in which English was one of the subjects.
Further assertion of the petitioner is that the Matric examination of Madhyamic Shiksha Parishad, UP, and the Intermediate examination conducted by he Board of High School and Intermediate Education UP Allahabad, have been recognised as equivalent to the Matric and Intermediate examinations respectively of the Board of School Education, Haryana, vide Annexure P6 and P.7.
She has placed on record Annexure P.8 to show that she has passed 10+1 examination from Arya Girls High School, Mohana (Sonepat), with English as one of the subjects.
3.
On the basis of these averments, the petitioner has claimed that she is fully qualified to be appointed as Art & Craft Teacher but the respondents have unlawfully denied appointment to her.
4.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents solely on the ground that she does not fulfil the conditions of eligibility specified in Annexure P-1 inasmuch as she has not passed the Matric examination with full subjects from the Haryana School Education Board.
The case of the respondents is that English is one of the subjects which is required to be passed before a candidate can be said to have passed Matric Examination with full subjects and as the petitioner has not passed the English paper she has no right to be appointed.
Respondents have relied on Annexure R1 in support of their claim that the passing of English paper is a condition precedent for appointment as Art & Craft Teacher.
5.
A look at Annexure P.1 shows that under the heading 'Qualification' a candidate was required to be Matric pass (full subjects) from the Haryana School Education Board or equivalent and pass in Two Years Art and Craft Diploma examination conducted by the Haryana Industries/Industrial Training Department or equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
The petitioner has been denied appointment only on the ground that she has not passed the Matric examination with English as one of the subjects.
However, a perusal of Annexure P.8 clearly shows that the petitioner has also passed English paper in her 10+1 examination and there is no dispute that this examination was passed by the petitioner from a school affiliated with the Haryana Board of School Education.
Annexures P6 and P.7 further show that the examinations passed by the petitioner from UP have been treated as equivalent to the corresponding examinations of the Haryana Board of School Education.
Therefore, once the petitioner has cleared the English subject in 10+1 examination the technical hitch in her eligibility stood removed.
It is clear from the record that the petitioner has not only passed the examinations recognised as equivalent to the examinations of the Board of School Education, Haryana, but she has also cleared the English paper.
Therefore, it must be held that respondents have without any legal justification denied appointment to her.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to treat the petitioner as eligible for appointment as Art & Craft Teacher and in case her name has been included in the merit list they should appoint the petitioner as Art & Craft Teacher within a period of one month.
The petitioner shall get benefit of seniority as per her merit position but shall not be entitled to the benefit of actual salary till the date of issue of the order of appointment in terms of this judgment.
Petition allowed.