GS Singhvi, J - Appointment of respondent No. 4 as Director, Haryana State Seed Certification Agency (for short, 'the Agency') is an issue in this writ petition wherein initially the petitioner had made a prayer for issue of a direction to the respondents to consider his case for promotion to the post of Director, but subsequently in his replication dated 2831994, filed in the context of reply of respondent No. 3, a prayer for quashing of appointment of respondent No. 4 has also been made.
2.
The respondent-Agency was established on 31101975 in view of the provisions contained in Section 2 of the Seeds Act, 1966.
It is a body controlled and managed by the Government of Haryana and Commissioner-cum- Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Agriculture Department, is its Chairman.
The Agency started actual functioning w.e.f.
191976.
Initially, its staff was taken on deputation from the Agriculture Department of the Government of Haryana.
Petitioner, who had joined service in the Agriculture Department of the Government of Haryana as Technical Assistant in the year 1971 continued to work in the department till the creation of the Agency.
On and with effect from 31101975, the petitioner started working in the respondent-Agency.
With effect from 191976, he was taken on deputation.
In the year 1977, he was selected for appointment as Seed Certification Assistant (subsequently re-designated as Seed Certification Officer) and was appointed as such vide order dated 361977 of the Director of the respondent-Agency.
In the year 1982, he was selected for appointment as Chief Seed Certification Officer in the service of the respondent-Agency and was appointed on that post vide order dated 10101982, issued by the Director.
At that time the petitioner possessed the academic qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) from Meerut University.
The committee which selected the petitioner consisted of the following officers :  1.
Commissioner, Agriculture Department, Government of Haryana; 2.
Managing Director, Haryana Seed Development Corporation; 3.
Director of Agriculture, Haryana; 4.
Professor - Head of the Department of Plant Breeding, Hisar Agriculture University, Hisar; and 5.
Director, Haryana State Seed Certification Agency.
3.
After his selection, the petitioner was subjected to medical examination, where he was declared to be partially colour blind, but was still treated as fit for appointment looking to the nature of the duties.
Having served the respondent-Agency for last almost 18 years, including on deputation for almost one year, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to be promoted as Director of the respondent-Agency.
His plea is that by completely overlooking his candidature for promotion as Director of the respondent-Agency, the respondents decided to fill this post by appointing an officer of the Agriculture Department on deputation and in fact respondent No. 4, who is working as Additional Director in the Agriculture Department, has been posted on deputation on the post of Director of the respondent-Agency.
Petitioner's assertion is that right from the date of creation of the Agency in the year 1975, officers of the Agriculture Department have occupied the post of Director on deputation and once again an officer of the Agriculture Department has been foisted on the Agency without considering the claim of its own employees, including the petitioner, who happens to be the senior-most officer in the service of the Agency.
Petitioner's plea is that appointment of respondent No. 4 as Director of the respondent-Agency is contrary to the provisions contained in Haryana State Seed Certification Agency Service Rules, 1979 (for short, 'Rules of 1979') as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
He has pleaded that the State Government has no right to appoint an officer on the post of Director of the respondent Agency and, therefore, appointment of respondent No. 4 is without jurisdiction.
It has also bee pleaded by the petitioner that total exclusion of employees of the respondent-Agency is contrary to the doctrine of 'equality'.
4.
Respondents have filed two separate replies.
One of the replies has been filed by the State of Haryana while the other has been filed by respondent No. 3.
In its reply, respondent No. 1 has pleaded that the petitioner was a Class-III employee in the Agriculture Department whereas respondent No. 4 has been serving as Class-I employee since March, 1976.
He has been appointed as Director of the respondent-Agency vide Government's Endorsement No. 2276-Agri-I(3)-94/13421 dated 21.6.1994.
It has been stated that respondent No. 4 is MSc.
(Agriculture) and is, therefore, qualified to hold the post of Director.
In regard to the petitioner, it has been stated that he does not possess the academic qualification for the post of Director, because he is an MSc.
(Agriculture) in Botany whereas qualification required for the post of Director in MSc.
(Agriculture) in Plant Breeding/Agronomy/Horticulture(Vegetables)/Seed Technology.
Respondent No. 1 has referred to Rule 9(1) of the Rule of 1979 in support of its plea that the Government has power to make appointment on the post of Director by deputation.
5.
In its reply, respondent No. 3 has pleaded that the petitioner was promoted as Chief Seed Certification Officer with a special concession from the Government, inasmuch as he was promoted despite his medical unfitness.
Respondent No. 3 has also raised objection to the eligibility of the petitioner by alleging that the petitioner does not possess the qualification prescribed for the post of Director in the Rules of 1979.
6.
In his replication, the petitioner has stated that qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) in Botany is sufficient to entitle him to be appointed as Director because on the basis of this very qualification, he has been appointed as Seed Certification Assistant and then as Chief Seed Certification Officer and that academic qualification for the post of Director is identical to the required academic qualification for the post of Chief Seed Certification Officer and Seed Certification Assistant (Officer).
Further to this, the petitioner has stated that respondent No. 4 also does not possess the qualification specified in the Rules of 1979.
His academic qualification is MSc.
(Agriculture) in Entomology, a subject in the insecticide-pests and their control.
It has also been stated by the petitioner that respondent No. 4 does not fulfil the age requirement because he has already attained the age of 57 years.
7.
A re-capitulation of the rival pleadings would show that the petitioner, who is MSc.
(Agriculture) in Botany had joined service of the Agriculture Department of the Government of Haryana in the year 1971 and since 1976 he has been serving with the respondent-Agency.
Initially, he was taken on deputation in the year 1976 and from 1977 he has been in the regular service of the respondent-Agency.
Firstly, he was appointed as Seed Certification Assistant (subsequently redesignated as Seed Certification Officer) and then as Chief Seed Certification Officer.
He has gained total experience of 18 years while with the respondent-Agency, out of which for almost 12 years he has worked on the post of Chief Seed Certification Officer.
It is also an undisputed fact that the petitioner was selected for the post of Chief Seed Certification Officer by a high -powered committee.
The averments made in the petition further reveal that in addition to his academic qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) in Botany and 18 years of experience of service with the respondent-Agency, the petitioner has undergone the following trainings :-  1.
Training in potato production with a special reference to seed production at international training course on potato production held in Shimla.
(Annexure P-1); 2. International training course of seed-technology-organisation and management of seed programmes, held by the Food And Agriculture Development Centre (NEL) of the German Foundation for International Development (DSE) (Annexure P-2); 3. International course on Seed Technology for vegetable crops held at Los Banos College, Laguna, Philippines.
(Annexure P-3); and 4.
Improvement training course organised by the National Seeds Corporation Ltd (Annexure P-4).
It is clearly borne out from the record that respondent No. 4 possesses the qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) in Entomology.
It is also revealed from the record that since the creation of the Agency, the post of Director has been held on deputation by the officers of the Agriculture Department of the Government of Haryana.
Details of these deputation are :-  Sr. No. Name of the officer Period 1.
Shri J.S.
Dhull 191976 to 5101981 2.
Shri K. Phul Singh 6101981 to 2481988 3.
Shri SK Sindhwani 24.8.1988 to 2191991 4.
Shri G.S.
Virk 23.8.1991 to 3181992 5.
Shri SK Sindhwani (Additional Charge) 3181992 to 31-5.1994 6.
Shri SS Gill (Respondent No. 4) June, 1994 to date 8.
On our direction, the learned Assistant Advocate General has produced the file of the Government in which the question of appointment on the post of Director, Haryana Seed Certification Agency, has been dealt with.
This file is unnumbered and consisted of 21 sheets containing notings and two blank sheets.
The file begins with a note of the State Minister, Excise and Taxation, dated 26.4.1994, in which he had recommended appointment of Dr. JS Yadav, Chief Scientist, Oil-seeds, in Haryana Agriculture University, Hisar, on deputation as Director of the Agency.
On 27/2941994, Special Secretary to the Chief Minister recorded the desire of the Chief Minister that proposal may be put up in respect of the recommendation made by the State Minister.
That proposal is, however, not available on record.
At page 3 of the file, reference to the letter of the Director bearing No. Spi.-I/Estt.1(1) dated 1651994 has been made.
He has reproduced a note written by Shri DPS Malik, Member of Parliament and HPCC(I) President to the Chief Minister recommending appointment of Shri Ram Pal Malik, Additional Director, Agriculture, on deputation as Director of the Agency.
Reference has also been made to a similar recommendation made by the Minister of Public Works Department on 1151994 and a note of the Special Secretary to the Chief Minister indicating the desire of the Chief Minister to have a proposal in that regard.
The office of the Director made a note that Shri Ram Pal Malik was already on deputation with H.L.R.D.C.
for the last two years.
On 861994, Commissioner (Agriculture) and Secretary to the Government of Haryana recorded a note that he had discussed the note with the Hon'ble Agriculture Minister and while taking note of the fact that Shri Ram Pal Malik was already on deputation, the Commissioner opined that respondent No. 4 be transferred and posted as Director of the Agency.
Upon this, the Agriculture Minister recorded that respondent No. 4 would be the most suitable officer for the post of Director, which was very important.
The proposal of the Agriculture Minister was approved by the Chief Minister as is evident from the notings recorded by the Special Secretary to the Chief Minister on 17.6.1994.
This is how the Government issued direction for appointment of respondent No. 4 as Director of the Haryana State Seed Certification Agency.
In order to examine as to whether the action of the respondent in appointing respondent No. 4 as Director of the respondent-Agency is legal or not, we consider appropriate to make reference to the notification by which the Haryana State Seed Certification Agency Service Rules, 1979, have been notified.
Rule 2 of these Rules contains definition of various terms, including the terms 'Chairman', 'Direct Recruitment' and 'Service'.
Rule 3 says that service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix A The post of Director is at Serial No. 1 in Appendix A The post of Seed Certification Officer appears at Serial No. 4.
The post of Chief Seed Certification Officer has been placed at Serial No. 1 in the category of field level staff.
Rule 5 speaks of the age limit for appointment by direct recruitment.
Rule 6 specifies the authorities, which are entitled to make appointment on the various posts.
Rule 7 specifies the necessary qualifications for appointment to the service.
Mode of recruitment is prescribed in Rule 9.
Rules 10, 11 and 12 deal with pay of members of service, probation/confirmation and seniority.
Other rules are general in nature.
Rules 6, 7, 9 and relevant extract of Appendix B in relation to the posts of Director, Seed Certification Officer and Chief Seed Certification Officer are reproduced be low :-  Sr. No.
Designation of post Appointing Authority 1.
Director Governing Board 2.
Chief Seed Certification Officer 3.
Dy.
Chief Seed Certification Officer 4.
Asstt.
Accounts Officer 5.
Seed Certification Officer 6.
Office Superintendent 7.
Assistants 8.
Accountants 9.
Sr.
Scale Stenographer 10.
Jr.
Scale Stenographer 11.
Steno-typist Director 12.
Clerks 13.
Drivers 14.
Beldars 15.
Peons 16.
Chowkidars 7.
No person shall be appointed to the service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B of these rules.
8.
(1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made in the manner as specified in column 4 of Appendix B to these rules.
Where any vacancy occurs or about to occur in the Service, the appointing authority shall determine the manner in which such vacancy shall be filled.
Note :- All promotions shall be made on the basis of seniority and fitness to the post and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion as a matter of right and on the basis of seniority alone.
(2) In the case of Clerks :-  (i) 20% by promotion from class IV employees who are Matriculates or possess equivalent qualifications and have worked as such for not less than a period of 5 years.
(ii) 80% by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Govt. of India."
Extract of Appendix - B "Designation of Posts Academic qualifications and experience Age Method of Recruitment 1.
Director MSc.
(Agri.)
in Plant Breeding/Agronomy/Horticulture (Veg.
)/Seed Technology At least 15 years experience in Research/Farm Management/Crop Production/Seed/Development and Extension Activities out of which 10 years experience in a senior capacity.
Should be fully conversant for organising planning implementation and knows Administrative/technical affairs connected with the seed production.
40-45 years i) Promotion from the Chief Seed Certification Officer (ii) Direct (iii) Transfer or Deputation 2.
Chief Seed Certification Officer.
MSc.
(Agri.)
in Plant Breeding Agronomy/Horticulture (Veg.
)/Seed Technology.
At least 5 years experience in research/Farm Management/Crop Production Seed Production/Development & Extension activities as Class II or 7 years as Seed Certification Officer or equivalent.
25-35 years i) Promotion from the Dy.
Chief Seed Certification Officer/Seed Certification Officer ii) Direct iii) Transfer of Deputation 3. xx xx xx 4.
Seed Certification Officer MSc.
(Agri.)
in Plant Breeding/Agronomy/Horticulture (Veg.
)/Seed Technology Preference will be given to experienced persons."
25-35 i) Direct ii) Transfer or Deputation 9.
It is more than apparent from the above-quoted Rules and extract of Appendix-B that the appointing authority in regard to the post of Director is the Governing Body.
Being the appointing authority, it is for the Governing Body to decide as to by what mode the vacancy in the cadre of Director be filled.
Minimum academic qualification prescribed for the posts of Director, Chief Seed Certification Officer and Seed Certification Officer, is one and the same.
Major difference is with regard to the requirement of experience.
Promotion to the post of Director can be made only from amongst the Chief Seed Certification Officers.
10.
It is clear from the above that although under the Rules of 1979, authority to make appointment on the post of Director vests with the Governing Board appointment of respondent No. 4 has, in fact, been made by the Government and not by the Governing Board.
No material has been produced before us to show that the Governing Board of the respondent-Agency ever met and applied its mind to the question of making appointment on the post of Director.
It is, therefore, obvious that no exercise was undertaken by the competent authority in terms of Rule 9 for the purpose of deciding as to by which method the post of Director should be filled.
It is also clear that the Governing Board of the respondent-Agency had at no point of time applied itself to the requirement of eligibility, experience what to say of suitability of a particular person to be appointed as Director of the Agency.
In our opinion, it is a case in which the Governing Board of the respondent- Agency has abdicated its duty as well as authority to make appointment on the post of Director and the State Government usurped the power of the Governing Board of making appointment on the post of Director.
Thus, the exercise undertaken by the Government and its action of appointing respondent No. 4 on the post of Director cannot but be held as without jurisdiction and respondent No. 4 is liable to be declared as usurper of high public office of Director of the respondent-Agency.
11.
We may now advert to the objection of respondent Nos. 1 and 3 regarding eligibility of the petitioner to be appointed as Director by promotion.
It is not in dispute that academic qualification prescribed in the Rules of 1979 for appointment on the posts of Director, Chief Seed Certification Officer and Seed Certification Officer is one and the same.
The petitioner has been appointed as Seed Certification Assistant (redesignated as Seed Certification Officer) and Chief Seed Certification Officer with his qualification as MSc.
(Agriculture) in Botany.
Selection on the post of Chief Seed Certification Officer was made by a committee consisting of various Officers of the Government, including the Commissioner, Agriculture.
The committee, which selected the petitioner had the occasion to examine the qualification possessed by the petitioner and once the said selection committee took the view that the qualification possessed by the petitioner made him eligible for appointment on the post of Chief Seed Certification Officer, the respondents now cannot turn round and question the eligibility of the petitioner.
We are surprised to note that respondent Nos. 1 and 3 have come forward with such a plea though respondent No. 4, who is also MSc.
(Agriculture) in Entomology, a subject relating to insecticide-pests and their control has been appointed as Director.
In our considered opinion, the objection raised by respondent Nos. 1 and 3 to the eligibility of the petitioner is clearly misconceived and untenable.
12.
Before concluding, we cannot but observe that the manner in which the State functionaries have usurped the authority of a duly constituted body to make appointment on the highest post of the organisation leaves much to be desired.
Officers of the Government departments and others, who have approached the political figures for getting recommendations for appointment on the post of Director, ought to have been discouraged rather than being encouraged.
The Government should have taken a serious note of indirect pressure on Ministers and other political figures in the matter of appointment on the post of Director.
Neither of the political figures, who made recommendation, had any direct concern with the department of Agriculture and yet they made recommendation without any hesitation.
It need be only reminded to them that appointment to the highest as well also to the lowest public post is a public property and every person, who possesses qualification for appointment on a particular post, has a right to participate in the process of enjoyment of this public property.
Appointment on posts in public employment cannot be treated as a matter of charity, largess or concession till the doctrine of 'equality' enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution remains on the statute book and any attempt to violate this basic feature of the Constitution would be viewed adversely by the Court.
13.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Appointment of respondent No. 4 on the post of Director, Haryana State Seed Certification Agency, which was subject to the result of this writ petition in terms of order dated 661994 of this Court, is declared illegal and is quashed.
Respondent No. 4 is declared as usurper of the office of the Director, Haryana State Seed Certification Agency.
The Haryana State Seed Certification Agency is directed to make appointment on the post of Director in accordance with the provisions of Rules of 1979 within a period of three months from today.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.