SK Jain, J - Through this single judgment L.P.A. No. 767 of 1993 arising out of Civil Writ Petition No. 9435 of the 1987 'Karam Chand v. State Transport Controller and others' and Civil Writ Petition No. 8802 of 1993 'Nanak Chand v. State of Haryana and others' are proposed to be disposed of as identical questions of law and facts are involved therein.
Facts first.
2.
Karam Chand helper/electrician employed in Haryana Roadways, Faridabad filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9435 of 1987 seeking a mandate thereby quashing the order dated 9.7.1987 vide which his juniors were promoted on the grounds :  (i) that he was senior to the private respondents;  (ii) that he possessed higher qualification as compared to those of respondent Nos. 4 to 7;  (iii) that the Assistant Fitters were promoted from the common seniority list of helpers working with Turners, Washing Boys, Electrician, Welder, Tyre man, Motor Mechanic, Carpenter and Peons.
He further sought a direction to be issued to respondent Nos. 3 to 7 to promote him with effect from 9.7.1987 when his juniors were promoted.
3.
The writ petition was contested.
on behalf of the official respondents and a written statement was filed.
Their stand is that respondent Nos. 3 to 7 were promoted in accordance with their seniority in the trade.
It was however not denied that the petitioner was senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 7 in common seniority list.
A single Bench of this Court allowed the said writ petition vide its judgment dated 20.10.1992 thereby directing the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to promote the petitioner as Assistant Fitter with effect from the date when his juniors were promoted.
It was ordered that his entire service will, however, count towards seniority, pension, fixation of pay, grant of increments and other allied benefits.
However, back wages were denied to him.
4.
Feeling aggrieved, with the portion of the judgment vide which the back wages were denied to him the writ petitioner has filed LPA No. 767 of 1993.
Civil Writ Petition No. 8802 of 1993.
5.
Nanak Chand petitioner who was employed as helper in Haryana Roadways Depot, Faridabad filed Civil Writ Petition No. 8802 of 1993 seeking a mandate thereby quashing the order of promotion dated 1941991 and issuance of a direction to the first and second respondents to promote him as Assistant fitter/blacksmith from the date his juniors were promoted.
His case is that there was a joint seniority list of helpers working with turners, washing boys, radiator repairer, electrician, welder, tyreman, motor mechanic and carpenter etc., Respondents No. 3, 4 and 5 were junior to the petitioners in that seniority list but respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Assistant Fitter whereas respondent No. 5 was promoted as Assistant Blacksmith vide order dated 1941991 and thus the seniority of the plaintiff had been ignored.
6.
On being served, the official respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed written statement.
They took the stand that the department had constituted a committee to examine the issue of promotion of helpers to the post of Assistant Fitter, Assistant Carpenter, Assistant Electrician etc.
The said committee recommended that promotion should be made on the basis of tradewise seniority instead of joint seniority list, provided they possessed the requisite qualification i.e. Middle pass and two years experience in the respective trade.
It was further recommended that the option of other helpers be obtained for promotion to the post of Assistant in the respective trade provided they possessed the said qualification and experience in the trade on which promotion case would be considered.
On the basis of the said recommendation it was asserted that the impugned order had been passed strictly in accordance with the said promotion policy.
7.
Perusal of seniority list (Annexure P-2) would show that petitioner Nanak Chand is shown at Serial No. 8 and Daya Nand, Puran Mal and Kirpa Ram respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5 have been shown at serial Nos. 9, 10 and 16, respectively.
This fact has not been denied on behalf of the respondents as mentioned herein before.
It is also admitted that private respondent Nos. 3 to 7 had been promoted as Assistants and that there was no tradewise seniority list in existence.
So, in view of the fact that there was only one common seniority list in the cadre, promotions have to be regularised in accordance therewith.
Denial of the promotion to senior persons normally would be illegal.
The action of the respondents No. 1 and 2 in not promoting the petitioner to the post of Assistant Fitter in flagrant disregard of the common seniority list was clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In the matter of employment including the right of promotion the petitioner has thus been denied equal opportunity.
8.
For the aforementioned reasons, this writ petition is allowed.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to promote the petitioner as Assistant Fitter with effect from 1941991 on the date his juniors were promoted.
He will also be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
9.
Now on to the question of back wages.
Learned Counsel for the respondents have vehemently argued that the petitioner was not entitled to any arrears of pay and allowances because he did not work on the post of Assistant Fitter during the relevant period.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of Supreme Court in Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others v. Union of India and another, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 166.
On going through the judgment, we find that limited relief was granted keeping in view the fact that there was delay of 17 years in approaching the Court and further MP High Court granted the relief in Appeal No. 441 of 1981.
It was on the basis the Supreme Court had also granted limited relief.
Principle of 'No Work No Pay' cannot be attracted to the case in hand as due promotion was not allowed to the petitioner at the relevant time when persons junior to him were promoted and the petitioner cannot be made to suffer on account of inaction on the part of the respondent.
In view of the fact that it has been found that there was no justification for not fixing the petitioner in the promotional grade the relief of back wages cannot be denied to the petitioner.
In Sikandar Lal v. State of Haryana, decided on July 13, 1989 principle of "No Work No Pay" was not applied in such circumstances.
10.
Again a Division Bench of this Court in Prem Chand v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(2) RSJ 475 : 1993(3) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 617, held that the principle of 'No Work No Pay' could not be attracted to the case where due promotion was not allowed to the petitioner at the relevant time when person junior to him were promoted and the petitioner cannot be made to suffer on account of inaction on the part of the official respondents.
Since there was no justification for not fixing the petitioner in the promotion post, the relief of back wages could not be denied to him.
Reference can also be had to Parshadi Lal v. The State of Haryana and another, 1994(1) SCT 159 (P&H) : 1994(1) RSJ 197.
In view of the above discussion, the part of the judgment impugned in the L.P.A. where under the relief of back wages was denied to the appellant is set aside.
It is directed that he was entitled to payment of back wages.
L.P.A. and the writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.