RGururajan, J - Petitioner in this petition is challenging the promotion policy letter No. Air HQ/C 98824/1/PO5, dated 22-7-1999 on the ground that It is violative of Regulation of Air Force, 1964.
Petitioner is also seeking for a direction to the respondents to include his name in the select list of promotion to the rank of Wing Commander.
Petitioner is also seeking for various other reliefs.
2.
Petitioner got enrolled in Air Force in the year 1974 as a Sergeant in the Education Instructor grade.
He got Permanent Commission in the year 1982.
He refers to Regulation 162 to say that he made an application to the post of Wing Commander on 2-3-1998.
He refers to the various facts leading to this petition.
Petitioner also refers to the proceedings initiated by him in several Courts with regard to his grievance.
Petitioner states in the petition that he has been denied promotion in the light of a recent promotion policy which according to him is in variance with the old Regulation.
Petitioner also states in the petition that the present case is one of prejudice at the instance of the second respondent and he wants this Court to provide promotion to him.
3.
Respondents have entered appearance and they have filed a detailed counter statement.
In the counter statement, respondents refer to several proceedings between the parties.
They have filed various orders passed by the Delhi High Court in the matter of petitioner's grievance.
They also say that the petitioner has a remedy of statutory complaint in terms of Section 27 of the Air Force Act.
4.
Parties are heard at great length.
Learned counsel for the petitioner took me through the records to contend that the petitioner is entitled for promotion.
He states that at the instance of the second respondent he has been denied promotions.
He further contends that the present eligibility is contrary to Regulations in question.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent says that the present policy cannot be said to be bad.
It is only clarificatory in nature.
He further states that the case against the second respondent is not made out.
Learned counsel refers to various orders passed by the Delhi High Court in support of his contention.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel, I have carefully perused the material on record.
It is stated in the writ petition that the petitioner is eligible to be empanelled for promotion to the rank of Wing Commander.
He meets all requirements as laid down in Air HQ Policy Letter.
He has got more than 6 marks out of 9 marks in five previous years and more than 55 marks in mandatory qualities as laid down by Air HQ.
He never got 'below average assessment' or 'Adverse Remarks' in his service career.
He further states that for promotion to the rank of Wing Commander, calculation of marks and appraisal report covering a period of seven years are taken into consideration.
There is no provision of discretionary marks in the regulations.
On account of discretionary marks, subjectivity finds a dominant place in the Board.
According to the petition averments, Regulations are not amended and without amendment of Regulations the policy letter on promotion is not to be given effect to.
6.
In reply to this the respondent states that the policy letter of promotion is issued to lay down specific guidelines for selecting officers for promotion to the acting rank of Wing Commander as per the broad provision of the Regulations for the Air Force 1964.
Para 162 of the Regulations states that active promotion will not be granted automatically but will continue to be subject to recommendations, suitability, selection and other criteria.
Suitability is decided by the duly constituted PB-3 which does so based on the specific guidelines laid down in the promotion policy.
Respondents deny that there was any contradiction between the Regulations for the Air Force 1964 and the promotion policy laid down for promotion mode No. 3.
In the light of these pleadings let me (see) as to whether the promotion policy suffers from any violation of Air Force Regulations.
7.
Regulation 162 of the Regulations provides for qualifying service.
Criteria has been shown in the table to the said Regulation.
It is also stated that these limits are subject to revision from time to time and are to be used merely as one of the criteria for picking out officers to be considered as falling within the zone of promotion.
The present promotion policy in terms of Annexure-C provides for a promotion Board.
The composition of the Board is shown in the policy itself The eligibility criteria has been shown in Cl. 6.
The contention of the petitioner is that this policy runs counter to the Regulation 162.
Learned counsel for the respondent says that the policy is not in variance with Regulation 162.
As I mentioned earlier Regulation 162 itself states that acting promotions will not be granted automatically but will continue to be subject to recommendations, suitability, selection and other criteria.
The qualifying service in terms of the policy is nothing but an explanation of criteria in terms of Regulation 162.
It does not in any way offend Regulation 162.
On the other hand, it only explains Regulation 162.
Even the preface to the Regulation would show that Air and other Officers Commanding are responsible to ensure that these regulations are strictly observed and that any instructions or orders that may be issued from time to time are in no way inconsistent with these regulations.
It further says that these regulations do not supersede or cancel any administrative and departmental regulations, orders and instructions which are currently in force and which govern certain special categories of officers and men or else contain special provisions of a purely administrative nature.
Such orders and instructions are supplementary to and in amplification of these regulations.
The present policy in the light of the preface is nothing but supplemental to Regulation 162.
Similarly, in the policy minimum performance criteria has been shown in Cls. (a) and (b).
These minimum performance criteria is maintained for better efficiency and for better performance.
It cannot be forgotten that this Court is dealing with Air Force Personnel and there cannot be any dilution in the performance of the Air Force personnel.
A combined reading of the policy and the regulation would show that there is no variance as sought to be made out.
On the other hand, it is only supplementary and explanatory.
In these circumstances, I deem it proper to reject the contention of the petitioner on the facts of this case.
8.
Insofar as the merits of the matter are concerned, petitioner has made several grounds in support of his contention.
He took me through the pleadings to say that a merited officer is denied promotion for extraneous reasons.
He refers to previous proceedings and he refers to allegations against respondent No. 2.
Per contra, as I mentioned earlier, Union of India has filed a counter, explaining their stand in the matter.
They also say that remedy in terms of Section 27 is available to the petitioner.
9.
The Air Force Act of 1950 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Air Force of the Government.
Section 27 provides for a remedy.
In terms of Section 27 any officer who deems himself wronged by his Commanding Officer or any superior officer and who on due application made to his Commanding Officer does not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled may complain to the Central Government in such manner as may from time to time be specified by the proper authority.
Regulation 622 also provides for remedy for an aggrieved officer in terms of section 27 of the Air Force Act.
In the case on hand, there are several factual aspects in the matter of promotion.
There are allegations and counter allegations.
There is a fact-finding redressal authority in terms of Section 27 of the Act.
In fact a statutory complaint is already made in terms of Section 27 of the Act on 29-6-2001.
In these circumstances I deem it proper not to give any finding on the merits of the matter and I deem it proper to direct the respondents to dispose of the application within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
I also deem it proper to observe that while disposing of the statutory application, the authorities are directed not to be in any way influenced by this order and pass orders in accordance with law and strictly in accordance with the material available on record.
10.
Petition is partly allowed with the above directions.
Parties to bear their respective costs.
Petition partly allowed.