RL Anand, J - Miss Aradhana Uppal petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed that the order dated 1562001 (Annexure P-10) vide which one month notice of termination of the services has been issued is illegal and arbitrary and writ of mandamus be issued against respondent Nos. 2 and 3 directing them to accord approval of appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in Mathematics as the petitioner was fully eligible and qualified and was duly selected and appointed by a legally constituted selection committee and further the direction be issued to the respondents to release the salary to the petitioner from June, 2000 onwards.
It has also been prayed that the respondents be restrained from terminating her services on the basis of the order dated 1562001.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  3.
The petitioner is possessing the qualification of M.Sc.
B.Ed.
and has passed UGC NET examination.
In the year 1999 respondent Nos. 4 and 5 advertised two posts of Lecturer in Mathematics.
The petitioner along with others applied for the said post in response to the advertisement for her selection and appointment as Lecturer in Mathematics.
She was called for interview on 11101999.
On 3111999, the petitioner was selected and order was issued vide which she was given appointment as Lecturer in Mathematics.
It was however stipulated in the appointment letter that her appointment would be subject to the approval of the Vice Chancellor, University, and the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, Chandigarh.
In pursuance of the above said appointment as Lecturer the petitioner joined her duties as Lecturer in Mathematics on 4111999.
She was kept on probation which was extended on 5102000 for want of approval by the University.
On 1562001, a letter was issued to the petitioner wherein it has been stated that as the approval of the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 has not been received, therefore, her services shall be deemed to have been terminated.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that she was eligible for the post on the date of the interview and that she did not conceal anything from the respondent authorities and therefore, the action of the respondents initiated vide letter dated 1562001 (Annexure P-10) is violative and illegal.
5.
Notice of the wit petition was given to the respondents and the writ petition has been contested merely on the ground that on the date of submission of the application for appointment to the post she was not having the requisite qualification.
She applied for the post on 30.5.1999 and on that date she had not appeared or cleared UGC NET examination.
She could qualify herself for the post had she passed the said test within 20 days from the date of the advertisement issued on 1651999 but she did not clear the examination.
Her result was not declared, therefore, she was ineligible even on the date of the advertisement and 20 days thereafter.
With these defects the respondents prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records and we are of the considered opinion that the writ petition of the petitioner should be allowed as the petitioner has not concealed anything from the respondent authorities.
Moreover, the appointment of the petitioner was made by a duly constituted selection committee which was also represented by the nominees of the University and Director of Public Instructions.
During the course of the submissions, it was conceded before us that at the time of the filing the application the petitioner was not having requisite qualification/eligibility but the petitioner did not conceal this fact from the respondent authorities.
Admittedly at the time of the interview the petitioner had obtained the requisite qualification by clearing the examination.
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents relied upon Naresh Kumar and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1985(1) S.L.R.
426 and submitted that as the petitioner was not having the requisite qualification on the date of her application for the post and on the date of the advertisement or 20 days thereafter, therefore, the authorities in a rightful manner did not grant the approval to the petitioner.
We have gone through this judgment very carefully and we are of the opinion that this judgment is distinguishable on the facts.
In the cited case the candidate did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications specified in the advertisement.
In the case in hand, admittedly the petitioner attained requisite qualifications much earlier to the date of interview which was 1111999 so much so after submission of the application for the post, the petitioner on 15.9.1999 submitted further particulars by filing an application and stated that though she had appeared in the examination her result has not been declared.
Before the interview the petitioner was fully eligible though the degree was not conferred upon her.
It is the common case of the parties that after selection of the petitioner by the selection committee in which the nominees of the University and the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, were present, she was allowed to join the duties.
There was no complaint with regard to her work and conduct.
8.
It has been held in Bhupinder Singh & Ors. etc. v. State of Punjab & Ors., 2000(2) SCT 826 (SC) : 2000(2) SLR 608 as under :-  "It is clear from the facts of the case that not only the applicants, thousands in number, but the authorities too were also belabouring under an identical wrong impression.
That is why the applications were entertained and the applicants called for interview though not eligible by reference to the last date for receipt of applications.
The selection process is complete.
Even the appointment letters have been issued.
The controversy arose because several officers of the Education Department at the District level refused to join the selected candidates despite of their being armed with appointment letters.
Admittedly, with a stray exception of one or two, all the applicants have acquired the requisite eligibility qualifications by 30.10.96, the extended date for making applications.
From the corrigendum dated 17.10.96, it cannot be clearly spelled out that though the age requirement was to be determined by reference to 30.10.96, other eligibility requirements, i.e., those relating to education, were to be tested by reference to 15.2.96 and not 30.10.96.
At least, the corrigendum did not specifically say so.
There are no mala fides alleged.
It has not been the case of any one aggrieved and certainly not a finding arrived by the High Court that satisfaction of eligibility requirement by reference to the last date of making of the applications was not rigorously insisted on by the authorities of Education Department or the Selection Board for the purpose of accommodating or obliging any favoured candidate or candidates.
The enquiry set up pursuant to the orders of the High Court has also not brought out any finding enabling such an inference being drawn.
The action on the part of the Selection Board and the authorities of the Education Department though mistaken and unsustainable in law, was bona fide and a result of loose practice prevalent till then which has been discontinued now.
In our opinion it would cause grave injustice to the several appellants before us if their selection and appointment were struck down and they were now asked to seek employment elsewhere.
Most of them if not all, must have crossed the upper age limit for seeking public employment and the ghost of unemployment is likely to chase them for the rest of their lives.
It is not the case of the State Government that the entry of the several appellants before us as teachers in the Education Department, would be a disservice or cause discontentment in the services or any other problem."
The reading of the above para would show that the Hon'ble Supreme Court gave benefit to those candidates who were not qualified on the date of the submission of the application but they attained the eligibility during the period when their applications were under process or scrutiny and before the date of selection.
Admittedly, the petitioner had passed the requisite test, she did not conceal anything from the respondents, she was allowed to appear in the interview with open mind and open eyes.
At this juncture, to dis-lodge the petitioner from the services, especially in the Education Department, would cause dis-service to the society in general and to the petitioner in particular.
Therefore, we are inclined to follow the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bhupinder Singh's case (supra) and allow this writ petition, setting aside the order dated 15.67.2001 Annexure P-10 passed by the respondents and give directions to the University to accord sanction to the post held by the petitioner and also to provide sanction so that the salary of the petitioner may be released within two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order failling which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% pa. on her dues.
We also give directions to the respondent authorities that on the basis of the order dated 1562001 Annexure P-10, the services of the petitioner shall not be terminated.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.