RL Anand, J - Shri Deharvmvir son of Shri Om Parkash, a retired clerk of Dev Samaj College for Girls, Ambala City, has filed the present writ petition against the State of Haryana, Kurukshetra University.
Governing Body, Dev Samaj College for Girls, through its Secretary and Dev Samaj College for Girls through its Principal, Ambala City and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 44,279/- as balance towards gratuity and a sum of Rs. 52,556/- as balance towards leave encashment along with 18% interest per annum as the petitioner is entitled to the same according to he Rules and Regulations as applicable to the employees of the affiliated colleges in the State of Haryana.
The petitioner has further made a prayer for quashing Annexure P-10 the reply given by the respondents No. 3 and 4 to the petitioner rejecting his claim.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as a regular peon against a vacant post on 381978.
Respondent No. 4 started paying the monthly fixed salary of Rs. 150/- as against Rs. 750-12- 870-EB-14-940 meant for Class IV employees working in the Non-Government Affiliated Colleges.
The petitioner was getting a fixed salary of Rs. 1100/- per month on the basis of the post of a Peon in the year 1991.
When he was promoted as Clerk against a vacant post he was entitled to a scale of Rs. 950-20-1150-EB-235-1500 on the post of Clerk whereas the petitioner had been kept on fixed salary.
The petitioner was getting Rs. 1275/- as basic pay along with 110% dearness allowance which came to Rs. 2550/- per month.
The grouse of the petitioner is that though he was entitled to the scale but he was given fixed salary.
He earlier filed a civil writ petition in the High Court for the grant of regular pay scale, house rent etc. and the said writ petition was disposed of vide order dated 1891998 and directions were given by the Division Bench to decide the representation of the petitioner.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that respondent No. 4 is a college affiliated with the Kurukshtra University and as per the Rule 3 of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services) Act, 1979 he was entitled to the prescribed pay scale along with Dearness allowance on such rates as are applicable to the Government institutions.
Though some payment has been made to the petitioner but still certain amount has been highlighted in the earlier portion of the judgment which is due to the petitioner and, therefore, directions should be given to the respondents for the release of the said amount along with interest.
The petitioner has also calculated this amount in para No. 15 of the writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to these respondents, respondent No. 4 is a privately managed educational institution and is not receiving any grant either form the Government or from the University.
Thus, it is not a State or other authority under Article 12 of the Constitution.
Moreover, the disputed question of fact is involved in this case and, therefore, the writ jurisdiction should not be exercised.
It was also pleaded by the respondents that the petitioner has not approached the Court with clean hands as he has received the full payment and had given a certificate that nothing remained due from the college.
The petitioner has already relinquished his rights and now he had filed the writ petition after a period of 10 months.
It was also pleaded by the respondents that the petitioner remained absent from duty he applied for long leave which were sanctioned in spite of that the petitioner did not join the duty.
The act of the petitioner amounted to the abandonment of the duty.
The petitioner was doing a private business at Chandigarh as his wife was working at Chandigarh.
Earlier, the petitioner filed a writ petition which was disposed of with the direction to decide the legal notice of the petitioner.
The college applied its mind and whatever was due to the petitioner was given.
He had received the amount by making an endorsement in the receipt that he had received the full payment and nothing was due to him against the college.
4.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that Haryana Affiliated Colleges Pension and Contributory Funds Rules which were made effective with effect from 1151998 are not applicable as neither the petitioner was working on the aided sanctioned post before 1151998 nor continued to work as such thereafter.
Moreover, Dev Samaj College is not receiving any grant from the State Government or from the Kurukshetra University, 100% amount is spent by the management from its own resources.
The college has not been established with profit motive.
It is charging a nominal fee from its students and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any amount as he was not working on any aided sanctioned post.
With this defence, the respondents prayed for the dismissed of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard Shri Rajesh Garg, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri SK Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 3 and 4 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon firstly on the definition of the college by stating that college means a college under private management recognised/affiliated by the University and as per regulation 3 every employee of an affiliated college has to be paid according to the prescribed pay scale besides DA/ADA as mentioned in the appendix- X Irrespective of the fact that college is getting aid from the University or not, it was bound to pay the regular pay scale to the petitioner which has not been paid to him as a result of which the petitioner is entitled to the amount claimed.
7.
I do not subscribe to the arguments raised by he learned counsel for the petitioner for the reasons that respondent institution is not an aided institution.
Affiliation of the respondent institution with University, does not mean that petitioner is entitled to regular pay scale, until and unless the college is funded from the Government, it cannot give the scale of pay to its staff on the parity of the staff working in an aided institution.
It is not established on the record that the post of the petitioner was ever sanctioned as an aided post by the University or by the State Government.
Moreover, the document Ex.R-4/1 clearly shows that petitioner had received all payments towards provident fund gratuity and leave encashment on 12101999 in the presence of his father and brother by giving a certificate that nothing was due to him from the college.
In the opinion of this Court, the present controversy has been raised by the petitioner for the sake of controversy only.
Further, I am of the opinion that the writ of the petitioner is not maintainable against respondents No. 3 and 4 as these respondents do not fall within the definition of State or instrumentality of the State as required under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner has simply made respondents No. 1 and 2 as a party to the writ petition so as to confer jurisdiction upon the High Court.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon a judgment reported as AIR 1987 SC 311, Frank Anthony Public School Employees Association v. Union of India and others.
The cited judgment is also not applicable to the facts in hand.
Resultantly, the writ petition is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.