VK Bali, J - Challenge herein is to order dated June 1, 2000, Annexure P- 9, vide which petitioner has been placed under suspension, primarily on the ground that he is absolutely not concerned with the Water Supply and Sewerage Cell (O&M Cell), being Sub-Divisional Engineer of B&R Branch.
2.
It has, inter-alia, been pleaded that petitioner has been working on B&R side of the respondent-Corporation at Ludhiana and has no concern whatsoever with the duties of O&M Cell of the respondent-Corporation.
The duties of Water Supply and Sewerage System are of the employees of O&M Cell.
However, for dereliction of duty of employees of O&M Cell, petitioner has been placed under suspension on account of mala-fides of respondents 2 and 3.
It is stated that vide Annexures P-1 to P-6 starting from 1995, there were complaints made by the residents of area as also the Welfare Association of residents of Fauji Colony, Ranjit Nagar, Ludhiana.
In these complaints, the residents had been intimating the authorities that the Sewerage System had choked.
The had been requesting the authorities for maintaining the sewerage system.
However, the officers of O&M Cell did not bother to remove the defects.
There were hundreds of complaints regarding working of sewerage system and water supply.
The matter had also been given in the Press regarding choking of the system, death of four persons and falling ill of 65 persons, details whereof have also been given in the petition.
It is the case of petitioner that it is mentioned every where that infection had been caused by contaminated water because sewerage water got mixed with the drinking water.
The officers, who were responsible for choking of the system have not been touched and others, who were not working on Water Supply and Sewerage side, have been placed under suspension.
It is then pleaded that petitioner along with other officers of B&R Branch had filed CWP No. 5940 of 1994 which was decided on October 26, 1994.
Challenge in the said writ petition was for creation of new cadre by bifurcating the existing service into more than one cadre, as would be clear from operative part of order passed in CWP No. 5940 of 1994, reproduced in para 4 of this petition.
Petitioner and others were, thus, not taken to the cadre of O&M and were left in the cadre of B&R cell.
It is then pleaded that MN Sharma, respondent No. 3, who is Superintending Engineer of B&R side was transferred by respondent No. 2 from Patiala to Ludhiana in O&M Cell.
Petitioner filed a contempt petition against Shri NK Arora, Principal Secretary to Government of Punjab and MN Sharma, respondents 2 and 3 herein.
It is then pleaded that for his having filed aforesaid contempt petition, respondents 2 and 3 are inimical to him.
On the two grounds, thus, as stated above, order of suspension, Annexure P-9, has been challenged.
3.
When this Court issued notice of motion on June 12, 2000, counsel representing the State was asked to make available to the Court approval of Principal Secretary, Government of Punjab, reference whereof has been given in order, Annexure P-9.
The records of case have been made available to the Court and respondent No. 3 has also filed reply.
There is no reasoned approval that may be available on records of the case as admitted by the respondents, but they have sought to justify the order of suspension on the basis of the record as also written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
4.
It has, inter-alia, been pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 that Shri MN Sharma, SE (B&R) was never appointed as such in O&M Cell.
It was purely an administrative arrangement and it was specified in order, Annexure P-1/C that all payments to Shri Sharma be made towards the post of B&R side and it should be ensured that he shall not perform his duty on O&M side.
He was always borne on the cadre of B&R and that a detailed reply to the contempt petition has already been filed wherein allegations levelled by the petitioner have been denied.
It is then pleaded that construction of the streets with plain cement concrete (PCC) in the area of Fauji Colony, Sherpur, Ludhiana, was approved by the respondent- Corporation.
The work was allotted to the contractor which was to be completed in the area under the direct supervision of the SDO and Junior Engineer of the B&R department.
Further, raising of the manholes to the required level and casting of slabs was a part of the contract agreement to be executed at site under the supervision of the petitioner and his Junior Engineer.
The O&M cell and nothing to do with it.
On coming to know that the potable water being supplied in this area had become contaminated due to mixing of the sewerage water, a high level inquiry was conducted by the Zonal Commissioner of the area, who went to the spot, talked to several people, made extensive enquiries and then submitted his report, Annexure R-4/1.
It transpired that staff of B&R branch of the respondent Corporation did not carry out the work, as required and broke down all the manholes at one stretch.
In fact, these manholes were required to be broken and repaired one by one so that there may not be any chance of sewerage or water pipes getting damaged.
Thus, the petitioner and his Junior Engineer were prima-facie found negligent in the performance of their duty.
The Superintending Engineer certified that breaking of all the manholes at one time is technically incorrect.
Since valuable lives were lost and many people were suffering and admitted in the hospitals due to Gastroenteritis, it was incumbent upon the Corporation to fix the responsibility after conducting the enquiry.
Accordingly, to hold a fair departmental enquiry and keeping in view that SDO and JE of the B&R branch were found prima facie negligent and they may not tamper with any record, they were immediately placed under suspension.
The pendency of contempt petition has nothing to do with the departmental action taken against the petitioner.
Further, petitioner alone was not suspended and there were three others who were also suspended.
5.
From the records of the case that have been made available to this Court and reply that has been filed, it rather becomes clear that a high -level enquiry was conducted by the Zonal Commissioner of the area, who submitted his report, Annexure R-4/1.
From the enquiry report it is quite clear that the petitioner also had a role to play and it cannot be said that, being on B&R side, it was not his responsibility to look after the execution of the contract.
We are not wanting to comment anything more as that is bound to prejudice either of the parties before the Enquiry Officer.
From the totality of facts of circumstances of this case, we are of the view that contention of petitioner that he had nothing to do with the execution of work that resulted into so many deaths and hundreds of people being hospitalised, and further that allegation of mala fide, are too perfunctory and vague and on that basis, no occasion at all arises to quash order of suspension, Annexure P-9.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same at motion stage at itself, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.