GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing the remarks made in his annual confidential report for the year 1995.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner joined service as Clerk in the Sessions Division, Karnal on 16.2.1979.
He was promoted as Statistical Assistant on 731995.
Vide letter Annexure-4/A, he was communicated the remarks made in his annual confidential report for the year 1995 by the District and Sessions Judge, Karnal.
He represented against the same vide Annexure-P5.
The same has been rejected by the High Court as is evident from the letter Annexure-P.7 dated 2281998, a copy of which was endorsed to the petitioner.
3.
Shri G.S.
Bajwa urged for quashing of the remarks made by the respondent No. 2 by arguing that the entries made in Annexure-P4/A are vitiated by mala fides and arbitrariness of the then District and Sessions Judge, Karnal.
He submitted that the respondent No. 2 felt greatly annoyed due to the filing of C.W.P.
No. 5051 of 1996 by the petitioner for directing the respondents to consider him for appointment as Superintendent in the office of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Haryana and this is sole the cause for recording of adverse report.
Learned counsel further argued that the impugned remarks should be nullified because of patent violation of the instructions issued by the government for recording of annual confidential reports.
4.
We have considered the submissions of Shri Bajwa but are not inclined to agree with him.
For the reasons best known to him, the petitioner has not impleaded Shri NK Jain, the then District and Sessions Judge, Karnal, who made remarks in his annual confidential report, as party respondent although allegations of mala fide have been levelled against him.
Therefore, we can neither make an investigation on the issue of mala fide exercise of power by the concerned officer nor we can record a finding that the entries made in the annual confidential report of the petitioner are biased or tainted with malice.
5.
We are also of the opinion that mere filing of writ petition by the petitioner for vindication of his legal and constitutional rights cannot give rise to an inference that the then District and Sessions Judge, Karnal was prejudiced or biased against him and the same has been reflected in the ACR of the petitioner.
In any case, we cannot record a finding of mala fide against the officer concerned because he has not been impleaded as respondent.
That apart, we find that the representation made by the petitioner was rejected by a Judge of this Court and as representation made by the petitioner was rejected by a Judge of this Court and as no allegation of mala fide has been levelled against him, it is not possible to agree with Shri Bajwa that the adverse remarks are tainted with bias or mala fides.
6.
A look at Annexure-P4/A shows that the reporting officer has adversely commented upon the knowledge of the petitioner about rules and regulations, quickness in preparing proposals, punctuality and regularity.
He has observed that the petitioner neither knows the rules nor he has the will to learn.
The particular remarks entered in these columns are :-  Particulars'/items Reported by xx xx, Knowledge about rules and regulations.
Neither knows the rules nor has the will to learn.
Quickness in deciding the cases.
He is unable to compile the statements.
His work is being looked after by Sh. Pakhandu Ram.
xx xx Punctuality and regularity Remains absent without prior sanction of leave.
Usually late after interval.
Reputation for honesty.Fault, if any.
No complaint.Shirks work.
Fitness for promotion (In this column please write as to whether he could obey his duties satisfactorily).
After promotion as Assistant the employee's work and conduct has shown consistent deterioration.
He is being advised to improve.
xx xx Grading : (Outstanding, Very Good, Good, Average, Below Average) AVERAGE 7.
The petitioner has not placed any material to show that the work of compilation of statements which was entrusted to him is not being looked after by Shri Pakhandu Ram.
He has also not placed any material to show that the remarks relating to his absence without prior sanction of leave are contrary to record.
Thus, we do not find any valid ground to hold that the remarks made in the annual confidential report of the petitioner are vitiated due to arbitrariness or mala fides.
8.
The plea of violation of the instructions issued for recording of Annual Confidential Reports, deserves to be rejected because the learned Counsel could not show which of the instructions have not been followed by the reporting officer.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.