Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 15052 of 1998 (Miss Shanujeet Kaur v. State of Punjab and others and Civil Writ Petition No. 15658 of 1998 (Rajinder Kumar Bansal v. State of Punjab and others.
The facts have been taken from the first noted case.
2.
The petitioner passed her MBBS examination and on the completion of her internship was awarded a degree by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The Punjab Government issued a notification calling for applications for admission to the three year Post Graduate degree course for the session 1998- 2001 to be held in the Government Medical/Dental Colleges at Patiala/Amritsar and also notifying that the admission would be made on the basis of the Post Graduate Entrance Test to be held by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The University, thereafter issued a prospectus inviting applications for the entrance test and also indicating the schedule for that purpose; the last date for the receipt of applications for the entrance test was fixed as 451998, the test to be held on 2451998 and the result thereof was to be declared on 161998.
It was also provided that the last date for the receipt of application forms for admission to the Post Graduate Degree Course at the Government Medical College, Amritsar on the basis of the result of the entrance test was 1261998 and that the counselling for candidates under the 40% quota reserved for fresh graduates (such as petitioner) would be held on 2361998.
The petitioner took the entrance test and on the declaration of the result was shown at Sr. No. 24 in merit.
As per the scheduled programme, counselling was to be held on 2361998 but due to the pendency of some proceedings in the High Court, to which the petitioner was not a party, it was not held on that day and was postponed indefinitely.
It appears that the petitioner had also made an application for admission to the Post Graduate Degree Course at Manipal in Karnataka.
She appeared for counselling in that Institution between 161998 and 6.6.1998 and was granted admission and accordingly deposited her fee on 181998.
The Principal of the Government Medical College, Amritsar, being the Chairperson of the Counselling Committee, issued two Press notes, Annexures P-8 & P-9 dated 991998 and 16.9.1998 respectively informing candidates under the 40% quota that they were required to appear for counselling on 22.9.1998 and that all candidates were to give an affidavit at the time of counselling that he/she had not joined any Post Graduate Degree Course at any College previously and also had not joined any Government/Semi Government/Private service.
It is the petitioner's case that by virtue of Annexure P-9, she had been struck out of reckoning as she had in the meanwhile joined the Post Graduate degree course at Manipal.
Annexure P-9 has been impugned by the petitioner in the present proceedings.
3.
On notice of motion, one reply has been filed on behalf of respondents 1, 2, 4 and 5 by Mrs. Sudesh Khanna, the Principal of the Government Medical College, Amritsar and another by respondent No. 6, the candidate at Sr. No. 50 and waiting in the wings and likely to get admission on the failure of the petition.
4.
In the reply filed by the official respondents, reliance has been placed on Clause 4(b) relating to the eligibility for taking the entrance test, which provided that a candidate who has already done or is doing any post graduate degree course shall not be eligible to appear in the test and the inference sought to be drawn is that as the entire process from the date of calling of applications for the entrance test to the actual admission was one consolidated chain intimately linked together, the date in question was to be the date on which the admission was actually made and as the petitioner had taken admission at Manipal on 181998, she could not be admitted to the Medical Colleges at Patiala or Amritsar on a subsequent date.
5.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 6, it has been pointed out that as the petitioner was at merit rank No. 24 in the entrance test, she would have positively got admission in the Post Graduate Degree Course at Amritsar or Patiala and by blocking another seat at Manipal, she had become ineligible under Clause 4(b) ibid.
6.
Mr. Pheruman, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has first and foremost argued that the interpretation put by the respondents on Clause 4(b) of the prospects was erroneous as the date visualised therein was the date of appearance in the entrance test and not the admission in the Post Graduate Course on the basis of the entrance test.
He has also urged that the respondents had made a substantial change in the criteria for admission long after it had been set in motion, by the corrigendum dated 16.9.1998, Annexure P-9, and this was impermissible as held by this Court in Ravdeep Kaur v. The State of Punjab, 1985(1) ILR 343, Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab, 1993(4) SLR 673 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H); and Raj Singh v. Maharishi Dayanand University, 1994(4) RSJ 289 : 1994(2) SCT 766 (P&H); and Civil Writ Petition No. 8567 of 1998 Dr. Gur Lal Singh Sandhu etc. v. State of Punjab etc., 1999(1) SCT 311 (P&H) decided on 24.7.1998.
7.
Mr. PS Patwalia and Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 3 and 6 respectively have, however, pointed out that intention behind, rather than a literal interpretation of Clause 4(b) ought to be taken and that public interest warranted that a candidate should not be permitted to block two seats and thereafter drop one at a convenient time, leading to its wastage.
They have accordingly urged that the eligibility of the candidate was to be determined not on the date of entrance test as argued by the petitioner's counsel, but as on the date of actual admission and as the admissions had been made at Amritsar on 23.9.1998 whereas the petitioner stood admitted to the Medical College at Manipal on 181998, she was no longer eligible for admission.
8.
Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for respondents 1, 2, 4 and 5 has adopted the arguments raised by Mr. Patwalia and Mr. Sibal and has also relied upon Dr. Hari Om Manchanda v. The State of Haryana, 1993(2) RSJ 574 : 1993(2) SCT 22 (P&H);, in support of the arguments advanced.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the relevant record.
The schedule relating to the receipt of applications for the entrance test, the holding of the entrance test, the declaration of the result thereof and the various dates fixed for the receipt of application forms for admission to the Courses and also dates of interview and counselling have already been noted above.
Clause 4(b) of the eligibility criteria, which requires interpretation has to be examined in the light of the aforesaid dates.
This clause has also been reproduced verbatim in Clause 23 dealing with the eligibility to take the entrance test and is reproduced below :-  "4(b) A candidate who has already done or is doing any Post Graduate degree course shall not be eligible to appear in the test."
Clause 6(ii) relating to the choice of subjects specifically provides that the allotment of subjects and the allocation of the colleges would be made on the basis of merit obtained by the candidates in the entrance test and on no other basis.
A reading of Clauses 4(b) and 6(ii) clearly reveals that the purpose behind the counselling is only to give a choice of the speciality to a candidate as admission is to be made exclusively on the basis of merit in the entrance test and that the date disqualifying a candidates on taking admission elsewhere is the date of the test.
Admittedly, on the date of the test, the petitioner had not been admitted to the Medical College at Manipal.
It has, however, been forcefully urged that a literal interpretation should not be given to Clause 4(b) and 23. ibid and the intention behind them should not to be over-looked.
It has been pointed out that a candidate should not be permitted to block two seats at one time as public interest required that in case a candidate already stood admitted to a Post Graduate Degree Course on the date on which he sought admission in the second one, he should not be permitted to take the second course.
In this connection, it has been highlighted that the petitioner stood at merit position No. 24 in the entrance test and her admission against one of the 77 seats reserved under the 40% quota for fresh graduates was a virtual certainty and as she had still taken admission at Manipal she should not be permitted to change the Institution midstream as the seat at Manipal would be wasted and respondent No. 6, who had given up the seats offered to her in three specialities in order to take admission in her preferred course of MD Gynaecology (to which the petitioner had also staked her claim) would suffer prejudice with consequent loss to the public.
10.
To my mind, the arguments advanced have no merit.
Rules 4(b) and 23 ibid leave no scope for doubt with regard to their applicability and as to the dates on which they exhaust themselves.
It is to be noted that the unending demands for admission to such courses and the limited number of seats available makes it necessary that a candidate apply for admission to a number of institutions as it is impossible to visualise with any certainty the chances of admission to any particular one.
It must also be borne in mind that admissions to medical colleges throughout the country take place at almost the same time.
The prospectus has, therefore, advisedly confined the scope of Rules 4(b) and 23. to the date of the entrance test, so as to give a reasonable chance to candidates who cannot get admission to the Post Graduate Institution at Amritsar or Patiala to seek admission elsewhere.
It is also evident that the prospectus had fixed 2361998 as the date of counselling and this date was postponed without a fresh date being fixed.
It cannot therefore be said that the petitioner was duty bound to wait till such time the result of the admissions in Punjab had been finalised before seeking admission at Manipal.
This was a risk which the petitioner was quite rightly unwilling to take.
It is true that the petitioner was very high in the merit and her admission a near certainty but as the rules would have to be applied uniformly even to the case of a border line candidate, the argument advanced cannot be accepted.
It is apparent that had the admission process been conducted as per schedule and the counselling held on 2361998, there would have been no occasion for the petitioner to have gone to Manipal and sought admission there on 181998.
Moreover the intention behind rules 4(b) and 23. ibid would be relevant if there was some ambiguity in their scope but a bare reading thereof shows on such ambiguity.
The judgment in Dr. Hari Om Manchanda's case (supra), which deals with a different situation, has no applicability to the case in hand.
11.
It has also been argued by Mr. Pheruman, the learned counsel for the petitioner, that the requirements of the affidavit as per the corrigendum Annexure P-9 had made a striking departure from the prospectus and was, therefore, liable to be struck down on that basis.
Reliance has been placed on Ravdeep Kaur's, Amardeep Singh Sahota's, Raj Singh's and Dr. Gurlal Singh Sandhu's cases (supra) in this connection.
12.
Clauses 4(b) and 23. have already been noted above.
The affidavit which is now sought to be obtained from the candidates was to be in the following words :-  "He/she had not joined any Post-graduate course at any college previously and also has not joined any Govt/Semi Govt/Private Service."
To my mind, this provision has enlarged the scope of the prospectus as Clauses 4(b) and 23 stipulated that a candidate, who has a already done or was doing a Post Graduate Course was not eligible to appear in the test, meaning thereby that the date in question was the date of the entrance test, whereas the affidavit now postulates that the last date relevant for the purpose of admission is the date of the admission.
In Dr. Gur Lal Singh Sandhu's case (supra), while dealing with a similar situation, this Court after examining a large number of decisions held as under :-  "There broad principles are, therefore, discernible from the cited judgments - firstly, that a prospectus has the force of law, secondly a candidate has a right to seek admission on its basis and on its basis alone, and finally that the conditions stipulated therein cannot be changed to the detriment of any candidate."
It is the admitted position that a Letters Patent Appeal against this judgment has been dismissed.
Applying these principles, it must be held that the changes in the criteria for admission by the corrigendum Annexure P-9, cannot stand legal scrutiny as it cannot be held to be explanatory in nature but has in fact changed the criteria for admission provided in Clauses 4(b) and 23, to the petitioner's detriment.
Civil Writ Petition No. 15658 of 1998.
In this case, the petitioner got admission to the Post Graduate Degree Course on 241998 at the Nair Dental College, Bombay on the basis of the All India Examination.
He filled in the application form for the PG entrance test at the Guru Nanak Dev University on 1441998, Annexure R-2 with the reply and gave a declaration on solemn affirmation that he had not done and was not doing any Post Graduate Degree Course at that time.
A similar undertaking was given by him vide Annexure R-3 dated 2251998.
The petitioner also qualified the entrance test and in the application form for the Post Graduate Degree Course, he, for the first time, divulged that he had already been admitted in the Nair Dental College, Bombay.
13.
In the light of what has been held above, the date relevant for determining the eligibility of a candidate for admission was the date of the entrance test and as the test had been held on 2451998, the petitioner, who already stood admitted in the Nair Dental College, Bombay at that time was not entitled to admission.
This has been so held in Dr. Sangeeta Rani v. State of Punjab, Civil Writ Petition No. 5432 of 1998 decided on 2151998 wherein a challenge to the validity of Clause 4(b) was repelled by this Court.
14.
Mr. Salwan, the learned counsel for the petitioner has, however, argued that as the petitioner has merely paid his fee on 241998 but had not attended any classes upto 2451998, as the session was to commence from October, 1998, the ratio of the judgment of Dr. Sangeeta Rani's case (supra) was not applicable to the present case.
15.
To my mind, the distinction attempted by the learned counsel does not exist.
Clauses 4(b) and 23 specifically provide that a candidate, who had already done or was doing any Post Graduate Degree Course would not be eligible to appear in the entrance test.
The petitioner herein had been granted admission and had also paid his fee in the Nair Dental College, Bombay on 241998 and as per Annexure P-6 with the reply filed by the respondents, had cancelled his admission in that Institution on 2481998.
The petitioner, therefore, is not entitled to admission to the Post Graduate Course in Amritsar or Patiala, in the light of the judgment in Dr. Sangeeta Rani's case (supra).
16.
Civil Writ Petition No. 15052 of 1998 is, therefore, allowed and a direction is issued that in case the petitioner otherwise fulfills all conditions, she be admitted in the Post Graduate Degree Course in MD Gynaecology forthwith.
However, Civil Writ Petition No. 15658 of 1998 is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Copy dasti.
Petition allowed.