MN Rao, C.J.
- Shri Devi Singh, the father of the petitioner died in harness due to cardiac attack on 1.11.1979 surviving him his widow, two minor sons and two minor daughters.
He was at that time working as Fire Assistant in the Fire Fighting Cadre.
He joined the service on 771965.
The petitioner is the eldest son and he attained majority in the year 1988.
He made a representation on 2551988 after completing his Matriculation seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
That was rejected by the Director in the office of the Directorate General of Security on 28th August, 1992 vide letter No. A- 1/37/TCS-90/6326 (Annexure PM) on the ground that (it is) "a belated case as the death occurred on 1.11.1979 and it is more than 12 years old case."
He applied for the post of Fire Assistant against the direct recruitment and although called for interview twice in 1990 and 1991, he was not selected.
When he again made a representation in 1992, he was informed by the office of the Directorate General of Security by memorandum dated 27.9.1963 (Annexure PJ) that his case had already been considered and the decision was also conveyed to him.
He, therefore, filed the present writ petition for a direction to the four respondents (i) Union of India through the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Government of India, New Delhi, (ii) Director General of Security, New Delhi, (iii) The Divisional Organiser, SSB, HP Division, Shimla, and (iv) the Commandant Training Centre, Sarshan Bushahr (Rampur) District Shimla, to give him employment suitable to his qualifications under the policy governing employment to the children of persons who die in harness.
2.
In the reply-affidavit filed in July, 1995 inter alia, the stand taken was that the petitioner was called for interview for the post of Fire Assistant on two occasions in 1990 and 1991 but it was not under the policy governing compassionate appointments; he applied for appointment against direct recruitment and on the assessment of competitive merits, he was not selected.
3.
A rejoinder was filed by the petitioner contending that he applied for appointment on compassionate grounds immediately after he became major and, therefore, his case could not be rejected on the ground of delay.
4.
A Division Bench of this Court on 11121995 after noticing the order passed by the Director came to the conclusion that under the policy governing compassionate appointments, the competent authority to take the decision is the Secretary, but not the Director in the cases involving long delays in seeking such appointments.
Thereafter, the matter was considered by the Secretary in the Directorate General of Security (Cabinet Secretariat) in terms of the provisions contained in para 7 of the policy incorporated in DP & T OM No. 14014/6/86-Estt(D) dated 3061987 and rejected the request on the grounds that (i) the total annual income of the family of the deceased from all sources as per the income certificate furnished by the Revenue authorities is about Rs. 17,000/-; and (ii) the request was belated.
5.
Shri RK Gautam, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner being the eldest among the four children of the deceased, there could not have been any request for compassionate appointment prior to 1988 before attaining majority.
The family is getting Rs. 11,820/- as family pension because of the death of the petitioner's father and this amount should be excluded while considering the financial position of the family for the purpose of compassionate appointment.
Besides the family pension, the income of the family from immovable property is Rs. 4,500/- per annum, which works out to Rs. 370/- per month.
In his submisssion the aforesaid two relevant aspects, namely, that the children of the deceased were minors and immediately after the eldest child attained majority, application was made for compassionate appointment and the annual income from immovable properties the family is getting is Rs. 4,500/-, have not been taken into consideration by the Secretary to the Government of India before coming to the conclusion that the petitioner should not be given compassionate appointment.
6.
In opposition to these submission, Shri PA Sharma, learned Senior Standing Counsel for the Union of India has contended that both on grounds of income and delay, the request of the petitioner for compassionate appointment deserves to be rejected and the order passed in this behalf should not, therefore, be faulted.
7.
Although a plea was raised by the respondents that the proper forum to entertain the grievance of the petitioner is the Central Administrative Tribunal, but not the High Court, the learned counsel appearing for the Central Government has stated that the post held by the petition's father belonged to Special Security Bureau - a wing of the armed forces - and, therefore, the Central Administrative Tribunal by virtue of clause (a) of Section 2 of the Administrative Tribunals Act has no jurisdiction in relation to the members of the armed forces of the Union of India (vide order sheet dated 29121997).
The contention concerning jurisdiction, therefore, fails.
8.
Compassionate appointments are regulated by the policy incorporated in OM No. 14014/6/86-Estt(D) issued by the Government of India, Department of Personal and Training on 30th June, 1989.
The appointments are given only to son or daughter or near relative of deceased Government servant, who dies in harness leaving his family in immediate need of assistance, when there is no other earning member in the family.
Appointments in respect of Group 'C' or Group 'D' posts alone can be given on compassionate grounds against direct recruitment quota.
Paragraph 6 of the policy, which is relevant, lays down:  "6.
Relaxation :  Compassionate appointments are made in relaxation of the following :-  (a) Recruitment procedure, i.e. without the agency of the Staff Selection Commission or Employment Exchanges.
(b) Age-limit wherever necessary.
The lower age-limit should not be below 18 years of age.
(c) Educational qualification to the extent stated in para 4 above.
(d) Clearance from Surplus Cell of this Department/Directorate General of Employment and Training.
NOTE - If an employee dies while in service or is retired on invalid pension and there is a ward below 18 years of age and who alone is available for employment, he should apply for a job as soon as he attains the age of 18 years.
The persons below the age of 18 years should not be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds.
The upper age-limit may, however, be relaxed as hithertofore as per the orders already existing on this subject."
9.
Belated requests are dealt with in paragraph 7, which reads:  "7.
Belated requests for compassionate appointments :  Ministries/Departments can also consider the requests for compassionate appointment even where the death took place long ago, say five years or so.
While considering such belated requests it should be kept in view that the concept of compassionate appointment is largely related to the need for immediate assistance to the family on the passing away of the Government servant in harness.
The very fact that the family has been able to manage somehow all these years should normally be adequate proof to show that the family had some dependable means of subsistence.
Therefore, examination of such cases calls for a great deal of circumspection.
The decision in those cases may be taken at the level of Secretary only."
The other paragraphs in the policy are not material for our purpose.
10.
In the impugned order dated 16.2.1996, the Secretary after extracting paragraph 7 of the policy quoted the information placed by the department before him:-  "The family got pensionary benefits to the tune of Rs. 15,919/- at the time of death besides present family pension of Rs. 11,820/- per annum.
The family has also got a total cultivable land of 0.84.68 hectares including 'A' category cultivable land and orchard, etc. and a double storeyed house where the family is stated to be residing.
The income from immovable property, according to the applicant, is Rs. 4,500/- per annum.
Thus, the total annual income from all sources, as per income certificate furnished by the Revenue Authorities, is about Rs. 17,000/-".
He then concluded :-  "The compassionate appointment is to be offered to the next of kin of the deceased Government servant or his widow when the family is in indigent circumstances requiring immediate financial help following the death of the Government servant.
From the account of the family income and landed property, etc., given in the preceding para, it is clear that the family had sufficient means of subsistence and was not in immediate need of financial help.
The family has been subsisting for more than sixteen years from the income, as enumerated in the preceding para.
Keeping in view the above fact and spirit of offering compassionate appointment and being belated, the request of Shri Ramesh Kumar is devoid of merit and not considered to be a fit case for compassionate appointment.
Hence the request of Shri Ramesh Kumar is not agreed to".
11.
It will thus be seen that the request was rejected on two grounds: (i) the family has sufficient means of subsistence and not in immediate need of financial help, and (ii) the application was belated.
In coming to the conclusion that the family had sufficient means of subsistence, the Secretary has taken into consideration the pensionary benefits the family was receiving Rs. 11,820/- per annum and annual income from immovable property estimated at Rs. 4,500/-.
The total annual income of the family thus comes to Rs. 16,320/-, which works out to Rs. 1,360/- per month.
It is totally unrealistic to draw the inference, as was done by the Secretary, that a monthly income of Rs. 1,360/- is "sufficient means of subsistence" for a family consisting of the widow and four children of the deceased employee.
12.
The family pension of Rs. 11,820/-, we think cannot be taken into consideration while dealing with the question of financial position of the family for the purpose of compassionate appointment.
The family pension was earned by the deceased employee while in service in respect of which the dependents after his life time would be the beneficiaries.
If the family pension be the criterion, no member of the family of any deceased employee, who died in harness would become eligible for compassionate appointment for the obvious reason that in the case of the death of every employee the family is entitled to get pension.
In judging the claim of the petitioner this relevant aspect has been ignored by the Secretary.
13.
Even if the family pension was taken into consideration, it would be impossible for a family consisting of five members to have even one meal a day with a meagre monthly income of Rs. 1,360/-.
It is uncontroversial that the petitioner - the eldest son of the deceased - became major in 1988 and immediately after completing Matriculation, which is the basic qualification for Group 'C' posts, submitted application for compassionate appointment.
The minimum age for recruitment is 18 years and this requirement cannot be relaxed even as per the power of relaxation comprehended by paragraph 6.
What is more important is that the note, which is part of paragraph 6 in clear terms, lays down that if "there is a ward below 18 years of age and who alone is available for employment, he should apply for a job as soon as he attains the age of 18 years.
The persons below the age of 18 years should not be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds".
The note being part of paragraph 6 dealing with the power of relaxation must be read as exception to paragraph 7 which concerns belated requests for compassionate appointments.
When the petitioner applied for the post immediately after attaining the age of majority his application ought not to have been turned down on the ground that it was belated.
By taking such a view the Secretary has clearly misdirected himself in that he overlooked the provisions of paragraph 6.
14.
It is, therefore, clear that in passing the impugned order the Secretary has not taken into consideration the relevant factor and, his decision thus suffers from a fatal legal infirmity.
The case falls squarely within the ambit of Wednesbury principle of exercise of discretion liable to be invalidated on the ground of unreasonableness, enunciated by Lord Greene in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation, 1947(2) All.
E.R.
680:  ".....a person entrusted with a discretion must direct himself properly in law.
He must call his own attention to the matters which he is bound to consider.
He must exclude from his consideration matters which are irrelevant to the matter that he has to consider.
If he does not obey those rules, he may truly be said, and often is said, to be acting "unreasonably".
15.
Unquestionable the Wednesbury principle forms part of Indian Public Law : See 1994(6) S.C.C.
651, Tata Cellular v. Union of India.
16.
We may now advert to the precedents cited by Shri PA Sharma, learned Standing Counsel for the Central Government, in support of his submission that the application of the petitioner was liable to be rejected on the ground of delay:-  (i) Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Asha Ramchhandra Ambedkar and another, 1994(2) S.C.C.
718 : 1994(2) SCT 548 (SC) deals with the claim of the son of a deceased employee of Life Insurance Corporation for appointment on compassionate grounds.
The application of the widow was rejected on the ground that she was age barred and when the son applied his application was also rejected on the ground that "the competent authority has shown inability to offer any appointment".
The Bombay High Court allowed the application of the son and issued a writ of mandamus directing the Life Insurance Corporation to appoint him on compassionate grounds recording the finding that he was entitled to such appointment.
Overturning that view the Supreme Court held that such a direction is contrary to statutory provisions and "the jurisdiction under mandamus cannot be exercised in that fashion.
It should have merely directed consideration of the claim of the second respondent.
To straight-away direct the appointment would only put the appellant.
Corporation in piquant situation.
The disobedience of this direction will entail contempt notwithstanding the fact that the appointment may not be warranted."
(ii) Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) S.C.C.
138 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC), lays down the proposition that there should not be any direction in regard to compassionate appointments "either as a matter of course or in posts above Classes III and IV", which also lays down the rule: ".....the compassionate employment cannot be granted after a lapse of a reasonable period which must be specified in the rules.
The consideration for such employment is not a vested right which can be exercised in future."
Both the rulings are thus not in point - they do not deal with the legal principle concerning exercise of discretion.
17.
For these reasons, Civil Writ Petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 16.2.1996 is set aside.
18.
What is the relief to be granted to the petitioner is the next question for consideration ?
The two grounds on which the second respondent rejected the claim of the petitioner, namely, the family has sufficient means of subsistence and the application is belated being wholly unreasonable, no purpose would be served by remitting the case for fresh disposal.
If the above two grounds are eschewed from consideration, it is uncontroversial - learned Standing Counsel for the Union of India could not dispute this - the petitioner would have got the employment of compassionate grounds.
19.
In the circumstances while quashing the impugned order dated 16.2.1996, we issued a writ of mandamus to the Ist and 2nd respondents to consider the petitioner for any Group 'C' post and issue appropriate orders of appointment, as expeditiously as possible - as his claim has been pending since 1988 - in any event not later than four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner will get his costs in the writ petition, which we quantify as Rs. 2,000/-.
Petition allowed.