M. Ramakrishna, CJ.
- The appellants 1 to 3, being aggrieved by the judgment and order made by the learned single Judge on October 28, 1994 in SWP No. 1110 of 1994, have come up in the present appeal, challenging the correctness and legality of the findings recorded and the conclusion reached by the learned single Judge, on the grounds stated in the Memorandum of Appeal.
2.
We have heard Mr. Baldev Singh, learned Government advocate appearing for the appellant.
He has taken us through the facts and questions of law arising in the instant case.
He has brought to our notice that the reliance placed by the learned single Judge on the ratio of a judgment delivered by this High Court in State v. Prem Singh - Civil 2nd Appeal No. 24 of 1993 decided on Sept 11, 1993 with a view to dispose of the matter in S.W.P.
No. 1110 of 1994 in favour of the writ petitioner (respondent) and against the State (appellant) is erroneous and the same cannot sustain in law.
3.
As to the legal questions raised in the instant case, Shri Baldev Singh, learned GA, brought to our notice the relevant provisions of law governing the subject matter.
He has brought to our notice that the respondent (writ petitioner), Sita Ram, had been inducted into service as inferior class somewhere in the year 1937.
Indeed, he was working as such at the crucial point of time, namely October 10, 1966 but later on, it is submitted, he (writ petitioner) had been promoted to the post of Technician-II with the pay scale attached to the said post (Rs. 1200-2040) with effect from August 12, 1987; whereas he (Sita Ram) had been sought to be superannuated by an order made on Sept 2, 1994 giving effect from October 31, 1994.
It is relevant to note here, according to Shri Baldev Singh, GA that even earlier and before he was promoted to the post of Technician-II, he was promoted to the post of Line Erector and from that post he had been promoted to the post of Technician-II with salary attached to that post (Rs. 1200-2040).
Therefore, Shri Baldev Singh learned Govt. Advocate submits that regard being had to Schedule-II of Article 226 of the J. and K. Civil Service Regulations (Vol.
I), "hereinafter referred to as the Regulations", a person holding the post of Technician-II drawing the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 shall not come within the purview of inferior service.
In that view of the matter, the learned single Judge has committed an error in extending the benefit of 60 years instead of 5 years in favour of the writ petitioner (Sita Ram), which is illegal and not sustainable in law.
Therefore, he submits that this appeal deserves to be allowed and the order under appeal set aside.
4.
As against the submissions made by the learned Government Advocate, Shri BR Sharma, learned Counsel for the respondent (writ petitioner) submits that at the outset a person who continued to be a Government servant serving in inferior cadre on October 10, 1966, shall be entitled to get the benefit of Schedule-II of Article 226 of the Regulations.
Secondly, he submits that although Sita Ram respondent herein had been promoted to the post of Technician-II in the year 1987, admittedly he was drawing the pay scale lesser than a Line Erector and, therefore, the learned single Judge was right in extending the benefit of 60 years in his favour by virtue of the order under appeal.
5.
It is not possible to concede to the submission made by the learned Counsel for the respondent (writ petitioner) for the reason that the Court will have to be guided by the law made by the legislature.
Article 226 of the J. and K. Civil Service Regulations (Vol.
I) reads thus :-  "226(1) An officer shall retire compulsorily on his attaining the age of 55 years, unless the competent authority considers him efficient and permits him to remain in service.
He may, however, be retained in service after the date of compulsory retirement with the sanction of the Government on public grounds which must be recorded in writing but he must not be retained after the age of 60 years except in very special circumstances....." This is general provision of law relating to the age of superannuation of a Government servant.
However, the 1st proviso to the said article provides as follows :-  "Provided that the Government servants who were in service on 10101966 and were treated inferior as per Schedule II, will retire on attaining the age of 60 years.
Provided further....(not applicable)"  Therefore, in the light of law governing the age of superannuation of a Government servant in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, we will have to consider as to whether Sita Ram respondent herein would come within the scope of Proviso I of Article 226 of the Regulations.
With a view to enable us to be guided by the said proviso, we will have to look to Schedule-II appended to Article 226 of the Regulations.
Schedule II of the said Article is to be found at page 96 of the Regulations (Vol. II).
S. No. 138 of the said Schedule deals with the Electric Department.
Entries 1 to 43 (Plant Repairer to Gate- Keepers) as enumerated in 43 entries do come within the purview of Electric Department.
Although it is seen therefrom that a Line Erector comes within the scope of Entry No. 39, but a person who had been working as Technician-II does not come within the Entries 1 to 43 of S. No. 38 of Schedule-II to the Regulations (Vol. II).
Therefore, as on the date of the order seeking to retire by superannuation Shri Sita Ram (respondent) does not come within Entries 1 to 43, as stated above, so as to enable him to consider him as Government servant serving in the Electric Department as an inferior Government servant.
Therefore, the writ Court ought to have seen the intendment of the Legislature before extending the benefit of 60 years in his favour while passing the order under appeal.
Indeed, it is incorrect to rely upon the ratio of decision rendered by this High Court in State v. Prem Singh, Civil Second Appeal No. 24 of 1993 decided on September 11, 1993 inasmuch as we have verified the findings recorded by the learned single Judge in that appeal where the leaned single Judge has nowhere referred to the scope of Article 226 read with Schedule-II of the Regulations referring to the cadre in which Shri Sita Ram respondent herein had been working at the time when he was sought to be superannuated, to find out as to whether he would come within the purview of inferior civil servant.
In that view of the matter, both the decisions, namely, (i) in State v. Prem Singh, Civil Second Appeal No. 24 of 1993 decided on Sept 11, 1993; and (ii) in S.W.P.
No. 1110 of 1994 disposed of by the learned single Judge on October 28, 1994, against which the present appeal has been presented by the appellants, are incorrect and not sustainable in law.
6.
In the result, this appeal is allowed and the order under appeal dated October 28, 1994 made by the learned single Judge in S.W.P.
No. 1110 of 1994 is set aside and the order of the Government dated September 2, 1994 seeking to retire Shri Sita Ram respondent herein on superannuation on attaining the age of 58 years, is justified.
The appellants shall be entitled to the costs, advocate's fee Rs. 1000/-.
Order accordingly.
Appeal allowed.