Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the annulment of his appointment to the post of Vegetable Botanist at the Chaudhary Charan Singh Agricultural University, Hissar.
The sequence of events may be briefly noticed.
2.
On September 13, 1992, the University advertised a post of Vegetable Botanist.
The petitioner who was working as an Assistant Scientist at the University, applied for the post.
He was interviewed.
Dr. KS Baswana was selected.
The petitioner was at No. 2 in the merit list.
On March 20, 1993, the Board of Management approved the proceedings of the Selection Committee and the proposal for appointment of Dr. Baswana.
On June 19, 1993, the Registrar of the University informed the petitioner that "the Vice Chancellor... is pleased to appoint you to the post of Horticulturist/Olericulturist in the Department of Vegetable Crops..." The terms and conditions of appointment were indicated.
It was also stated that the "appointment is subject to approval of the Board of Management".
On August 14, 1993, the case regarding the petitioner's appointment to the post of Horticulturist/Olericulturist was "put up to the Board of Management for consideration and confirmation of the action taken by the Vice Chancellor."
Vide proceedings, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.7 with the writ petition, the Board decided that "the case may be reviewed by a committee consisting of Vice Chancellor, Shri MK Miglani, IAS, Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Agriculture Department and Dr. HC Sharma, Director of Research, CCSHAU."
This committee met on October 3, 1993.
After going through the details of the case, the committee observed that "Dr. Avtar Singh lacked in required experience when the post of Vegetable Botanist was advertised.
His experience with M/s Kirloskar was neither of teaching, research nor of extension.
He was also not an outstanding candidate."
The Committee came to the conclusion that it "does not recommend the appointment of Dr. Avtar Singh as Horticulturist/Olriculturist".
Accordingly, it recommended that "the appointment to him may be withdrawn from the date it was given/offered to him".
A copy of these proceedings is at Annexure P.8 with the writ petition.
This report was placed before the Board in the 120th meeting held on October 4, 1993.
The Board accepted the recommendations.
Besides confirming the findings of the Committee, it also observed that the post was different from that which had been advertised and it had not yet been included in the University Budget on the date of the interview.
Resultantly, on October 5, 1993, the University withdrew the offer of appointment which had been issued to the petitioner vide letter dated June 19, 1993.
A copy of the order is at Annexure P.11 with the writ petition.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13042 of 1993 to challenge this order.
The writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on October 20, 1993.
Undaunted, the petitioner submitted a representation dated October 25, 1993 to the Vice Chancellor.
A copy of this representation is at Annexure P13 with the writ petition.
However, he did not mention that Civil Writ Petition No. 13042 of 1993 filed by him had been dismissed by the High Court in limine.
The efforts bore fruit.
On January 1, 1994, the petitioner was offered appointment to the post of Vegetable Botanist in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
A copy of the order is at Annexure P14 with the writ petition.
It was inter alia observed in the order that the appointment "has been made in exercise of emergency powers and is subject to the approval of the Board of Management...." The petitioner alleges that he assumed charge on the same day.
On July 1, 1995, the petitioner alleges that he was posted against the post of Extension Specialist (Vegetable Crops).
In accordance with the stipulation in the order dated January 1, 1994, the matter was placed before the Board of Management.
It decided to refer the matter to the Committee.
On January 2, 1996, according to the petitioner, the Committee recommended that the petitioner's appointment may be approved as he "has been working for the last two years..." It also observed that "in future, however, such stretching of the panel should be stopped."
The matter was placed before the Board in the meeting held on March 25, 1996.
A copy of the Agenda Item is at Annexure P18.
The Board rejected the recommendation of the Committee.
This decision is at Annexure P19 with the writ petition.
It was circulated vide memo dated March 30, 1996.
By an order dated March 30, 1996, the petitioner was informed that his appointment as Vegetable Botanist stand withdrawn w.e.f.
January 1, 1994.
A copy of this communication is at Annexure P20.
As a result, the petitioner was reverted to his substantive post of Assistant Scientist.
The petitioner alleges that he personally met the Chancellor on April 10, 1996 and pointed out various errors in the order dated March 30, 1996.
The Chancellor stayed the operation of the impugned order.
Ultimately, the Chancellor desired the Board to reconsider the matter.
A communication dated July 11, 1996 was sent by the Chancellor to the University.
On Feburary 25, 1997, the Board of Management affirmed its earlier view.
Hence this petition.
The petitioner prays that the action of the respondents in annulling his appointment "to the post of Vegetable Botanist/Olericulturist/Extension Specialist (Vegetable Crops) or any such order to the same effect" be quashed.
He further prays that the orders which have "the effect of requiring the petitioner to refund the salary drawn by him from June 1993 till the issuance of the said impugned orders...." be quashed.
3.
The respondent-University contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been averred that in response to the advertisement, six applications had been received including that of the petitioner.
These applications were placed before the Screening Committee constituted by the Vice Chancellor.
The petitioner and another candidate were found to be ineligible.
He represented to the Vice Chancellor.
This representation was examined by the then Head of the Department who inter alia observed that the petitioner "has not done M.Sc.
and PhD with specialisation in Vegetable Breeding as is the requirement for this post."
It was further observed that "he does not fulfil the requirement of five years' experience of teaching/research/extension..." The Vice Chancellor, however, directed that the interview card be issued.
Accordingly, the petitioner was called for interview.
The Selection Committee had recommended a panel of two persons.
These recommendations were accepted by the Board in the meeting held on March 20, 1993.
Subsequently, the head of the department submitted a proposal with two alternatives to the Vice Chancellor.
In pursuance of the order of the Vice Chancellor, the petitioner was given appointment as an Olericulturist in the scale of Rs. 3000-5000.
It was not approved by the Board.
The writ petition filed in the High Court by the petitioner was dismissed.
4.
The post of Vegetable Botanist against which Dr. Baswana had been appointed was declared vacant after his transfer against the post of Associate Professor which had fallen vacant because Dr. Kalloo had proceeded on deputation, to the ICAR Institute.
The Vice Chancellor after considering the validity of the panel approved the appointment of the petitioner as Vegetable Botanist.
Orders dated January 1, 1994 were issued.
It has been stated that "the petitioner was favoured right from the beginning by the then Vice Chancellor firstly by calling him for interview by relaxation of qualifications when there was no such clause provided in the advertisement.
This action itself on the part of the Vice Chancellor was not in accordance with the law specially when another candidate who was also placed in the same situation was not called for interview..." Secondly, the petitioner was "offered the post of Olericulturist which too was improper considering that the post advertised had already been filed up by the appointment of Dr. KS Baswana and the panel had already become redundant."
Thirdly, it has been pointed out that a vacancy of Vegetable Botanist was "made to come into existence subsequently by transferring the selected candidate Dr. KS Baswana against the post of a teacher who proceeded on deputation for a limited period."
According to the respondent-University, the petitioner had been "favoured by the then Vice Chancellor from the very inception and his appointment at all stages was illegal".
He did not fulfil the requisite qualifications and "the relaxation allowed by the Vice Chancellor in the absence of any clause for the same in the advertisement was therefore not in accordance with law.
Further the petitioner also lacked the requisite academic qualifications prescribed for the post of Vegetable Botanist as was pointed out in the meeting of the Board of Management held on 30.12.1996.
The petitioner does not have specialisation in Vegetable Breeding either at Master's level or at PhD level."
It has been pointed out that the petitioner had qualified these examinations in the field of Agronomy and not in Vegetable Breeding.
The respondent points out that Agronomy is "the science of soil management and the production of field crops".
As against this, Breeding is "the production of new forms by selection, crossing and hybridizing".
On these premises, the respondent maintains that the petitioner was ineligible and the recommendation of the Selection Committee itself was invalid and illegal.
Even on merits, a detailed reply has been given controverting the petitioner's claim.
5.
It appears that during the hearing, the record of the case was produced.
The petitioner was allowed to inspect the record.
Thereafter, he had filed a detailed affidavit.
A reply thereto has been filed on behalf of the University.
6.
Civil Misc. application No. 5727 of 1992 had been filed by Dr. MS Dahiya with the prayer that he be impleaded as a respondent.
The detailed facts regarding the case were mentioned in this application.
Notice of the application was given to the counsel for the petitioner by an order dated March 17, 1997.
Learned counsel had accepted notice.
Another Civil Misc. application No. 7971 of 1997 was filed by Dr. Partap Singh with the prayer that he be impleaded as respondent No. 5.
Notice of this application was issued to the counsel for the petitioner.
No reply to both the applications was filed.
These were listed for hearing along with the main case.
In the circumstances, we had considered it appropriate to hear the counsel for the applicants.
We allow these applications.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended by Mr. Jagdish Singh Khehar that the qualifications and experience as prescribed in the advertisement could be relaxed.
The petitioner was rightly included in the panel.
It was valid for a period of one year.
During that period, a person like the petitioner whose name was borne on the panel could be validly appointed to the post.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the added respondents.
Surprisingly, no one had put in appearance on behalf of the University.
8.
Admittedly, one post of Vegetable Botanist had been advertised.
The following qualifications had been laid down :-  "(i) Bachelor's degree with atleast 55% marks in percentage system or atleast 2.50/4.00 or its equivalent on point scale system.
(ii) Master's degree with atleast 60% marks on percentage system or atleast 3.20/4.00 or its equivalent on point scale system in vegetable crops with specialisation in Vegetable Breedings.
(iii) PhD in Vegetable Crops with specialisation in Vegetable Breeding.
(iv) Five years experience of Research/Teaching/Extension."
It has been categorically stated on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner "has not done M.Sc.
and PhD with specialisation in Vegetable Breeding..." It has also been asserted that he does not fulfil the requirement of five years' experience.
While it has been suggested in the petition that the requirement of five years' experience was relaxted, there is not even a suggestion that there was relaxation of the academic qualifications.
Even in the affidavit filed by the petitioner, after inspection of the record, the primary claim is that "the issue as to whether the petitioner possessed the qualification of M.Sc.
in the particular speciality under reference, was never considered by the Vice Chancellor, by the Academic Council, by any of the committees constituted by the Board of Management or by the Board of Management itself."
Assuming it were so, it does not mean that there was an order of relaxation.
Apparently, the petitioner has not even controverted the claim made on behalf of the respondents that he had done PhD in Vegetable Agronomy and not in Vegetable Breeding.
There is not even an assertion regarding any relaxation in this behalf.
In this situation, it appears difficult to accept the petitioner's claim that the qualifications were relaxable or that these have been actually relaxed.
However, even if this aspect of the matter is ignored, one cannot lose sight of the fact that only one post of Vegetable Botanist had been advertised.
Dr. Baswana had been selected and appointed against this post.
No other post having been advertised, the question of appointing the petitioner as a Horticulturist or as an Olericulturist would not have arisen.
The offer made to the petitioner was rightly withdrawn by the University.
The writ petition challenging the order dated October 5, 1993 was dismissed by a Bench of this Court.
Still the petitioner had represented.
He had not disclosed the fact that he had filed a writ petition which had been dismissed.
The Vice Chancellor had invoked his emergency powers and ordered the petitioner's appointment as a Vegetable Botanist.
The vacancy was artificially created by adjusting Dr. Baswana against the post of Associate Professor as Dr. Kalloo had proceeded on deputation.
The Board of Management had disapproved the action of the Vice Chancellor.
Even when the Chancellor asked the Board to reconsider the matter, it found no reason to vary its earlier decision.
The facts as enumerated above clearly show that the petitioner did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
There was not even a proposal for relaxation of the academic qualifications.
There is no conscious decision by which the qualifications may have been actually relaxed.
In the proposal put up for the consideration of the Board, a copy of which is at Annexure P2, it had been only mentioned that "the panel as prepared by the Selection Committee with the relaxation of experience to Dr. Avtar Singh may also be approved."
It is undoubtedly correct that the panel was approved.
There was no order of relaxation by the Board.
In any event, only one post of Vegetable Botanist having been advertised and that having been filled up, his appointment by posting Dr. Baswana as Associate Professor was only a device to unduly help him.
It was not a vacancy which had occurred in the normal course.
It had been created.
It has been suggested on behalf of the respondents that the then Vice Chancellor had done everything to help the petitioner.
The suggestion does not appear to be unfounded.
In any event, the Vice Chancellor has to thank himself for giving an opportunity to the respondents to make this allegation against him.
We say no more.
9.
It was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the panel was valid for a year and, therefore, the petitioner could have been appointed against any vacancy that had occurred during the period of one year.
10.
In abstract, this contention is correct.
However, in the present case, it clearly appears that actually no vacancy had come into existence.
It was only created to help the petitioner.
The Board had refused to approve this action of the Vice Chancellor.
It did not err in doing so.
No other point was urged.
No ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.