M.S.A.
Siddiqui, J - The petitioners, unsuccessful applicants for the post of Registrar in the office of the respondent No. 1, by this Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, are challenging the selection of respondent No. 2 to the said post.
The petitioners have also filed Writ Petition No. 114/1996 under Article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the letter dated 22121995 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education), approving the retention of lien of respondent No. 2 in Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan to enable him to join the post of Registrar in the office of the respondent No. 1.
This order shall also govern the disposal of Writ Petition No. 114/1996 as both the petitions raise common questions of facts and law.
2.
It is beyond the pale of controversy that the petitioners are lecturers of the Lal Bahadur Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth (hereinafter referred to as `Vidyapeeth'), which is a deemed University under the University Grants Commission.
The petitioners are drawing the pay scale of Reader.
Respondent No. 2 is a permanent employee holding the post of a senior Lecturer in the Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Puri, a constituent body of the Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan (for short `the Sansthan').
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as a lecturer in 1980 and before joining the post of Deputy Educational Adviser on 781992 on deputation in the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India.
He was working on the post of Principal, Chandrasekhar Saraswati Adarsh Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya, Kanchipuram and was on deputation on that post during the period 30121988 to 1892.
Respondent No. 2 was reverted to his parent body, i.e. Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Puri from 281992 to 681992.
He joined the post of Deputy Education Adviser on 781992.
3.
By an advertisement issued on 1311994, respondent No. 1 invited applications from qualified and eligible persons to fill the post of Registrar.
Pursuant to the advertisement, respondent No. 2 applied for the said post and a call letter was issued to him.
On a representation submitted by the petitioners against issue of call letter to respondent No. 2, the interview for the said post was cancelled.
Fresh interview scheduled to be held on 26121994 was notified and the petitioners also applied for the said post.
Petitioners were not called for the interview but again a call letter was issued to respondent No. 2.
On 21121994, the petitioners, through their counsel served a notice on the Vice-Chancellor of the Vidyapeeth highlighting certain irregularities in the interview to be conducted on 26121994 for appointment to the post of the Registrar (Annexure P/3).
On 24121994, respondent No. 2 applied to the Sansthan to forward his application to Vidyapeeth for the said post.
On 26121994, the Santhan forwarded the application of respondent No. 2, subject to the conditions that (i) no lien would be granted to him, and (ii) he would have to resign from the services of the Sansthan on his selection for the said post.
Interview scheduled to be held on 26121994 was cancelled.
Thereafter, fresh interview scheduled for 1741995 was notified and call letters were issued to the petitioners and respondent No. 2.
On 1041995, the petitioners addressed a letter to the Secretary (Education), Ministry of HRD, Govt. of India (Annexure P/5) highlighting malafides in entire selection process and obvious predetermination for selection of respondent No. 2.
On 1541995, the petitioners addressed a communication to the Vice-Chancellor of the Vidyapeeth (Annexure P/6) against composition of the Selection Committee consisting of Dr. Vachaspati Upadhyaya, Chairman, Dr. SB Raghunathacharya, Vice-Chancellor, Tirupathi Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Prof. Rama Ranjan Mukherjee and Shri DS Mukhopadhyaya.
On 1741995 the candidates including the petitioners and respondent No. 2 were interviewed by the selection committee.
After the recommendation for selection of respondent No. 2 to the post of Registrar was approved by the Executive Council, appointment letter was issued to the respondent No. 2 by the Vidyapeeth.
Respondent No. 2, before joining the post of the Registrar, sought permission from the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India for retention of his lien in the Sansthan, which was accorded by the Ministry for Human Resources Development, as the Chairman of the Sansthan.
Respondent No. 2 has joined his new posting in the month of January, 1996.
4.
Briefly stated, the petitioners' case is that the selection of respondent No. 2 to the post of Registrar is illegal in the face of the prescribed qualifying eligibility to be filled to that post.
It is alleged that the application submitted by respondent No. 2 was not in accordance with the due process prescribed therefor inasmuch as the application was not forwarded through proper channel with a ``No Objection Certificate'' from the Sansthan, and that, despite the irregularities in the application and the procedure regarding its submission, he was called for the interview.
It is further alleged that at the time of selection, respondent No. 2 was posted as Dy.
Educational Adviser (Sanskrit) in the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development, Govt of India and in that capacity he was exercising overall control and supervision over all the major Sanskrit Vidyapeeths in the country including respondent No. 1 and as such he exercised considerable influence in the process of selection as members of the Selection Committee were wholly biased in his favour.
It is also alleged that despite refusal of the Sansthan to grant lien to respondent No. 2 unless he resumed duty in the Sansthan and served for the cooling off period under the Rules, the Minister for Human Resources Development as Chairman of the Sansthan illegally permitted him to retain lien vide letter dated 22121995, which is violative of the OM dated 24260 (Annexure P-III of Writ Petition No. 114/1996).
5.
It is stated in the counter-affidavits filed on behalf of the respondents that the Selection Committee was constituted by the Vice Chancellor in accordance with the Recruitment Rules of the University.
The Selection Committee met on 26121994 to select the Registrar, but on consideration of the representations made by the petitioners, the Committee, however, decided to postpone the interview and call non-eligible departmental candidates along with the eligible candidates on the terms discussed in the Committee vide resolution dated 26121994 (Annexure R-3).
It is further stated that the application of respondent No. 2 was duly forwarded by the Sansthan and ``No Objection Certificate'' was also received from the Sansthan before the date of interview.
Since respondent No. 2 was possessed of the requisite qualification prescribed by the advertisement (Annexure P1) he was selected by the Selection Committee for the post of Registrar.
Respondents have denied the petitioners' allegations of favouritism and foul play in selection of respondent No. 2 for the said post.
It is also stated that the office memorandum dated 2421960 (Annexure P-III) issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India is not at all applicable to the Sansthan vide rule 33 of its bye-laws and further that respondent No. 2 was permitted to retain lien by the Minister for Human Resources and Development as the Chairman of the Sansthan, which he was empowered to do and as such the impugned letter dated 22121995 is not violative of the Office Memorandum dated 2421960.
6.
The main questions which have been urged for consideration in these Writ Petitions are (i) whether the selection of respondent No. 2 to the post of Registrar was illegal as he lacked the qualifying eligibility for the post; (ii) whether the selection of respondent No. 2 for the said post is vitiated by malafides or bias; and (iii) whether the impugned action of the Minister for HRD, Government of India and Chairman of the Sansthan in permitting respondent No. 2 for retention of his lien is without jurisdiction and is violative of the Office Memorandum dated 2421960 ?
If so, its effect on the selection of respondent No. 2 for the post in question.
7.
We will first of all deal with the first point indicated above.
By an advertisement issued on 1311994, respondent No. 1 invited application from qualified and eligible persons to fill up the post of Registrar.
The qualifications and eligibility notified in the advertisement, as averred in the Writ Petition No. 1376/95 and not controverted in the counter affidavits filed by the respondents, are as follows :  (b) For Direct Recruitment Essential (i) A post-graduate degree with at least 55% marks or its equivalent grade.
(ii) Experience At least 12 years, experience as Lecturer/Reader of which 5 years should be in Reader's Grade with experience in Educational Administration.
Or Comparable experience in research establishments and other institutions of higher education.
or 12 years of administrative experience of which 5 years as Deputy Registrar or an equivalent post.
8.
There has been a lot of controversy between the parties as to whether respondent No. 2 could be said to have 12 years' experience as lecturer/Reader of which 5 years' experience in Reader's grade, as is required under the aforesaid clause of the advertisement, to make him eligible for the post of Registrar.
The qualifying eligibility required for the post of Registrar, as mentioned in the aforesaid Clause consists of two parts - the first part is that a candidate must have 12 years' experience as lecturer/Reader and the second part is that out of 12 years' experience, 5 years' should be in Reader's grade with experience in Educational Administration.
Admittedly, respondent No. 2 was appointed as a lecturer in 1980 and the advertisement in question was issued on 1311994.
It follows that the respondent No. 2 had 12 years' experience as a lecturer on the relevant date and thus fulfilled the first part of the qualifying eligibility for the said post.
The dispute is with regard to the second part.
While respondent No. 2 claims to have the requisite experience of 5 years in the Reader's grade with experience in Education Administration by reason of his posting as Principal in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700 from 30121988 to 181992 in GSN Mahavidyalaya, Kanchipuram (TN) and as Deputy Educational Advisor of Sanskrit in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5000 in the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development for the period from 781992 till the date of joining the post of Registrar in January 1996.
According to respondent No. 2, he has been in the post of lecturer and above from the year 1980 till the date of his selection to the post of Registrar, which is about 14 years' and out of 14 years, he has been in the Reader's grade for 6 years and 3 months (3 years and 7 months as Principal of the Sanskrit College in Kanchipuram and 2 years and 8 months as the Dy.
Educational Advisor in the Ministry of HRD).
It has been seriously contended by the petitioners that the post of Deputy Educational Advisor of Sanskrit could not be equated with the grade of a Reader and as such respondent No. 2 was ineligible for selection to the post of Registrar.
Inevitably, the issue here has to run around the meaning of the word `Grade'.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the issue whether a particular post is in a particular grade or not has to be evaluated on the basis of a comparison of the two posts themselves, and not of the promotional posts and in performing this exercise, one of the most relevant and determinative factors is the pay scale attached to the posts in question.
He further contended that if the pay scales are different, then, prima facie, the posts cannot be said to be in the same grade.
9.
According to Webster's Dictionary, `grade' means a class of persons or things of the same rank.
Thus the use of the word `Grade' in the eligibility clause of the advertisement comprehends the hierarchy of officials of the education department.
It is undisputed that before joining the post of Dy.
Educational Advisor in the Ministry of HRD, respondent No. 2 was principal of the GSN Mahavidyalaya Kanchipuram in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
Pay scale of Reader is also Rs. 3700-5700.
It follows that the posts of principal of the said Mahavidyalaya and Reader of the respondent university are of the same grade.
Thus, on joining the post of Dy.
Education Advisor on deputation, respondent No. 2 carried with him the same rank or grade attached to the cadre post to which he was appointed before joining the ex-cadre post.
Even otherwise, it is inconceivable that respondent No. 2 would have opted to join an ex-cadre post of a lower grade in the Ministry of HRD.
In this view of the matter, we have no hesitation in holding that respondent No. 2 was in the Reader's grade from 30121988 till the date of his selection to the post of Registrar and as such he fulfilled the qualifying eligibility prescribed for the said post.
10.
This takes us to the next question as to whether the selection of respondent No. 2 for the post in question is vitiated by malafides or bias.
It has been averred in the petition that as Dy.
Education Advisor in the HRD Ministry, respondent No. 2 was instrumental in granting sanction to all the Vidyapeeths including respondent No. 1 and he also exercised overall control and supervision over these institutions and as such his selection to the post of Registrar was guaranteed.
It is stated in the counter-affidavits filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 3 that respondent university is under the control of the University Grants Commission and is getting all the grants from the said Commission.
It is significant that the petitioners have not filed any document to substantiate their aforesaid allegations.
Consequently, it would be unsafe to place any reliance on the bald allegations of the petitioners, particularly in view of the specific denial of the said facts by respondents Nos. 1 to 3.
11.
Next, it is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that respondent No. 2, taking advantage of his posting as Dy.
Education Advisor in the HRD Ministry, exercised adverse influence in the process of selection as members of the Selection Committee were wholly biased in his favour.
These allegations of bias have been denied by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
Admittedly, a Selection Committee consisting of the following members was constituted :-  1.
Prof. Vachaspati Upadhyay, Vice Chancellor-Chairman.
2.
Prof. BM Shukla, former Vice Chancellor, Gorakhopur University.
(as nominee of the Chancellor).
3.
Prof. SB Ragunathacharya, Vice Chancellor, Tirupathi Sanskrit Vidyapeeth.
(nominee of the Vice Chancellor as expert in the field of University Administration).
4.
Dr. DS Mukhopadhyaya, Joint Secretary (Languages).
(Representative of the Ministry).
5.
Prof. Rama Ranjan Mukherjee, Chancellor, Tirupathi Sanskrit Vidyapeeth.
(nominee of the Executive Council Karya Parishad).
12.
The essence of attack of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the entire farce in the present case has been engineered by Dr. Mailau Misra, former Vice-Chancellor of the respondent University with whom the present Vice-Chancellor (respondent No. 3) is in close connivance.
There is nothing on record to substantiate the said charge.
The petitioners have not even pleaded material facts to show that Dr. Misra was in any way interested in the selection of the respondent No. 2 for the post in question.
Dr. Misra is also not impleaded as a party to the petition, to answer the allegations.
It is also contended that the bonafides of choosing the Chancellor (Respondent No. 4) and Vice-Chancellor (respondent No. 6) of the same Vidyapeeth, especially in view of the fact that the former had been a co-member, with the respondent No. 2 of the Executive Council of the respondent University, cannot be said to conform to the principles of due process of law, as applicable to administrative action.
It is worth highlighting that the petitioners have stated in their rejoinder-affidavit dated 27111995 that the petitioners have no grudge against all the members of the Executive Council and their only grievance is that members of the Selection Committee were biased in favour of respondent No. 2.
Undisputably, members of the Selection Committee are persons of stature, holding high positions.
The Selection Committee had expert members and it had the expertise to judge the relative suitability of competing candidates.
In the instant case, malafides or bias cannot be inferred from mere selection of respondent No. 2 by the Selection Committee.
It is worth mentioning that the allegations of malafide or bias have been couched in vague terms.
The allegations of malafide or bias must be concrete, clear and sufficiently articulated for the court to appreciate them objectively.
It is well established rule that the burden of establishing malafides or bias lies very heavily on the person who alleges it.
As has been held by the Apex Court in Kedar Nath v. State of Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 220 that the charge of malafide or bad faith may be made easily or without sense of responsibility, and that is why it is necessary for the courts to examine it with due care and caution.
In the instant case, considering all the allegations made by the petitioners against members of the Selection Committee, we do not think that they could be considered as sufficient to establish malafide or bias.
For these reasons we hold that the allegations of malafide or bias are insufficient to vitiate selection of the respondent No. 2 by the Selection Committee.
13.
The petitioners attempted to scuttle the merits of the case by attempting to take the stand that the impugned action of the Minister for HRD, Govt. of India and Chairman of the Sansthan in permitting respondent No. 2 for retention of his lien is without jurisdiction and is violative of the office memorandum dated 2421960 (Annexure P.III).
From the facts averred in the writ petition and the counter-affidavits as well as the documents annexed, it transpires that respondent No. 2, while working as Dy.
Education Advisor, applied for the post of Registrar in the respondent University.
As respondent No. 2 was a permanent employee of the Sansthan, his application was forwarded by the Sansthan with the condition that on his selection, respondent No. 2 was to resign.
On his selection to the said post, respondent No. 2 represented to the Government on 1751995 to obtain the permission of the Chairman (Minister for HRD) of the Sansthan to join the new assignment in relaxation of condition mentioned above.
On a consideration of the said request, the Chairman of the Sansthan permitted respondent No. 2 to retain his lien in the Sansthan vide letter dated 22121995 (Annexure P/2).
14.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has contended that the petitioners have no locus to assail the validity of the action of the Chairman of the Sansthan in permitting respondent No. 2 to retain his lien in the Sansthan and further even assuming that the OM dated 2421960 (Annexure P/III) was applicable by virtue of the provisions of Rule 33 of the bye-laws, Rule 36 of the bye-laws empowers the Sansthan to relax any of the provisions of the bye- laws to relieve its employee of any undue hardship arising from the operation of such provisions.
15.
To appreciate the rival contentions of the parties, it is necessary to refer to the OM dated 2421960 (Annexure P/III), which reads as under :-  M.H.A.
OM No. 4 (sic) 41) -ED II/59 dated 24260.
Intervant between successive deputations.
7A.
OSS/CSSS/CSCS officers who have reverted from ex-cadre posts, should not be appointed to another ex-cadre post under the delegated powers unless he has worked in a Cadre post for at least one year after reversion from the previous ex-cadre post.
16.
Now the question that arises for consideration is whether the said OM is statutory in character and whether its confers any right upon the petitioners which can be enforced by this Court in its Writ jurisdiction.
A perusal of the OM (Annexure P/III) shows that it is in the nature of a departmental order and instruction, which the officers of the Central Government are required to follow in dealing with the cases coming before them.
The Government in the exercise of its executive or administrative powers may give instructions to its servants or lay down certain norms, general principles and policies to be followed by officials for maintaining uniformity of approach in dealing with the cases coming before them, but these cannot be characterised as statutory rules which are justiciable in certain circumstances.
It has been held in GJ Fernandes v. State of Mysore, AIR 1967 SC 1753 that ``in order that such executive instructions have the force of statutory rules, it must be shown that they have been issued either under the authority conferred on the Government by some statute or under some provision of the Constitution providing therefor.''
In the instant case, no such statute or any provision of the Constitution has been pointed out to us under which the instructions contained in the afore-quoted OM can be said to be statutory rules.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that instructions contained in the OM (Annexure P/III) are mere administrative instructions and are not statutory rules.
Therefore, even if there has been any breach of such executive instruction, that does not confer any right on the petitioners to invoke Article 226 of the Constitution for quashing orders in breach of such instructions.
That apart, permission for retention of lien in the Sansthan is a matter between the Sansthan and respondent No. 2 and the petitioners have nothing to do with it as they are not employees of the Sansthan and are not at all affected adversely by such retention of lien by respondent No. 2.
Viewed thus, the petitioners cannot base on the OM (Annexure P/III) a right to enforce the instructions in their favour by invoking Article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the letter dated 22121995 (Annexure P/2) as the power under the said Article is not intended to be used as an inquisitorial power to interfere every action and order of the State or its instrumentalities.
Moreover, rule 36 of the bye-laws empowers the Sansthan to relax any of the provisions of the bye-laws to relieve its employee of any undue hardship arising from the operation of such provisions.
In the instant case, the Chairman of the Sansthan has validly permitted respondent No. 2 to retain his lien in the Sansthan to enable him to join the post of Registrar on his selection to the said post.
There is nothing on record to show that the said action of the Sansthan is vitiated by malafide bias or arbitrariness.
It is also interesting to note that the Sansthan has not been impleaded as a party.
Respondent in CW 114/96 in which the petitioners are seeking direction for quashing the order permitting respondent No. 2 to retain his lien.
17.
For the foregoing reasons, both the writ petitions are meritless and are required to be dismissed.
Accordingly, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
Rule is discharged.
There shall be no order as to costs.
A copy of the judgment will be placed on the record of CW 114/96.