TS Doabia, J - Petitioner is aggrieved against termination of his services.
The order of termination was not placed on record by the petitioner.
However, the same has been placed on record as annexure R/6 along with the return by the respondents.
The following reasons have been given in the return with a view to bring an end to the relationship of master and servant.
(i) that, the petitioner would cause some vehicle to go out of order intentionally,  (ii) that, he used to remain absent; and (iii) that, he was warned about his conduct but he did not take any steps with a view to improve himself.
2.
In the return several objections have been taken.
The main objection is that the petitioner is not qualified to be appointed as driver.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner has rendered service for more than three years.
It is also argued that the respondents- authorities issued a letter of appointment knowing fully well as to what the qualifications of the petitioner were.
According to him, there was no misrepresentation on the part of the petitioner and therefore his services could not be terminated.
The position of law be noticed.
4.
So far as the claim of equitable estoppel is concerned reliance has been placed on one of the earliest decisions on the subject reported as Registrar, University of Madras v. Sundara Shetti, AIR 1956 Mad.
309.
In this case the petitioner appeared for Secondary School Leaving Certificate examination held by Government of Madras in March, 1952.
Certificate was given by the University that she is eligible for admission to the University course of studies.
He got admission in Madras University.
While he was so undergoing his course of study, he was informed by the Principal of the College that his admission is liable to be cancelled as his name was not found mentioned in the list of candidates eligible for University course of study.
This was challenged in the High Court.
While dealing with this aspect of the matter Rajamannar, CJ, in para 15 observed :  "It was not suggested by the University that the petitioner in this case knew that he had not been declared eligible and that his action was mala fide in embarking on a course of University study.
Nor was it suggested that he had procured endorsement of eligibility by fraud or improper means.
In these circumstances, we consider that a Mandamus should issue both to the University of Madras and to the Principal of the Thiagarajan College to forbear from preventing the petitioner to complete his intermediate course and appear for the intermediate examination in the course."
5.
This principle of equitable estoppel was made applicable by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in K Jagannadham v. District Collector, Kurnool, AIR 1966 Andh Pra 59.
In this case probationer was discharged on the ground that he was not competent to appear for competitive examinations.
There was no concealment of facts on the part of the petitioner.
The order of Government cancelling the appointment of the petitioner was quashed.
The learned single Judge placed reliance on an unreported Division Bench decision of that Court in writ petition No. 332/57.
This was noticed in para 9 and reads as under :  " A more direct decision was rendered on 9-12-1960 by a Division Bench of this Court composed of Chandra Reddy CJ, and Ramachandra Rao, J in W.P. No. 332 of 1957 (Andh.
Pra.).
The facts of that case are very close to the facts of the present case.
The petitioner applied to the Service Commission for permission to sit for a competitive examination and it was granted.
He passed the examination.
Sometime later he was informed that he was selected provisionally for appointment as Lower Division Clerk in the office of the Director of Agriculture and Fisheries, Andhra.
In pursuance of this, he was duly appointed and was given training for three months from 5-7- 1956 to 4-10-1956.
But in April, 1957, the Public Service Commission sent a memorandum to him that he should have obtained 35 per cent of marks in the optional subject in his H.S.C.
examination, for admission to the Ministerial Service Examination held by them and that as he had secured only 30 per cent in the optional subject in H.S.C.
examination he did not possess the minimum general educational qualification and that he was therefore not eligible for appointment as a clerk by direct recruitment and his provisional selection as a clerk was consequently cancelled.
This order was impugned in a writ petition filed under Art. 226.
The Division Bench allowed this writ petition and quashed the aforesaid order passed by the Public Service Commission.
The learned Chief Justice stated : We do not think that this order can be allowed to stand.
There can be little doubt that at the time when the petitioner sent in his application he had also sent a certificate of marks obtained by him, which revealed that he has secured only 30 per cent in the option subject.
Notwithstanding this, the petitioner was permitted to sit for the competitive examination and he was declared to have passed the test and it was only when he came out successfully in the examination that he was appointed as a clerk to serve in Department of Agriculture.
Thereafter, he was working for a number of months in different places in Andhra Pradesh in that department.
That being the position, it is not open to the Public Service Commission to cancel his selection and remove him from service."
6.
The above decision applies on all fours to the present case.
7.
Apart from this, the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of hearing before bringing an end to the relationship of master and servant.
It would accordingly be just and proper to direct the respondents authorities to now accord a post-decisional hearing and to pass fresh order.
Let this be done within a period of three months.
For this reliance was placed on Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakaram, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1994 Lab.
I.C.
762.
8.
Another argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner completed more than 240 days of service and the provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 would also be attracted.
The respondent authorities would also examine this aspect of the matter.
9.
The respondents authorities would take notice of the position of law referred to above and after affording proper opportunity pass such order as may be deemed fit.
Ordered accordingly.