NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of a bunch of six writ petitions Nos. 10053, 11136, 12075, 12208, 12702 and 13619 of 1994 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
Since the main arguments were addressed in CWP 10053 of 1994, facts are being taken from that case.
2.
The short but interesting question of law that arises for determination in these petitions is whether a candidate belonging to a reserved category who has secured more marks in the competition that some of the General category candidates should be admitted against a reserved seat or should he be given a seat in the general category.
3.
Admissions to the MBBS/BDS/BAMS (Ayurvedscharya) course for the academic session 1994-95 in all the three State Medical Colleges, two State Dental Colleges and Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala were made by holding a competitive entrance examination (for short, PMT).
This entrance examination was conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the University) on behalf of the Government of Punjab As per the prospectus issued by the University, the total number of seats in the Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges were as under:-  (i) Medical College, Patiala 150 seats.
(ii) Medical College, Amritsar 150 seats.
(iii) Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot 50 seats.
(iv) Dental College, Amritsar 40 seats.
(v) Dental College, Patiala 40 seats.
(vi) Ayurvedic College, Patiala 30 seats.
Fifteen per cent of the total seats were to be filled up on all India basis through a test to be conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi.
Some of the remaining seats (after 15 per cent CBSE quota) were reserved for various categories of candidates and we are concerned here only with the following three categories for whom 2 per cent of the total seats in each of the categories were reserved:  (1) Children/grand-children of political sufferers; (2) Sportsmen/sportswomen; (3) (i) Children/widows of defence personnel who are killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in war; (ii) Children of the serving/ex-servicemen; (iii) Wards of gallantry awardeers.
Petitioners 1 to 4 fall in the category of children/grand-children of political sufferers for whom seats are reserved, petitioner 5 applied for the reserved seat for sportsmen/sportswomen whereas petitioner 6 belongs to the category of children of serving/ex-servicemen.
Petitioners who were eligible for admission to the various courses submitted their application forms to the University and took the PMT examination for admission against the aforesaid reserved categories.
They were successful in the examination in as much as they obtained more than the minimum marks required but have not been given admission as they were lower in merit than those who have been admitted in those categories.
Since the question posed before us is purely legal, we need not refer to the details of marks obtained by different categories of candidates in the PMT examination.
Suffice it to say, that it is common case of the parties that some of the candidates who have been admitted against the reserved seats have secured more marks in the PMT examination than the candidates admitted in the general category/unreserved category.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the candidates belonging to the reserved categories who have been selected and have obtained more marks than the candidates in the unreserved categories should be admitted against the seats meant for the unreserved candidates.
According to the petitioners if this was done, then some of the candidates admitted against the reserved seats would have been given admission against the open seats and the seats meant for the reserved categories would become vacant and the petitioners would stand a chance for being admitted against those seats.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the admission made on the result of the PMT examination held by the University is sought to be justified on the basis of the government instructions circulated as per letter dated 19101983 (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition) according to which admissions are first made against the reserved seats and after filling those seats, the open merit seats or unreserved seats are filled up.
The Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents submitted that the State Government was fully competent to frame the aforesaid policy.
The argument of the State counsel is that even if a candidate belonging to a reserved category secures more marks than the one belonging to the unreserved category, he/she cannot be allotted seats from the open category.
He/she has to be given a seat against which they sought admission no matter that they secured more makes than some admitted in the unreserved category.
It was also contended that these reservations were in the nature of concessions covered under Article 16(1) of the Constitution which could not be enforced by way of a writ petition.
It was further submitted that the University conducted PMT examination for admission in three medical colleges, two dental colleges and one ayurvedic college at Patiala and the selected candidates were to be allocated to different colleges according to their merit-cum-choice in their respective categories and it would not, according to the respondents, be fair to first fill up the open seats and then the reserved seats.
Such a course if adopted would, according to the learned State counsel, give undue benefit to persons like the petitioners over other candidates who were higher to them in merit in their respective categories.
5.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length.
Before dealing with their contentions on merits, it is necessary to refer to the instructions issued by the State Government on October 19, 1983 regarding admissions to MBBS/BDS courses in the State Medical/Dental Colleges.
These instructions read as under:-  "2.
According to the existing system, admissions are first made against the open category seats and reserved category seats are filled from the candidates not admitted against general category seats.
Government received some representations pointing out anomalies in the admissions as a result of this.
The matter also come up for discussion in one of the meetings of the Directors Research and Medical Education and the Principals of the three Medical Colleges held with the Secretary Health, Punjab.
3.
The matter has been considered by the Government and it has been decided that from the next academic session i.e. 1984-85 admissions shall first be made against reserved category seats and thereafter against open merit seats.
4.
The above decision may be brought to the notice of all concerned, under intimation to Government.
A perusal of the aforequoted instructions would make it clear that prior to their issuance the method adopted for admitting students against open category seats and the reserved seats was that from the merit list of all the students including the reserved and unreserved categories admission was given to them on merit and after filling up the open category seats, the remaining candidates belonging to different reserved categories were offered admission against the reserved seats.
The system was given a go-bye by the instructions and the State Medical Colleges were directed to do otherwise.
In our opinion, the instructions as they now stand are unreasonable and frustrate the very purpose for which reservations are intended to be made.
The object of any reservation is to give some benefit by reserving a few seats for that class for whom reservation is made.
The underlying assumption is that such a class of persons is not capable of competing on merits with others because of economic, social, geographical, political or any other reason.
it does not, however, imply that if a person from a reserved class does well on merit and secures a higher position than the general candidates, he should not be allowed to take advantage of his merit and compete for the seats meant for the general candidates.
The reservation inheres in itself the grant of some concession to a class of persons who are not otherwise likely to get admissions and if any one from that class can get admissions on merit, it cannot be said that such a person has been given the benefit of that concession and that he should be given a seat meant only for the unreserved category.
The implementation of the present policy of the State Government would mean that a candidate belonging to the reserved category is not allowed to seek admission against the seats meant for general categories and the reservation instead of working to the benefit of the reserved categories would work to their detriment.
The effect of such instructions would be that students falling in the reserved categories can only claim the reserved seats and even if they fair better than others in the open competition they will not be allowed to occupy any unreserved seat.
In other words, it means that only such number of candidates form the reserved category would be allowed admission as are equal to the number of reserved seats even though larger number from that class may have secured more marks than the candidates in the general category.
This, in our opinion, is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The view we have taken finds support from the observations of the Bombay High Court in Ravindra Sahdeo Sonawana v. Dean, Grant Medical College, Bombay and others, 1989(4) SLR 118 and of Gujarat High Court in Sida Nitin Kumar Laxman Kumar Laxmanbhai v. Gujarat University, AIR 1991 Guj.
43.
In Sida Nitin Kumar's case (supra), learned Judge observed as under:-  "From the aforesaid settled legal position it is evident that the posts or seats are reserved for individuals belonging to particular caste, community or class.
But reverse is not true.
Members belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Socially and Educationally Backward Class for whom reservation of posts is made are not reserved for these seats or posts.
They cannot be asked to occupy only reserved seats/posts.
They would be and should be free to occupy any seat or post including unreserved posts.
However, while claiming un-reserved posts, they should prove their merit like any other citizen who is not entitled to benefits of reservation.
To deny them the right to occupy any seat other than the seat reserved would amount to denying them the right of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution."
We are in agreement with the aforesaid observations.
6.
The matter now stands finally settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1993(1) RSJ 1 : 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : wherein their Lordships of the Supreme Court after concluding that the reservation contemplated in clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution should not exceed 50 per cent, observed in paragraph 831 of the judgment, as under:-  "In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a communal reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say, Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition field on the basis of their own merit; they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste; they will be treated as open competition candidates."
For the reasons recorded above, the Government instructions dated 19101983 are hereby quashed.
It is directed that while granting admission against the reserved and unreserved seats, a common merit list of all the reserved and unreserved candidates should be prepared and the open seats filled up as per that merit list and if any candidate from the reserved category falls in that list he will be treated to have been admitted in the General Category.
After this is done, the reserved candidates should be granted admission in the order of their merit against the reserved seats.
This method would certainly avoid the anomaly that has arisen in the present case.
7.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to admit in the general category those candidates in the reserved categories who have secured more marks than the candidates in the general category and then fill up the seats that may fall vacant in the reserved categories from amongst candidates in these categories according to their merit.
8.
Mr. Walia pointed out during the course of hearing that some of the candidates in the reserved categories who are higher than the petitioners in merit in their respective categories have also not been granted admission and, therefore, the petitioners would not be entitled to the admission.
If it is so, we further direct the respondents to issue notices to all the candidates including the petitioners in different reserved categories for seeking admission to the various colleges and fill up the seats according to merit from amongst these who respond to those notices within three works from the date when the notices are issued.
There is no order as to costs.