G S Singhvi, J - Petitioners have sought issuance of a writ of mandamus against the respondents for payment of revised pay scale in the cadre of Senior Technical Assistants (for short 'STAs').
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioners were initially employed as STAs in the Irrigation Department of the Government of Punjab.
In the year 1984, the Government of Punjab took a policy decision and transferred to post of Project Development Economist from Irrigation Department to the Joint Development Commissioner, Kandi Watershed and Area Development Project, Punjab, Chandigarh.
In pursuance of that decision, a proposal was made by the Department of Agriculture and Forests for sanction of the staff.
On the basis of the aforesaid proposal, an order dated 2621985 (Annexure P-2) was issued by the Financial Commissioner Development and Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Agriculture and Forests, whereby sanction of the President of India was conveyed for creation of four posts of STAs in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200 and abolition of equal number of posts in the Irrigation Department.
In that order it was clearly mentioned that incumbents of those posts shall be entitled to pay and allowances as are admissible to State Government employees from time to time.
Petitioners were transferred and appointed on the newly-created posts of STAs under the Joint Development Commissioner, Kandi Watershed and Area Development Project, Punjab, Department of Agriculture and Forests.
3.
Pay scales of the employees working in the Irrigation Department were revised but some of the cadres were left out of the scope of the Pay Commission.
Dr. Gautam and others filed C.W.P.
No. 2237 of 1987 claiming revision of pay scales.
Their writ petition was allowed by the High Court vide its judgment dated 361989.
In compliance with the orders passed by the High Court, the Government of Punjab issued Notification dated 3101989 and prescribed the revised pay scales for various posts, including the posts of STAs.
The revised pay scale for the post of STA came to be prescribed as Rs. 800-1400 with effect from 111978 and Rs. 2000-3500 with effect from 111986.
Petitioners made representations for the grant of the revised pay scale.
Their case was recommended by different departmental authorities but benefit of revised pay scale has not been given to them.
They have complained of the discrimination and violation of their fundamental right of equality in the matter of employment.
Assertion of the petitioners is that they are discharging duties which are identical to those being performed by the STAs employed in the Irrigation Department and once pay scale for the posts of STAs of Irrigation Department has been revised, they have also acquired a right to be given the benefit of revised pay scale.
4.
In their reply, respondents have not disputed the claim of the petitioners that they were at one time appointed in the Irrigation Department and were then transferred to Agriculture and Forests Department with the abolition of the posts in the Irrigation Department and creation thereof in the Agriculture and Forests Department.
Their plea is that the petitioners were given fresh appointments in the Agriculture and Forests Department.
Further plea of the respondents is that the petitioners cannot get benefit of the judgment given in Dr. Gautam's case (Dr. Gautam and others v. The State of Punjab, CWP No. 2237 of 1987, reported as 1989 (2) S.L.R.
70), because that judgment was confined to the seven persons and the LPA filed by the Government against the judgment of the learned Single Judge was still pending before a Division Bench.
5.
During the course of hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioners made a statement that the LPA No. 1734 of 1989 filed by the State of Punjab against the order of the learned Single Judge has been dismissed by the Division Bench on 1181993.
Learned Assistant Advocate General has not been able to controvert this statement of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners.
6.
The only question, which requires adjudication by this Court, is as to whether the petitioners have a legal or constitutional right to be paid salary in the revised pay scale.
Admitted facts of the case show that the petitioners were initially appointed as STAs in the Irrigation Department.
With the creation of new posts in the Department of Agriculture and Forest under the Joint Development Commissioner, Kandi, Punjab, and Watershed and Area Development Project, Punjab, and consequential abolition of the posts of STAs in the Irrigation Department, they were posted in the new organisation.
While issuing order Annexure P-2 dated 2621985, the Government had made it clear that the incumbents of the posts of STAs shall be entitled to pay and allowances admissible to State Government employees.
To be precise, para 2 of order dated 2621985 is quoted hereunder :-  "2.
Incumbents to these posts shall be entitled to such pay and allowances as are admissible to the State Government employees from time to time.
The headquarters of the staff will be Chandigarh."
It is clear from the above extract of order Annexure P-2 dated 2621985 that the Government had unequivocally given out to the petitioners that they shall be entitled to such pay and allowances that will be admissible to the State Government employees from time to time.
In the face of this, it is not open to the respondents to contend that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of revised pay scale, which has been extended to the other STAs in the Government service.
7.
Moreover, we find that when the petitioners are discharging duties identical to the duties being performed by the STAs employed in the Irrigation Department, there can be no justification for not paying them salary in the pay scale prescribed for STAs of the Irrigation Department.
STAs working in the Irrigation Department can appropriately be termed as counterparts of the petitioners.
When the Court has treated the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' as an integral part of the equality clause contained in the Constitution, it is not open to the respondents to deny benefit of salary to the petitioners in the revised pay scale.
By doing so, the respondents have clearly discriminated the petitioners.
8.
Above all, we find that once the LPA filed by the State Government against the order of the learned Single Judge passed in the case of Dr. Gautam's case (supra) has been dismissed, there remains no legal impediment in the grant of revised scale to the petitioners.
The respondents have in their reply come forward with a categorical plea that the petitioners cannot be extended the benefit of the judgment of the learned Single Judge rendered in the case of Dr. Gautam because the LPA filed by the State Government is still pending before a Division Bench.
With the dismissal of the LPA that ground is no more available to the respondents to deny the benefits of revised pay scale to the respondents.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to give benefits of revised pay scale to the petitioners in terms of the Notification dated 3101989.
The respondents shall pass necessary order and make payment of arrears to the petitioners within 3 months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.