MS Liberhan, J - The management of the Public High School Juan (Sonepat) and Haryana High School Sonepat were taken over by the Government with effect from 13.6.1980 and 951984 respectively.
The staff of the respective schools i.e. the petitioners were also taken over by the Government.
It was specifically provided that the staff will be given the grades as approved by the Government and their pay will be fixed in accordance with the Government rules.
This is so discernible from reading Annexure P-1 memorandum dated 2721980 for taking over the respective schools and clause 4 of the gift deed Annexure P-4 which runs as under :  "The members of the staff who are taken over in Govt. service by the Government under the preceding clause shall be treated as fresh entrants of their previous service in the aforesaid school shall be allowed to them and their seniority vis-a-vis the old Government servants shall be determined accordingly."
2.
The pay of the petitioners was fixed at minimum of the scale protecting their last drawn salary.
The Schools were taken over when the instructions dated 1141966 were operative and so far as State of Haryana is concerned, these instructions were never withdrawn.
The petitioners voluntarily accepted the conditions of service.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that in view of the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4461 of 1971 (S Dalip Singh Gill v. The Director of Public Instructions, Punjab) decided on 1381988, the instructions dated 1141966, stood quashed and consequently, as directed in the said judgment the petitioners are entitled to the relief claimed.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners further relied on a judgment in L.P.A. No. 1346 of 1991 (Prof. Dev Dutt Kaushal v. The State of Punjab) 1991(3) SCT 225 (P&H) decided on 21.10.1993 by this Court & Roshan Lal v. State of Haryana reported in 1994 Recent Services Judgments 778 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
457.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents refuted the submissions made.
It was contended that the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners are not para materia with the facts of the case in hand.
It was further contended that instructions dated 1141966 were never withdrawn by the State of Haryana.
It has been urged that pay of the petitioners were fixed in terms of the gift deed Annexure R.2 as well as instructions Annexure P-1 the basic conditions on which the schools were taken over.
Petitioners accepted the terms and conditions as envisaged by Annexures P-1, P-9 and R.2 voluntarily and jointed service.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the pleadings.
I am of the considered view that when the Schools were taken over, conditions specifically laid down in the sanction of the Governor of Haryana for taking over the schools runs as under :-  2(e) The staff will be given the grade as approved by the Govt. and their pay will be fixed in accordance with Government Rules."
Relevant conditions of gift of the Schools to Government reads as under :-  3.
That the Government shall not be bound to take in Government services all members of the staff of the schools and shall have full discretion in taking over such of them in Government service as one considered suitable by it (Government) service as only such persons shall be taken into Government service, who actually fulfil the requisite qualifications and are found suitable and eligible for the post in question.
4.
The members of the staff who are taken over in Government service by the Government under the preceding clause shall be treated as fresh entrants in Government service and no credit whatsoever of the previous service in the aforesaid school shall be allowed to them and their seniority vis-a-vis the old Government servants shall be determined accordingly.
5.
The staff will be given the grade as approved by the Government and their pay will be fixed in accordance with the Government rules.
6-7.
The relevant instructions which were prevelant when the schools were taken over are given in the letter dated 1141966.
These run as under :-  "2.
(i) The teacher whose pay is less than the minimum of the Govt. scale should be given minimum of Govt.
Scale.
(ii) In other cases where the pay is more than the minimum of the Govt.
Scale, he should continue to draw the same pay subject to the condition that it may not exceed the maximum of the grades, the amount of his pay which he may be getting in excess of the minimum of the Government pay scale being treated as personal pay and adjusted in his future increments provided.
(iii) That these principles also shall be applicable to those members of the staff whose candidature has been approved by the SSS Board/Punjab PSG and who have been appointed on regular basis.
8.
Though it is averred in the petition that instructions dated 1141966 stood withdrawn in view of the decision in CWP No. 4461/1971 but the fact is disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents.
I find no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that instructions of 1966 stood withdrawn at the relevant time as it is obvious from the very fact averred by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the instructions were withdrawn only by Punjab Government in view of the decision of this Court in 1976 and not by State of Haryana.
These instructions were very much applicable in State of Haryana as these were never withdrawn.
The withdrawal of instructions by Punjab Government is of no consequence for State of Haryana.
9.
The judgment cited by the learned counsel for petitioners is not applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as in the said case, the petitioner joined service of the Haryana State on taking over of the School by the Government on the condition that Government scales would be allowed to him.
Pay and allowances are to be fixed equivalent and identical in higher time scale.
The Court on facts found that respondent-State is estopped on the principle of promissory estoppel to change the conditions with respect to fixation of pay of the petitioners.
If the petitioners have changed their position and joined service subject to the conditions on which the schools was taken over.
10.
Factual matrix in the present case is that there is no change brought about in the conditions as referred to in the facts of the case after the schools were taken over.
Rather the petitioners joined service subject to the conditions referred to above.
There is no dispute that their pay being fixed in terms of those conditions.
11.
So far judgment in L.P.A. 1346 of 1991 is concerned, it was observed therein :-  "The service rendered by the appellants prior to the taking over of college by the State Government will have to be counted for purpose of pension and other retiral benefits.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has failed to persuade me in what manner and on which question of law or facts, the said judgment is remotely applicable to the facts of the present case.
Learned counsel for the respondents does not refute the proposition that petitioners would be entitled to retiral benefits, keeping in view the service rendered by the petitioners.
Learned counsel for petitioner vehemently relied on 1994(1) RSJ 778 : 1993(3) SCT 262 (P&H)(D.B.)
Roshan Lal v. State of Haryana.
It was in view of the fact that the petitioner was enjoying the selection grade.
When the School was taken over by the Government, that the Hon'ble Judge, after accepting those instructions as such are applicable and the person on absorption had to be fixed at the minimum pay scale and in the eventuality he was drawing more pay.
His pay was to be fixed at minimum pay scale and excess to be treated as his personal pay.
It was observed that selection grade was one of pay scale, therefore, was entitled to be fixed in minimum of pay scale in selection grade.
The law laid down as under :-  "After hearing counsel for the parties on this point, I am of the view that there is force in the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner.
According to the Instructions dated 1141965, the pay of an incumbent on absorption had to be fixed at the minimum of the scale if the pay was less than the minimum of the pay scale.
If it was more than the pay was to be fixed at the minimum of the pay scale and the excess pay was to be considered as his personal pay.
Selection grade was one of the pay scale i.e. Rs. 400-20-500.
The petitioner was in this pay scales and was getting Rs. 420/- on 26.2.1979.
Therefore, under principle (ii) of the instructions dated 1141965, the pay was rightly fixed at Rs. 400/- in the pay scale Rs. 400-20-500 and Rs. 20/- was fixed as his personal pay.
If the interpretation put by the respondents is to be accepted, then the pay of an incumbent would stand reduced on absorption as is sought to be done by the respondents in case of the petitioner.
The impugned order is liable to be quashed on short score alone."
Law laid down as observed supports the contention of the respondent rather of the petitioner.
In view of the law laid with which I fully agree, the pay scale of the petitioner has been rightly fixed.
However, the Government may consider for releasing some increments to provide for some scope for initiation to teachers for earning increments.
Otherwise with ceiling of pay, chances of getting increments would be settled for long span of periods.
13.
I am of the considered view that the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondents have got force as the petitioners accepted the service subject to the conditions laid down in the sanction granted by the Governor for taking over the school vide Annexure P-1, instructions contained in letter dated 1141966 Annexure P-9) as applicable to the State of Haryana and the gift deed Annexure R.2 and the conditions reproduced above.
This, in view of the observations, made above, the factual fixation of pay vide Annexure P-10 is not in dispute.
As a natural corollary the same is upheld.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioners further contended during the course of arguments that petitioners would be entitled to the special increments and the pay scale revised from time to time.
There is nothing on record to show that respondents are at liberty to adjust even the special increments and other benefits granted by the State from time to time to the similarly situated persons who are in Government service.
The petitioners are part of the cadre of which the Government employees are and form one class.
There are no object, or any reasonable reason suggested to deprive a person in the cadre, of the benefits, of special increments or revision of pay scale of any other benefit granted by the State from time to time solely on the ground of person's source of coming in the cadre.
Once a person is a part of cadre, discharges some function and are similarly situated, there are no grounds to treat them differently.
Doing so would be violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
In my considered view, the petitioners are entitled to any special increments and revised pay scale which are granted to the other employees of the State belonging to the cadres of teachers and Head Masters etc.  15.
With above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.