Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein is a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
He is aggrieved by an adverse report for the period from April 1, 1984 to March 31, 1985 which was conveyed to him vide letter dated July 10, 1985, as also the action of the State of Punjab in superseding him for promotion in the rank of Superintendent of Police while persons junior to him viz. respondents Nos. 5 to 13 had been promoted.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner who is a member of the Scheduled Castes joined as an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police on April 1, 1959.
He was promoted as Sub Inspector on May 27, 1963 and confirmed as such in the year 1975.
He was further promoted as Inspector with effect from July 26, 1971 and confirmed in this rank in the year 1980.
He was promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police with effect from July 26, 1977.
It has been averred that the petitioner earned approximately 75 Commendation Certificates.
He was also given cash rewords to the tune of Rs. 25,000/-.
A specific mention may be made of order dated June 18, 1982 by which Director General of Police Punjab ordered the grant of a cash reward of Rs. 7500/- to the petitioner for "doing good work and giving/developing useful information which led to the arrest of ......" Thereafter, vide letter dated June 23, 1982 the Director General sanctioned a cash reward of Rs. 4000/- to the petitioner.
Vide orders dated August 21, 1982, a reward of Rs. 1000/- was given to the petitioner.
Vide letter dated February 24, 1983, the petitioner was informed that "President has awarded Police Medal for meritorious services" to him.
Besides the above, letters of appreciation from the Home Secretary, Govt. of Punjab and Director General of Police, Punjab were also issued to the petitioner.
4.
From the year 1959 when the petitioner joined service till July, 1988 when this writ petition was filed, the petitioner had been communicated only one adverse report for the year 1984-85.
The petitioner alleges that this report was recorded by respondent No. 4 on account of wholly extraneous considerations.
It was conveyed to him vide letter dated July 10, 1985 (Annexure P-2).
He had represented against this report on October 10, 1985 (Annexure P-3).
It has been alleged that this report had been recorded mala fide.
It has been further averred that in view of consistently good record of service, the report could not be sustained.
5.
The petitioner further avers that while his representation against the adverse report was pending, the govt. promoted various persons including respondents Nos. 5 to 13 vide orders dated November 10, 1986 and June 10, 1987.
Thereafter, the representation submitted by the petitioner against the adverse report for the year 1984-85 was rejected by the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police and Secretary Internal Security vide letter dated June 26, 1987.
6.
The petitioner has challenged the adverse confidential report, the orders rejecting his representation and the action of the State Govt. in ignoring his claim for promotion while persons junior to him were promoted on November 10, 1986 and June 10, 1987.
His representation against his supersession (Annexure P-4) which was submitted on June 11, 1987, having borne no fruit, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
7.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 3 by Mr. JS Dhaliwal, Assistant Inspector General of Police.
Respondent No. 4 has filed two separate written statements.
A written statement was also filed on behalf of respondent No. 7.
Thereafter, replications and replies thereto have also been filed by the parties.
8.
It appears that the matter came up for hearing on December 12, 1989 before SD Bajaj, J The learned counsel for the petitioner had produced a copy of the Memorandum dated January 20, 1989 showing that the petitioner had been allowed to cross the efficiency bar at the stage of Rs. 1700/- in the scale of 940-1850 with effect from July 1, 1988.
A copy of this order is on record and is Mark `A'.
9.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it has been inter-alia, mentioned that the "representation of the petitioner was considered by the Government and the same was rejected through letter No. 1/7/87-1H(1)/19946, dated 2961989".
In paragraph 9 of the written statement it has been averred that the "private respondents were promoted on 10686 when the representation of the petitioner against the adverse remarks for the period from 1484 to 31385 was pending consideration with the Govt. His representation was rejected on 24.6.1986.
It is, however, further mentioned that the representation of the petitioner was considered by the Govt. and not by the Director General of Police, Punjab.
The petitioner was not ignored merely on the basis of the adverse remarks, but a departmental enquiry was also pending against him.
The petitioner was duly considered alongwith the private respondents.
It may further be submitted that the Departmental Promotion Committee in its meeting held on 261987 had found him unfit for promotion on the ground of the 1984-85 adverse report as also the pendency of a departmental enquiry.
The recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee regarding the petitioner as also all other officers considered was approved in toto by the Government.
It may further be submitted that a charge-sheet had been duly served on the petitioner on 20387.
In paragraph 15 of the written statement, it has been mentioned that "the representation of the petitioner was considered by the Govt. (Home Department) and rejected through letter No. 1/17/87-IH(1)19946, dated 2661987.
Along with the written statement, a copy of the charge-sheet which was issued to the petitioner on March 20, 1987 has been produced as Annexure R-1.
The further written statement by Mr. KK Attri, which bears the date July 14, 1989 shows that vide orders dated March 21, 1989, the petitioner was awarded the punishment of censure in respect of this charge-sheet.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure R-1 with this written statement.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 4, the allegations of malafide have been controverted.
Facts have been given to show that the adverse report had been recorded by him objectively and bona fide.
Though in the written statement as originally filed, the details and documents have not been furnished, the detailed information has been supplied in the written statement filed subsequently.
10.
I have heard Mr. HS Mann, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS Kang, Deputy Advocate General and Shri SS Saron, Assistant Advocate General for the respondents.
Mr. Mann has raised a two-fold submission.
He has contended that the petitioner has had a consistently good record of service.
Except the report for the year 1984-85, he had not been communicated a single adverse report from the year 1959 till the filing of the petition.
His representation against the adverse report was still pending as he was superseded for promotion.
During the pendency of the representation, the claim of the petitioner could not be rejected on the ground of the adverse report.
He has further submitted that according to the written statement filed by the respondents, the private-respondents had been promoted on June 10, 1986 as also on June 2, 1987.
It has also been pointed out that on June 10, 1986 when the petitioner was superseded, no enquiry was at all pending against him and yet he was rejected on the ground that a departmental enquiry was pending against him.
The second submission raised by the learned counsel is that the report had been recorded malafide and was, therefore, vitiated.
Learned counsel for the respondents have controverted the stand taken on behalf of the petitioner.
11.
I have closely perused the pleadings of the parties.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3 by Mr. Jaspal Singh Dhaliwal, IPS, three different dates have been mentioned on which the representation submitted by the petitioner against the adverse remarks is stated to have been rejected.
In Paragraph 8, the representation is stated to have been rejected vide letter dated June 29, 1987.
In paragraph 9 the representation is stated to have been rejected on June 24, 1986.
In paragraph 15 of the written statement, the representation is stated to have been rejected through letter dated June 26, 1987.
I certainly cannot compliment the officer on the manner in which the written statement has been filed.
He would do well to be more careful in future.
The High Courts decide writ petitions on the basis of the pleadings of the parties.
The statement of facts made is normally accepted as correct.
The disputed questions of fact are not gone into by the High Court while deciding a writ petition.
Utmost care should be taken by an officer who undertakes to file the written statement on behalf of the State Govt. or other senior officers.
This care appears to be lacking in the present case.
12.
The petitioner in paragraph 9 of his petition has stated that the representation against the adverse remarks was rejected by the Govt. vide orders dated June 26, 1987.
In paragraph 8, the date of the order had been given as June 29, 1987.
For the purpose of this case, I assume that the correct date of order is June 26, 1987.
This is the date which has been mentioned in paragraph 15 of the written statement.
13.
The private-respondents are stated to have been promoted on June 19, 1986.
On that date, the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks was admittedly pending.
Thereafter, the petitioner's claim was considered on June 2, 1987.
Even on that date, the petitioner's representation was pending.
On both the occasions, the claim of the petitioner was rejected on the basis of the adverse report for the year 1984-85 and the pendency of the enquiry.
Could this be done ?
14.
It is no doubt correct that the claim of an officer for promotion to a higher rank has to be considered on the basis of his record of service.
In case of selection, the comparative merit has to be assessed on the basis of record of service.
While considering the record of service, a report which has not been communicated to an officer or a report against which a representation is pending, should not be taken into consideration.
This is for the reason that the action in considering a report which has not been communicated is unfair.
It is an exparte opinion against which the officer has a right to represent.
Similarly, when a representation against an adverse report has been submitted and is yet pending consideration, the position continues to be the same.
The ex-parte assessment has not been confirmed.
In this situation, even such a report against which a representation is pending cannot be taken into consideration.
This position of law has been settled by the Apex court in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra's case reported as 1987(2) SLR 54.
Their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :-  "In Amar Kant Choudhary v. State of Bihar and others (supra) the Court again emphasized that adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Unless the representation against the adverse entry is considered and disposed of it is not just and fair to act upon those adverse entries.
These decisions lay down the principle that unless an adverse report is communicated and representation, if any, made by the employees is considered, it cannot be acted upon to deny promotion."
In view of the above dictum of law, the adverse report for the year 1984-85 could not have been taken into consideration while considering the petitioner's claim for promotion on June 10, 1986 and June 2, 1987.
The respondents erred in taking this report into consideration.
The consideration of the petitioner's case is vitiated on this ground alone.
15.
The second factor taken into consideration by the respondents while deciding the petitioner's case for promotion relates to the pendency of the departmental enquiry.
It has been categorically stated that the petitioner "was not ignored merely on the basis of the adverse remarks, but a departmental enquiry was also pending against him."
Factually the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on March 20, 1987.
The enquiry is initiated only when the charge-sheet is served on the employee.
It is thus clear that prior to March 20, 1987, no enquiry can be said to be pending against the petitioner.
Taking this factor into consideration was wholly unfair and illegal.
It is not unknown that complaints begin to pour in when an officer is about to be promoted.
Receipt of complaints, however, does not mean that an enquiry is pending.
It is only when a formal proceeding is initiated by the issue of charge-sheet that an enquiry can be said to be pending.
In the present case, no enquiry can be said to have been pending against the petitioner on June 10, 1986.
Consequently, the ground which weighed with the authorities while considering the petitioner's claim for promotion was wholly extraneous and untenable.
16.
The next consideration of petitioner's claim is said to have taken place on June 2, 1987.
The charge-sheet had admittedly been issued to the petitioner on March 20, 1987.
However, the pendency of an enquiry cannot be a factor for declaring a person as unsuitable.
The case of an eligible candidate has to be considered on the basis of his record of service.
If on examination of the record the officer is found suitable, he has to be declared fit for promotion.
If the officer is declared fit for promotion, but the charges against him were serious, then it may be open to the Govt. to withhold the benefit of actual promotion till such time as the officer is cleared of the charges.
In various parts of the country, the procedure known as `sealed cover procedure' is being followed.
This envisages that the result of the proceedings of the departmental promotion committee is kept in a sealed cover till the enquiry proceedings are completed.
Final decision regarding the grant of promotion is taken after the result of the enquiry is known.
Even this was not done in the present case.
The petitioner was rejected on the twin point of adverse report and the pendency of the enquiry.
This was wholly invalid.
17.
In view of the above I hold that the petitioner's claim for promotion from the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police to that of Superintendent of Police was not considered in accordance with law on June 10, 1986 and June 2, 1987 when persons junior to him were promoted.
18.
This brings me to the second issue relating to the confidential report.
While the allegations of malafide have been denied by respondent No. 4, the reasons for the rejection of the representation submitted by the petitioner have not been disclosed.
The fact remains that the petitioner had not been conveyed a single adverse report from the year 1959 till the year 1985.
Even a saint can sin.
However, utmost care has to be taken while deciding a representation.
An adverse confident report like the one which was conveyed to the petitioner can mar an officer's career.
Keeping in view the totality of the facts and circumstances and more particularly the fact that the petitioner had been given letter of appreciation in the year 1982, the President Medal for outstanding work in the year 1983 and various cash rewards of substantial amounts, I think it fair to remand the matter to the State Govt. for the reconsideration of the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks.
The State Govt. will decide the matter after hearing the petitioner.
It may also consider the desirability of passing a speaking order.
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to reconsider the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks for the year 1984-85 and to consider his claim from promotion with effect from June 10, 1986 and June 2, 1987 when persons junior to him were promoted.
This would be done in accordance with the observations made above.
In case the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc. shall also be granted to him.
The petitioner is also held entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed.