AK Sikri, J (Oral) - The husband of the petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the `deceased') was enrolled with the Indian Navy on 23121975 as a Muster Chief Petty Officer-II (MSCPO-II).
At the relevant time, he was posted in INS-KALINGA.
On 13121994 when the unfortunate incident happened, the deceased was on board and was on duty.
In the morning of 13121994 it was found that the deceased was sitting in a corner between the cot and the wall, turban hanging from window and around his neck.
He was dead at that time.
The reason for his death, as per the medical report, was asphyxia.
2.
A Board of Inquiry was constituted to go into the cause and the circumstances of the death.
After detailed investigation, the said Board returned its findings, which are annexed by the respondents along with their counter affidavit.
A perusal thereof would show that this Board of Inquiry consisted of one Lieutenant Commander as the President and two Members, one of whom was Surgeon Lieutenant, i.e., a medical officer.
As per the opinion of the Board, the deceased was in a low state of mind and was very tense after receiving a letter from his home on 12121994.
He had consumed three pegs of rum neat on 12121994.
He was crying after consuming liquor which fact was not known to the Divisional Officer or the Executive Officer.
The Officer of the duty did not find out the cause of absence of duty and did not ask for relief from Gunnery office or raised alarm.
The Board also specifically arrived at the following findings :  "m. Divisional officer not very familiar with the root cause of the severe tension sailor was undergoing.
n. Departmental/Divisional officer did not inform the sailor regarding cancellation of his duty ashore.
Therefore, caused a communication gap.
p. Sailor was not interviewed by the Logistic Officer/Executive Officer since last 3 months.
The failure on the part of divisional organization.
q.
During working hours OOD is not available in the Guard room/OOD's room as the same officers are working in their respective departments during working hours which are located widely apart."
3.
It is also specifically stated that no dedicated Officer of the Duty (OOD) was available during working hours and the incident could have been averted.
The ultimate conclusion, on the basis of aforesaid analysis, drawn by the Board was as under :  "The cause of death is asphyxia.
The death is attributable to the service."
4.
It may be mentioned at this stage that after the demise of the petitioner's husband, she was granted only ordinary family pension and her request for grant of special family pension was rejected on the ground that death was not attributable to the service.
She filed appeal against this decision.
When her appeal was not decided within a reasonable period of time, she preferred Writ Petition in this Court in the year 2001, which was registered as WP(C) No. 5678/2000.
This petition was disposed of on 2592000 with direction to the respondents to dispose of the appeal of the petitioner in accordance with law within two months.
In compliance with these directions, order dated 12122000 was passed by the Government of India rejecting her appeal, and in these circumstances, the present petition is preferred.
5.
The reason for rejecting the appeal, as communicated in the order dated 12122000, is that the death of husband of the petitioner was not attributable to service.
The said order dated 12122000 refers to the findings of the Board of Inquiry and thereby points out that the deceased was under great mental stress on account of domestic problems and committed suicide when he was intoxicated, as is clear from Para 2, which reads as under :  "2.
Your husband Late No. 106098H Charanjit Singh, of Indian Navy was enrolled in the Navy on 231275 and died on 131294 due to asphyxia caused due to hanging.
As per findings of Board of Inquiry he was under great mental stress on account of domestic problems and committed suicide when he was under intoxication."
6.
We have already noticed above that no doubt, the Board of Inquiry found that the deceased was under mental stress and had committed suicide.
However, at the same time, it also conclusively opined that much of the fault laid with the department officers as well who did not bother to find the cause of deceased's low state mind and also did not give him any counseling and even failed to communicate with him.
It is specifically stated that had there been a proper communication and had the deceased been informed regarding cancelling of his duty ashore and was interviewed properly, the incident could have been averted.
It appears that because of these reasons the Board concluded that death was attributable to the service.
7.
We may also note that while giving this finding, the Board had also made the following recommendations :  "1.
A dedicated officer of the day for the establishment of this stature is very essential.
He should be available at a specific office and should act as one-man contact point in case of any emergency.
He should be the first person to be informed of anything happening in INS Kalinga.
2.
An Officer performing the duty of OOD at INS Kalinga should be taken out of the department and if that is difficult, Day OOD concept should be resorted to.
3.
All fall in/Musters are to be taken meticulously taking care of accountability of men and materials.
4.
The OOD needs to take morning both watches everyday and report discrepancy to Executive Officer.
5.
Divisional/Departmental officers are required to have more interaction with sailors to know them, their families and any problems they are facing.
A special attention should be paid to such sailors who are known to have chronic family problems especially married inliving sailors and drink on heavier side."
8.
It appears that these recommendations were sent to the Eastern Headquarters.
The Eastern Headquarters, after studying the findings of the Board vide its letter dated 1251995 addressed to the Chief of Naval Staff, recommended that death of the deceased is not attributable to service.
Reading of this letter would clearly demonstrate that it proceeds with giving brief facts of the case, findings of the Board and recommendations of the Board.
These aspects are taken from the report submitted by the Board of Inquiry.
However, while reproducing the findings of the Board in Para 6 of this letter, it is mentioned that the death of the deceased was not attributable to service.
Para 6 under the caption "Findings of the Board" is reproduced in its entirety :  "Findings of the Board  6.
The main findings of the Board are as follows : (a) The sailor was seen to be in mentally disturbed state after reading a letter that he had received from home.
He was also seen consuming two pegs of rum neat immediately thereafter.
(b) His absence from the place of work was not noticed as he was supposed to be proceeding on duty ashore.
(c) The Post Mortem Report at appendix-E has reserved opinion on cause of death pending receipt of Chemical analysis report.
However, probable cause of death is Asphyxia as per Medical Officer INS Kalinga (QNo.
102 on page 19 of BOI refers).
(d) Death of the sailor is not attributable to service."
9.
It is where Rear Admiral/Chief of Staff, who had addressed letter dated 1251995 to the Chief of Naval Staff, fell in error.
We would like to highlight two aspects in so far as analysis of the findings of Board by the said Officer is concerned, namely, (i) though main findings are recorded by stating the mental state of affair of the deceased, his absence from work and the cause of death; other important findings of the Board whereby much of the blame was foisted on the authorities as well, particularly the finding that such an incident could have been averted, is not even mentioned, and (ii) it is wrongly mentioned that the finding of the Board was to the effect that the death of the sailor was not attributable to service.
The recommendation of the Headquarters to the Chief of Naval Staff was, thus, on the wrong premise, namely, the Board of Inquiry itself has come to the conclusion that death was not attributable to service whereas as per the Board of Inquiry, the death was, in fact, attributed to service.
Therefore, the recommendation of the Eastern Headquarters, which proceeds on the aforesaid error, cannot be sustained.
It appears that the Chief of Naval Staff also, going by the aforesaid recommendation of the Easter Headquarters, passed the order that it is not attributable to the service.
The entire consideration by the Eastern Headquarters and thereafter the Chief of Naval Staff is based on facts which were noted erroneously.
10.
In Civil Appeal No. 1960/2008 titled as Union of India and Ors. v. Surinder Singh Rathore arising out of SLP(C) No. 18728 of 2006 decided on 13th March, 2008, the Apex Court was pleased to hold :  "10.
The Medical Board's opinion was clearly to the effect that the ailment suffered by the appellant was not attributable to the military service and also not aggravated due to it.
Learned Single Judge and the Division Bench were not justified in holding that the same was attributable to Military service and/or was aggravated because of service.
The respondent is not entitled to disability pension.
However, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case payment, if any, already made to the respondent by way of disability pension, shall not be covered."
11.
It is thus clear that the opinion of the Medical Board has to prevail.
This position is reiterated in other cases reported in Union of India and Ors. v. Dhir Singh China, Colonel (Retd.
), 2003(1) SCT 825 : AIR 2003 SC 1197, and Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and Ors. v. S Balachandran Nair, 2005(4) SCT 607 : AIR 2005 SC 4391 and Union of India and Ors. v. Keshar Singh, 2007(2) SCT 754 : 2007(5) SCR 408.
12.
We may also point out at this stage that the opinion of the Board of Inquiry, which consists of experts, including a medical expert in this case, is to be given due weightage and cannot be brushed aside lightly.
There has to be very cogent and weighty reasons to arrive at different findings.
This aspect has come up before the Supreme Court, this Court as well as other High Courts in number of cases.
The consistent opinion is that the opinion of the Medical Board/Board of Inquiry is to be given effect to and acted upon.
13.
The decision of the respondents to the effect that death was not attributable to service is based on wrong consideration and is, therefore, would not stand judicial scrutiny and is, thus, set aside.
14.
After we set aside the decision of the Eastern Headquarters as well as the Chief of Naval Staff on this premises, the next question with which we are posed is as to what should be the next course of action.
We are of the opinion that in a matter like this where the petitioner is knocking the doors of the respondents for more than 13 years, as her husband died on 13121994, and is waiting for grant of special family pension, instead of relegating the petitioner to the respondents again and asking them to give their decision, we should ourselves decide this aspect and issue directions.
There is yet another reason for taking this course of action.
We have before us the entire material, namely, the report of the Board of Inquiry giving the aforesaid opinion, i.e., the death of the deceased is attributed to service.
The legal position about the sanctity of such an opinion is firmly established.
15.
Thus, when the respondents cannot ignore the aforesaid opinion of the Board of Inquiry in view of the legal principles laid down in the judgments mentioned above, it would be appropriate to give directions to the respondents to act upon the said report and treat the death of the petitioner's husband as attributed to service and grant her special family pension on that basis.
This writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to fix the special family pension of the petitioner within three months and start paying the same to her.
She shall also be given arrears of pension within the said period of three months.
Petition allowed.