Pranab Kumar Chattopadhyay, J - This appeal has been preferred at the instance of the Border Security Force authorities challenging the judgment and order dated 3rd September, 2002 passed by the learned Single Judge in the writ petition being C.O.
No. 14825 (W) of 1995.
2.
It appears from the records that on 16th December, 1991, the respondent/writ petitioner was on Sentry Duty at Babadam Chowk, Khanyar (Srinagar) when he was suddenly attacked by the militants with fire arms and suffered bullet injuries in the abdomen causing profuse bleeding.
It has been submitted on behalf of the appellants that the respondent/writ petitioner on being hit by the bullets of the militants failed to retaliate by opening fire at the said militants and ran out of the bunker leaving behind the Light Machine Gun (L.M.G.)
along with one Magazine containing 25 rounds of CTN ammunition as a result whereof the militants took away the said Light Machine run alongwith the Magazine, which has, however, been denied by the respondent/writ petitioner.
It has been specifically submitted on behalf of the said respondent/writ petitioner that from the backside of the bunker some militants opened fire at the respondent/writ petitioner as a result whereof the said respondent/writ petitioner suffered serious bullet injuries in the abdomen causing profuse bleeding.
It has also been submitted on behalf of the respondent/writ petitioner that taking advantage of the seriously injured condition of the respondent/writ petitioner due to the aforesaid bullet injuries, the militants snatched away the Light Machine Gun of the said respondent/writ petitioner from the bunker alongwith the Magazine containing 25 rounds of CTN ammunition.
3.
It is, however, not in dispute that due to the aforesaid bullet injuries, the respondent/writ petitioner had to be admitted in Army Base Hospital immediately and furthermore, the said Light Machine Gun of the said respondent/writ petitioner was also subsequently recovered by the Border Security Force Personnel.
The Commandant, 110 BN.
Border Security Force, namely, the appellant No. 7 herein initiated disciplinary proceedings against the respondent/writ petitioner on the following charges for alleged violation of the provisions of Sections 40 and 22(e) of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 :  "CHARGE SHEET  The accused No. 89151017 Constable Noor Alam Mandal of 110 BN BSF is charged with :- FIRST CHARGE AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER BSF ACT SEC 40 AND DISCIPLINE OF THE FORCE  in that he, at Babadam Chowk, Khanyat (Srinagar) on 16 Dec, 91 at about 0825 hrs.
while being on Sentry Duty, omitted to take any action to action to prevent the militants from coming close to his bunker (Morcha).
SECOND CHARGE AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDER BSF ACT SEC 40 AND DISCIPLINE OF THE FORCE  in that he,  at Babadam Chowk, Khanyar (Srinagar), on 16 Sep 91  at about 0825 hrs.
while being on Sentry duty, on  being fired upon by militants, omitted to retaliate the  militants fire and ran out of the bunker leaving behind  his 762 mm LMG bearings butt No. 93 body No. C 2310  along with one mag.
and 25 rounds on CTN  ammunition, as a result of which, the militants took  away the said LMG along with one mag and 25 rounds.
THIRD CHARGE NFGLECTING TO OBEY AN Y LOCAL ORDER BSF ACT SEC 22(e)  in that he,  at Babadam Chawk, Khanyar (Srinagar), on 16 Dec 91  at about 0825 hrs.
While being on Sentry duty, did not  chain his 762 mm LMG bearing butt No. 93 body No.  2310 by neglecting to obey the BN Order No.  Tac/OPS/110/91/1115.20 dated 10th Dec 91."
4.
Ultimately, the said appellant No. 7 passed an order on 14th July, 1993 dismissing the respondent/writ petitioner from service w.e.f.
24th April, 1993.
The respondent/writ petitioner thereafter, made an appeal before the superior authority for reviewing the aforesaid order of dismissal passed by the appellant No. 7 and to reinstate the respondent/writ petitioner in service.
The said appeal was, however, rejected by the competent authority and the same was communicated to the respondent/writ petitioner by the written communication of the Joint Assistant Director dated 13th July, 1995.
5.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of dismissal dated 14th July, 1993 and the subsequent rejection of the appeal by the written communication dated 13th July, 1995, respondent herein filed the writ petition, which was finally disposed of by the learned Single Judge on 3rd September, 2002 whereby and whereunder the said learned Single Judge set aside the order of dismissal passed by the appellant No. 7 in respect of the respondent/writ petitioner and directed the appellant herein to reinstate the said respondent/writ petitioner in service on or before 15th September, 2002.
The learned Single Judge, however, directed the disciplinary authority to consider the issue afresh and impose lighter punishment in accordance with the prescribed rules.
6.
Undisputedly, the appellants herein made specific allegations to the effect that the respondent/writ petitioner did not chain his Light Machine Gun in compliance with the BN.
Order No. Tac/OPS/110/91/1115-20 dated 10th December, 1991 and omitted to retaliate by opening fire at the militants and furthermore, instead of chasing the militants ran out of the bunker leaving behind his Light Machine Gun making way for the militants to take away the said Light Machine Gun with Magazine containing 25 rounds of CTN ammunition.
However, the said allegations were not established before the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge on appraisal of the evidence on record specifically held as hereunder :  "On appraisal of the evidence as annexed to the supplementary affidavit and taking a sum total of the same it appears to me that at best the petitioner could be blamed for his callousness.
The alleged offence was not at all intentional at least no such intention was apparent from the evidence which had come out in the summary trial.
It also reveals from the evidence that the relevant order directing the members of the force to chain the Light Machine Gun was not circulated amongst the concerned members.
It further reveals that after receipt of the three-bullet injuries the petitioner made a huge cry so that the other members could chase the militants or recovery of the said Light Machine Gun and did not inform him about the bullet injuries.
This fact would show that the petitioner had not intention which could term as an offence."
7.
The learned Single Judge even after arriving at a conclusion that the respondent/writ petitioner had no bad intention which could be termed as an offence, directed the disciplinary authority to reconsider the issue afresh and impose lighter punishment in accordance with law.
Admittedly, the charges were levelied against the respondent/writ petitioner for the alleged offence under Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
The aforesaid provisions of the Sections 22(e) and 40 are set out hereunder :  22.
Insubordination and obstruction :- Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say;  (a)...................  (b)..................  (c)................... (d)...................  (e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  (f)...................  shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the case of the offences specified in clauses (d) and (e), to two years, and in the case of the offences specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this act mentioned."
"40.
Violation of good order and discipline.
Any person, subject to this Act who is guilty of any act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the Force shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
8.
In terms of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968, an offender is liable to suffer imprisonment for the specified term as mentioned in the aforesaid Sections 22(e) and Section 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
There is, however, no scope to dismiss an employee from the service under the provisions of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the said Border Security Force Act, 1968.
9.
In the present case, however, the learned Single Judge has specifically held that the respondent/writ petitioner did not commit any offence and therefore, question of punishing the respondent/writ petitioner under the aforesaid provisions of Section 22(e) and 40 of the Boarder Security Force Act, 1968 cannot and does not arise.
The appellants herein also did not actually punish the said respondent/writ petitioner even in terms of the aforesaid provisions of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Boarder Security Force Act, 1968 since in terms of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968, nobody could be dismissed from service under any circumstances.
10.
On examination of the materials on record we are also satisfied that the charges levelled against the respondent/writ petitioner herein cannot be treated as misconduct.
Mr. Kalyan Kumar Bandyopadhyay, learned Senior Counsel representing the respondent/writ petitioner referred to and relied upon a decision of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. Shri Somnath Basu reported in A.I.R. 2007 Calcutta 29 and submits that the charges levelled against the respondent/writ petitioner cannot constitute a misconduct in view of absence of ill motive and bad intention on the part of the said respondent/writ petitioner.
Mr. Bandyopadhyay referred to Paragraph 61 of the aforesaid judgment, which is set out hereunder :  "61.
Misconduct arises from ill-motive and acts of negligence, innocent mistake or errors of judgment do not constitute the misconduct.
Even if there is any negligence in performance of duties or errors of judgment in discharging of such duties, the same cannot constitute misconduct unless ill- motive in the aforesaid acts are established."
11.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and also on examination of the materials and evidence on record we are of the opinion that the findings of the disciplinary authority are based on no evidence, which have also been established before the learned Single Judge.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary authority cannot be sustained in the eye of law as the same are based on no evidence and obviously perverse.
In the aforesaid circumstances, we hold that the learned Single Judge has rightly set aside the order of dismissal passed by the appellant No. 7 and, therefore, we approve the aforesaid direction of the learned Single Judge.
12.
However, we fail to understand why the learned Single Judge permitted the disciplinary authority to proceed afresh in the matter and impose lighter punishment even after arriving at a conclusion that the respondent/writ petitioner had no bad intention which could be termed as an offence.
We have already held that the offences allegedly committed by the respondent/writ petitioner have not been established before the learned Single Judge and therefore, the said learned Single Judge should not have permitted the disciplinary authority to proceed afresh and impose punishment on the respondent/writ petitioner herein.
13.
Mr. Priyabrata Mukherjee, learned Counsel of the appellant urged before us that the learned Single Judge overstepped his jurisdiction while deciding the writ petition by interfering with the findings of fact recorded in the summary proceedings in terms of the Border Security Force Act and rules.
We, however, do not accept the aforesaid contentions of the learned Counsel of the appellant herein.
The High Court, in our opinion, while exercising its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has every right to interfere with the final order passed by the disciplinary authority if the findings of the said authority are based on no evidence or perverse.
14.
In the present case, it has been established on the basis of the available materials on record that the findings of the disciplinary authority are based on no evidence and therefore, this Hon'ble Court has the power under the writ jurisdiction to interfere with the final order passed by the disciplinary authority as has been done in the instant case.
The learned Counsel of the appellant has rightly submitted that this Court cannot determine the quantum of punishment once the charge has been proved but in the present case, the punishment has not been inflicted in terms of the provisions of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
15.
The appellants herein are not entitled to dismiss the respondent/writ petitioner from service in terms of the provisions of Sections 22(e) and 40 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 and, therefore, the learned Single Judge has rightly set aside the illegal order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary authority in respect of the respondent/writ petitioner herein.
We, therefore, approve the aforesaid direction of the learned Single Judge.
16.
The learned Single Judge also directed the disciplinary authority to proceed in the matter afresh and impose lighter punishment even after coming to the conclusion that the said respondent/writ petitioner did not commit any offence.
We cannot approve the aforesaid decision of the learned Single Judge and therefore, we set aside the aforesaid direction of the learned Single Judge.
17.
We have been informed that the respondent/writ petitioner herein has already been allowed to join his service w.e.f.
15th September, 2002.
18.
Since the order of dismissal has been quashed, the respondent/writ petitioner is entitled to receive full back wages for the period the said respondent/writ petitioner had to remain out of service pursuant to the order of dismissal together with all other consequential service benefits.
The appellants herein are, therefore, directed to calculate the back wages of the respondent/writ petitioner without any further delay but positively within a period of two weeks from the date of communication of this order and disburse the same within a period of two weeks thereafter.
The appellants are also directed to grant all other admissible service benefits under the Border Security Force Act & Rules to the respondent/writ petitioner within the time mentioned hereinabove.
19.
In view of the aforesaid directions, the judgment and order under appeal stands modified and the instant appeal stands disposed of in the manner indicated hereinbefore.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocate of the parties on usual undertaking.
Arunabha Basu, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.