JS Khehar, J(Oral) - All the 83 petitioners in the instant writ petition were promoted to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police from within the State Police Service, except petitioner No. 16 Paramraj Singh, who is stated to have been appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police by way of compassionate appointment.
Appointment to the cadre of Deputy Superintendents of Police is regulated by the Punjab Police Service Rules, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1959 Rules').
The appointment of the petitioners as Deputy Superintendents of Police came about during the years 1975 to 1988.
2.
The grievance of the petitioners in the instant writ petition, originally pertained to the intent of the authorities to induct respondent No. 4 into the State Police Service as a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
It is pointed out in the pleadings of the instant writ petition, that the first effort in this behalf was made when a request was made to the Home Ministry, Government of India, to induct respondent No. 4 into the State Police Service.
According to the petitioners, this request was rejected by the Government of India.
During the course of hearing of this case, Sh. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel representing respondent No. 1, produced the relevant record.
It reveals that a request was made by the father of respondent No. 4 to the Government of India for her absorption and transfer into the cadre of the State Government.
This request was declined by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
3.
It would be relevant to notice that respondent No. 4 had not been inducted into the State Police Service when the instant writ petition came to be filed originally.
On the basis of the statutory rules, referred to above, by an order dated 23.2.1998, a Division Bench of this Court passed an interim order staying the absorption of respondent No. 4 against the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police, in the Punjab Police Service.
During the pendency of the instant writ petition, however, an order dated 1191998 came to be passed by the State Government, whereby respondent No. 4 was appointed as a Deputy Superintendent of Police "in view of the extremely compassionate circumstances flowing from the killing of her only brother (Sh. Avinder Singh Brar, IPS) at the hands of the terrorists" by relaxing the provisions of 1959 Rules, i.e., by invoking Rule 14 thereof.
The order also expressly notices, that the determination at the hands of the State Government, to appoint respondent No. 4 as a Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Punjab Police Service, would be subject to the decision rendered by this Court in CWP No. 11548 of 1996, i.e. the present writ petition.
After the order dated 1191998 was passed by the State Government, the instant writ petition as originally filed, was amended, and the order dated 1191998, whereby respondent No. 4 was appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police in Punjab Police Service, was impugned.
4.
The sequence of facts narrated in the instant writ petition reveal that respondent No. 4 was the only surviving child of their parents, after her brother Avinder Singh Brar, a member of the Indian Police Service assigned to the Punjab Cadre, came to be killed at the hands of terrorists.
In order to compensate the family, respondent No. 4 was inducted into the service of the Central Reserve Police Force (hereinafter referred to as 'the CRPF') as Assistant Commandant.
It was also disclosed to this Court, during the course of hearing, that the appointment of respondent No. 4 in the CRPF was occasioned by the fact, that it was considered desirable to keep her away from the State of Punjab, in view of the terrorist activities which were at their peak at that juncture.
5.
After the induction of respondent No. 4 as an Assistant Commandant CRPF, she was taken on deputation by the Police Department of the State Government, as a Deputy Superintendent of Police on 17.8.1993.
She continued to discharge her duties in the aforesaid capacity till the impugned order dated 1191998 came to be passed.
It was understandable, therefore, to consider the appointment of respondent No. 4 into the State Police Service with reference to 1993 i.e. the date w.e.f.
which she was taken into the State Police Service by way of deputation.
The impugned order, however reveals that her appointment into the Punjab Police Service was back-dated from the date when she "... was appointed in the Central Police Force as Assistant Commandant and joined as such...".
In other words the appointment of respondent No. 4 has been dated back to 1988.
It is, therefore, that a query was addressed by us to the learned counsel for the official respondents, to disclose to us the reason of relating back the impugned order of appointment of respondent No. 4 to the year 1988.
We were informed by learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab representing respondents No. 2 and 3, that the brother of respondent No. 4 Sh. Avinder Singh Brar was killed by terrorists while discharging duties for the State of Punjab on 14121987 at Patiala.
It was also pointed out, that the responsibility to rehabilitate one member out of the family of Sh. Avinder Singh Brar, rested squarely on the shoulders of the State Government.
In the interest of the family of Sh. Avinder Singh Brar, however, it was considered appropriate not to appoint respondent No. 4 in the service of the State Government at the said juncture, as her appointment in Punjab would have compromised her own security.
It is, therefore, that the respondent No. 4 came to be inducted by way of compassionate appointment as an Assistant Commandant in the CRPF in 1988.
It is submitted, that the State Government consciously, decided to induct respondent No. 4 into its own service with reference to the original date of appointment of respondent No. 4 as an Assistant Commandant of CRPF, when circumstances in the State improved.
6.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 representing the Ministry of Home Affairs has produced before us the original consideration which took place at the hands of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
It notices the following consideration, which had taken place at the time when the Ministry of Home Affairs granted clearance for the absorption of respondent No. 4 in the State Police Service:-  "4.
Miss Amrit Brar was appointed in CRPF on compassionate ground.
Her brother Shri AS Brar, IPS was killed by terrorists in December, 1987.
She is the only surviving child of her parents and their only support after the death of Shri AS Brar, who was killed by the militants.
Her case, therefore, deserves special consideration.
CRPF has also recommended her permanent absorption in the Punjab Police."
It would also be relevant to mention that after this writ petition came to be filed in 1996, the issue in hand, namely, the approval of the absorption of respondent No. 4, into the Punjab Police Service came up for re-consideration.
Despite the filing of the instant writ petition, the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, again reiterated its approval of absorption of respondent No. 4 into the Punjab Police Service by recording the following observations:-  "2.
HM had approved absorption of Miss Amrit Brar, Deputy Commandant, CRPF in Punjab Police vide notes at pp4-6/N Accordingly Govt. of Punjab absorbed Miss Amrit Kaur in Punjab Police vide their order No. 1/142/96-14(11)/1021 dated the 16.9.98 (pp.7-9/cor.)
subject to a final decision of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in WP No. 11548 of 1996.
3.
In view of the above there is no case for reconsideration of the decision of granting permission for absorption of Miss Amrit Kaur in Punjab Police.
CRPF are, therefore, advised to intimate to the Govt. of Punjab that there is no need to repatriate Miss Amrit Brar back to CRPF and also to complete necessary formalities to absorb her in Punjab Police as early as possible."
7.
It is apparent from the narration of facts noticed hereinabove, that the State Government before absorbing respondent No. 4 sought the concurrence and approval of the Government of India.
8.
The pointed issue, on the basis of which the absorption of respondent No. 4 into the State Police Service is sought to be challenged, is based on the 1959 Rules.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has invited our attention to Rule 2 (f) thereof, wherein the term "service" has been defined, and to Rule 2(b), wherein the term "direct appointment" has been defined.
Rules 2(f) and (b) are, being extracted hereunder, for facility of reference.
:-  "2.
Definitions.
- In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- xxx xxx xxx xxx (b) "direct appointment" means an appointment made otherwise than by promotion of an Inspector; xxx xxx xxx xxx (f) "Service" means the Punjab Police Service.
xxx xxx xxx xxx" Our attention has also been invited to Rule 6 of the 1959 Rules, which lays down the sources of recruitment, as also the ratio of appointments from the different sources of recruitment.
Rule 6 is being reproduced hereunder:-  "6.
Method of recruitment.
- (i) Recruitment to the Service shall be made - (i) Eighty per cent by promotion from the rank of Inspector and twenty per cent by direct appointment: Provided that only those Inspectors will be eligible for promotion who - (a) in the case of Inspectors (both promoted from subordinate rank and directly recruited) have got six years continuous service (officiating as well as substantive) in the rank of Inspector; and (b) in case they are Prosecuting Inspectors, have got eight years' continuous service (both officiating and substantive) in the rank of Prosecuting Inspector.
(2) Appointments by promotion shall be made by the Government from Inspectors brought on list 'G' which will be a list of officers considered fit for promotion to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, prepared by Government in consultation with the Commission.
The names in this list prepared at one time shall be arranged according to their inter se seniority.
This list will be maintained in two parts; Part; I (for officers from the Executive line) and Part II (for officers from the Prosecution line).
(3) Direct appointment to the Service shall be made on the result of a competitive examination conducted by the Commission.
The syllabus and rules relating to the examination will be framed by the Government in consultation with the Commission.
The examination will include a viva voce test.
Only those candidates will be interviewed for the viva voce test who obtain not less than the minimum qualifying marks fixed by the Commission in the written examination.
The Inspector-General of Police, Punjab will be present at the interview and will be entitled to put questions to the candidate and to express his views to the Commission.
A candidate's position shall be determined by adding the marks obtained by him in the written examination and in viva voce test.
Provided that other things being equal, preference will be given to a candidate who has worked for the cause of national independence or has rendered some outstanding social or public service. "
Collectively, on the basis of Rules 2 (b) and (f) and Rule 6 of the 1959 Rules, it is the vehement contention of learned counsel for the petitioners, that the Rules envisage no other source of appointment, besides appointment by way of promotion and by way of direct recruitment.
It is, therefore, the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners, that appointment by way of transfer or by way of absorption of respondent No. 4 into the State Police Service, against the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, is not permissible under the 1959 Rules.
9.
We have perused Rule 6 (i) of the 1959 Rules, emphatically brought to our notice.
It is, however, not possible for us to accept the first contention of learned counsel for the petitioner.
Although, Rule 6 (i) envisages appointment to 80% of the cadre posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police by way of promotion from the rank of Inspectors, and to the remaining 20% of the cadre posts by way of direct recruitment, and no other source of recruitment has been prescribed, yet the issue canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioners can easily be resolved on the basis of Rule 2 (b) of the 1959 Rules, wherein direct appointment has been defined to mean "an appointment made otherwise than by promotion of any Inspector".
Had the rule making authority decided to limit the ambit and scope of appointment by way of direct recruitment to its normal traditional meaning, it would not have extended the meaning of the term "direct appointment" in the definition clause through Rule 2(b) of the 1959 Rules.
The instant submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners misses the real issue.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 has been made by the relaxation of the 1959 Rules.
The effort on the part of the petitioners to trace the source of recruitment of respondent No. 4 to a specific rule under the 1959 Rules is, therefore, clearly misdirected.
Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules authorises the State Government to "...relax any of the provisions of these rules...".
The State Government admittedly appointed respondent No. 4 to the State Police Service, by exercising its jurisdiction under Rule 14 of the 1969 Rules, we therefore, find no merit in the instant submission.
10.
The second contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is based collectively on Rules 8 and 10 of the 1959 Rules.
The aforesaid Rules are also being extracted hereunder :-  "8.
Probation of members of Service.
- (a) Members of the Service shall be on probation for two years, which shall include the period of training at the Police Training School, Phillaur, and in the districts and in the case of members recruited by promotion the Government may by a special order in each, case permit periods of officiating appointment to the Service to count towards the period of probation.
(b) The services of a member recruited by direct appointment may be dispensed with by Government on his failing to pass the final examination at the end of his period of training, or on his being reported on, during or at the end of his period of probation, as unfit for appointment.
Provided that the Government may, if it deems fit, extend the period of probation by not more than one year.
(c) The Inspector-General of Police, Punjab may require any member of the service on probation appointed by promotion from the rank of an Inspector to undergo a special course of training and to pass the prescribed examination in any subject or subjects including a compulsory language in which his qualification may be defective.
Any such probationer failing to pass the examination prescribed for him or being unfavourably reported on, may be reverted to his substantive rank of Inspector.
xxx xxx xxx xxx 10.
Seniority of members of Service.
- The seniority of members of the Service shall be determined by the date of confirmation in the service.
Provided that if two or more members are confirmed on the same date.
(i) a member who is appointed to the Service by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed otherwise.
(ii) in the case of members who were appointed by direct appointment, the seniority shall be determined in accordance with their position in the competitive examination; (iii) in the case of members who were appointed to the service by promotion, the seniority shall be determined in accordance with the date of their entry in promotion list 'G'."
A perusal of Rule 8 reveals that the same regulates the period of probation of members inducted into the service, and Rule 10 determines the inter se seniority between the members of the service.
On account of the retrospective appointment of respondent No. 4 to the Punjab Police Service, it is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners, that Rules 8 and 10 of the 1959 Rules would be rendered nugatory if the appointment of respondent No. 4 is allowed to continue.
In this behalf it is sought to be emphasised, that the work and conduct of an individual appointed by way of direct recruitment is watched for a period of two years and in case his work and/or conduct is not satisfactory his services can be dispensed with.
Inviting our attention to the proviso under Rule 8(b) of the 1959 Rules it is submitted, that the maximum period of probation can not be extended beyond three years.
It is therefore averred, that on the date of appointment of respondent No. 4 i.e. 1191998 she must be deemed to have completed the period of her probation satisfactorily (in the year 1991), as her appointment had been related back to the year 1988.
Learned counsel for the petitioners went on to describe the impugned order dated 1191998 as a huge favour to respondent No. 4, by a blatant misuse of authority.
It is not possible for us to accept the instant contention of learned counsel for the petitioners.
Rule 8 of the 1959 Rules envisages the period of probation for two years.
It also envisages an extension thereto by a further period of one year in case of direct recruits.
In terms of Rule 8 of the 1959 Rules, respondent No. 4 shall obviously be deemed to have completed the period of probation satisfactorily w.e.f.
the date when she completes three years service in the employment of the Punjab Police Service.
The issue to be determined therefore is, whether respondent No. 4 has been permanently absorbed into the Punjab Police Service without assessing her performance ?
In our considered view the answer to the aforesaid question is in the negative.
This conclusion of ours is based on the fact that respondent No. 4 was taken into the employment of the State Police Service by way of deputation as far back as in 1993.
She was thereafter approved for absorption into the State Service in 1998 i.e. after she has rendered service for a period of five years in the State Police Service.
A period of five years, in our opinion was definitely sufficient for the authorities to adjudicate upon the suitability of respondent No. 4.
Had respondent No. 4 not been suitable for induction into the service of the respondents, she would not have been absorbed in the State Service.
One can also not loose sight of the fact that respondent No. 4 was initially appointed as an Assistant Commandant in the CRPF, and was promoted to the rank of Deputy Commandant in the said service.
Since it is not a matter of dispute that the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Punjab Police Service, in terms of equivalence, is at the same level as the rank of Assistant Commandant in the CRPF, it is obvious that respondent No. 4 had been adjudged suitable, not only for the rank at which she had been absorbed in the Punjab Police Service but also for a higher rank, when the impugned order dated 1191998 was issued.
It is, therefore, not possible for us to accept that respondent No. 4 had been accepted as a member of the Punjab Police Service without determining her suitability as suggested.
11.
Inviting the Court's attention to Rule 10 of the 1959 Rules, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners, that the action of the authorities in relating back the appointment of respondent No. 4 to 1988, would make all the petitioners junior to respondent No. 4.
It is apparent from the pleadings, that all the petitioners (except Paramraj Singh, petitioner No. 16) were appointed to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, by way of promotion, from lower ranks.
The 1959 Rules envisage a separate quota for appointment by way of promotion and a separate quota for appointment by way of direct recruitment.
Since it has already been concluded above that the appointment of respondent No. 4 under the 1959 Rules will be deemed to be an appointment by way of direct recruitment, it is clear that respondent No. 4 did not usurp a cadre post which was meant to be filled up by way of promotion under the concerned Rules.
In so far as, Rule 10 of the 1959 Rules is concerned, the same envisages the determination of seniority from the date of confirmation in the service.
It is now well settled that on the successful completion of the period of probation, an employee is deemed to be confirmed in the service for all intents and purposes, as noticed herein above.
Respondent No. 4 must be deemed to have completed her period of probation successfully on the expiry of maximum period of probation, laid down in Rule 8 (b) of the 1959 Rules.
Her seniority shall obviously have to be determined with reference to the date when respondent No. 4 completed the maximum period of probation prescribed.
It needs to be emphasised that learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 has emphatically pointed out, that a cadre post in the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police was available in the service, for direct recruitment with effect from the date from which respondent No. 4 has been inducted into the State Police Service.
This submission of learned counsel for the respondents has not been controverted by learned counsel for the petitioners.
Thus viewed, we find no difficulty in implementation of the 1959 Rules, either in determining the period of probation of respondent No. 4, or for determining her seniority vis-a-vis, other members of the State Police Service.
12.
The next contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is, that the action of the authorities in appointing respondent No. 4 to the State Police Service amounts to an act of amendment of 1959 Rules.
It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners, that in order to carve out a fresh mode of recruitment, it was imperative for the respondent to have amended the 1959 Rules.
In the same stream, it is submitted that the action of the authorities in appointing respondent No. 4 as a Deputy Superintendent of Police from a source of recruitment, not expressly envisaged under the 1959 Rules, must be deemed to be an arbitrary exercise of authority at the hands of the respondents.
During the course of hearing of the instant case, learned counsel for the respondents invited our attention to Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules.
The aforesaid rule is being extracted hereunder :-  "14.
General powers to relax rules.
- Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
Based on Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the Government has been vested with the authority to relax the provisions of the Rules.
It is obvious that the power of relaxation is provided only to deal with an issue, which is not expressly provided for under the scheme of a set of Rules.
It is ordinarily an extraordinary situation/circumstance.
It would definitely have been difficult, if not impossible, for the authorities to have contemplated and provided for a situation like the one in hand.
The circumstance of the nature of the controversy in hand, is unlikely to occur and cannot be expressly contemplated, so as to frame any express Rule therefor.
It is for these stray situations and circumstances that power is vested in Rules, so as to deal with such like eventualities.
We are satisfied, after having examined the entire factual matrix in which the State Government arrived at this final conclusion, that its action to invoke Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules was fully justified and calls for no interference at our hands.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, while referring to Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules, has advanced yet another contention, namely, that the Rule can be invoked only for a "class or category of persons".
It is the vehement contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that respondent No. 4 being an individual, the power envisaged under Rule 14 of the 1959 Rules could not have been invoked to grant her the benefits ensuing from the impugned order dated 1191998.
In so far as, the instant legal issue is concerned, it is by now well settled that an individual can also constitute a class and category by himself.
Having examined the factual position and background, in which respondent No4 was inducted into the Punjab Police Service, as a Deputy Superintendent of Police, we are of the opinion that the action taken by the respondents cannot be annulled on the touch stone of the instant submission of learned counsel for the petitioners.
14.
Besides the contentions advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners on the basis of 1959 Rules, learned counsel for the petitioners has also relied on the Punjab Absorption of Officer of the Para Military Forces (Group A) Service Rules, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as `the 2005 Rules').
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners, that the 2005 Rules have been expressly formulated for regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of officers of Para Military Forces (like respondent No. 4) who are on deputation with the State of Punjab, and who are to be absorbed in the employment of the Punjab Police in public interest (like respondent No. 4).
Therefore, relying on the aforesaid Rules, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended, that if the State Government desired to absorb the respondent, it was free to do so by creating an ex-cadre post in terms of the mandate of the 2005 Rules.
This according to learned counsel will ensure, that respondent No. 4 does not steal a march over existing members of the State Police Service, like the petitioners.
The instant contention advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners, is liable to be rejected for the simple reason that the 2005 Rules were notified only on 22.7.2005 and as such, could not be relied upon or referred to at the time, when the authorities passed the impugned order dated 1191998, appointing respondent No. 4 as a Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Punjab Police Service.
15.
In continuation to the contention noticed hereinabove, it is also the submission of learned counsel for the petitioners, that all the petitioners are liable to be adversely affected by the induction of respondent No. 4 into the Punjab Police Service.
In this behalf, it is pointed out that as a member of the cadre of Deputy Superintendent of Police, respondent No. 4 would gain eligibility for onward appointment to the Indian Police Service after rendering 8 years of service.
In this behalf it is pointed out that since respondent No. 4 has been retrospectively appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police w.e.f.
1988, she would be deemed having completed 8 years of service in 1996, and as such, will be deemed to have become eligible for consideration for appointment by promotion to the Indian Police Service w.e.f.
1996.
It is not possible for us to accept the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners, in the background of the fact that it is not disputed that respondent No. 4 was accommodated into the State Police Service against the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police against a cadre post available for direct recruits, as on the date of her retrospective appointment to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Since respondent No. 4 does not in any manner, curtail the quota for promotees, expressed under Rule 6 (i) of the 1959 Rules, the instant contention of learned counsel for the petitioners, in our view is devoid of merit.
16.
The last contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that respondent No. 4 having not severed her ties with the CRPF, cannot be considered to be a member of the State Police Service even till the present moment.
In this behalf, it is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners that respondent No. 4 continues to maintain her lien with the CRPF, wherein she was originally appointed as an Assistant Commandant and thereafter, promoted as Deputy Commandant.
It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners that respondent No. 4 has filed CWP No. 6908 of 2004 claiming further promotion within the CRPF.
The instant contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is also devoid of merit.
Needless to mention that a Division Bench of this Court on 23.2.1998 while dealing with the instant controversy had passed an interim order staying the absorption of respondent No. 4 as a Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Punjab Police Service.
Thus viewed, stricto senso, the impugned order dated 1191998 has till date not become effective and operational.
It is only when respondent No. 4 is confirmed against a post in the Punjab Police Service, that her lien in her parent cadre i.e. CRPF can be terminated.
17.
No other contention was advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners.
18.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in the instant writ petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.