VK Bali, J - Shiv Mohan Singh, who on attaining the age of superannuation, retired on 31-7-1997 claimed grant of overtime allowance for the period from 6-12-1990 to 10-5-1997 while he was working as Train Superintendent of Palace on Wheels.
He claimed to have over worked for 7700 hours and as per schedule of payment was entitled for payment of Rs. 3,50, 90890.
The Central Administrative Tribunal (in short 'the Tribunal') vide impugned order dated 6-6-2003 dismissed the claim of the petitioner being barred by time as also on merits.
It is against this order passed by the Tribunal that the present writ petition had been filed.
2.
Briefly put, the case of the petitioner has been that he had worked on the train Palace on Wheels from time to time for 7700 hours over and above the normal working hours and as such, was entitled for payment of over-time allowance of Rs. 3,50,90890.
When for a period of about seven years, he was not given over time allowance, he made representation on 27-2-1997 i.e. about five months before the date of his retirement.
He made two further representations dated 1-3-1997 and 21-9-1999 and yet, when the respondent authorities invoked no interest, he was constrained to file OA No. 79/2000 and the learned Tribunal vide order dated 10-4-2001 disposed of the same while directing the respondents to decide his representation by passing a reasoned and speaking order within two months from the date the petitioner was to make representation and to communicate the decision thereof to the petitioner within 15 days thereafter.
The respondents, however, found no favour with the claim of the petitioner as his representation came to be rejected vide order dated 13-6-2001 (Anx.
7).
It is against this order that challenge was made before the Tribunal, with the result already indicated above.
3.
Before we might notice the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it would be appropriate to mention that the claim of the petitioner was held to be barred by time by virtue of the provisions contained in Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
The order passed by the Tribunal in OA No. 79/2000 pressed into service to overcome the bar of limitation was repelled by observing as follows :  "It may also be pointed out here that filing of OA 79/2000, which was disposed of finally when the pleadings were complete and the matter was listed for hearing on the basis of the submission made by the learned counsel for the applicant that direction may be given to the respondents to decide his representation which he will file within 15 days will not extend the period of limitation.
Claim for grant of overtime allowance cannot be stated to be a subsisting cause of action so as to file an OA at any time, thus, the present OA is time barred and cannot be entertained in view of the provisions contained in Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985."
4.
While rejecting the case of the petitioner on merits, the Tribunal observed as follows :  "Admittedly, the applicant was posted as Train Superintendent on POW.
The respondents have placed on record the letter dated 27-1-1983 and 17-1-81 (Anx.
R/1 and Anx.
R/2 respectively), which reveal that supervisory staff is not entitled for the payment of overtime allowance.
The applicant has not challenged these orders in the present OA and as such the validity of these orders cannot be gone into.
The respondents vide impugned order dated 13-6- 2001 (Anx.
A/10) have specifically held that the applicant was working as Train Superintendent on POW from time to time during 1990 to 1997.
Train Superintendent of POW is supervisory authority from Railway side.
The applicant has admitted that he was working as Train Superintendent.
The duties of Train Superintendent on POW, the most luxurious train of India, are quite different from the duties of Train Superintendent of Mail/Express, Superfast, passenger services of Indian Railways.
The Train Superintendent on POW is required to attend emergencies related with mechanical working of rolling stock and such emergencies are very rare because this train is well maintained.
The applicant was regularly granted compensatory rest and weekly rest.
He was given two compensatory rests and one weekly rest for every trip of journey performed.
He was granted compensatory rest to compensate for any extra hour of work performed by him.
The applicant has not controverted any of these findings in the present OA Thus, the specific stand of the respondents that the applicant was performing only the supervisory duties and in lieu of extra hours of work performed by him he was granted two compensatory rests and one weekly rest and in view of the letters Anx.
R/1 and R/2 the applicant is not entitled to payment of overtime allowance, has not been demolished at all rather the applicant has not made even a single averment as to how the findings recorded by the respondents vide impugned order dated 13-6-2001 (Anx.
A/10) are not sustainable."
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that it is not the case that the petitioner might have slept over his rights.
In fact, he made representation before his retirement which was repeated twice and when the respondents did not care even to respond to the three successive representations the petitioner had filed OA No. 79/2000 in which, directions as mentioned above, were given.
The bar of limitation under Section 21 of the Act thus could not be applied in the facts and circumstances mentioned above and in any case, once the Tribunal had given directions to decide the representation and which in fact was decided, terminus quo for limitation would commence from the date representation of the petitioner was rejected.
6.
On merits of the controversy, learned counsel contends that case of the petitioner was based upon proviso to Section 132(4) of the Railways Act and the same could not be thwarted on the basis of instructions (Anx.
R-1 and R- 2).
He further contends that over time allowance is being granted to all Train Examiners running all trains except the Palace on Wheels and even though, when the matter came up for hearing before the Hon'ble Bench then seized of the matter on 1-2-2005 when the counsel representing the railways while controverting that over time allowance was not being granted to all Train Examiners, sought time to file an affidavit of the competent authority of the Railways, no affidavit was filed which would only mean that the assertions made by the petitioner to the effect aforesaid remained uncontroverted.
That being so, the respondents could not discriminate between the petitioner and other equally situate and in the circumstances, non-grant of over time allowance to the petitioner would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel appearing for the Railways, however, joined issues with the counsel for the petitioner on all the points referred to above.
We have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and with their assistance, examined the records.
The claim of the petitioner no doubt pertains to the period from 6-12-1990 to 10-5-1997 but it is conceded position that before filing the first OA for the desired relief, the petitioner made three successive representations, none of which was even responded to by the respondent Railways.
It is also conceded position that the Tribunal in the earlier OA filed by the petitioner had directed the respondent Railways to decide the representation of the petitioner and it is only pursuant to such directions that claim of the petitioner was considered and rejected vide order dated 13-6-2001 (Anx.
7) which was impugned in the second OA filed by the petitioner.
It is significant to mention that in response to the first OA filed by the petitioner the respondent filed reply and contested the matter by specifically pleading that the OA was belated and there was deliberated delay which amounted to negligence on the part of the petitioner.
It is despite the objection aforesaid that the representation of the petitioner was directed to be decided.
It is no doubt true that the counsel representing the petitioner before the Tribunal at the time of hearing had submitted that necessary direction be given to the respondents to decide representation filed by the petitioner, within fifteen days from the date of passing of the order but the respondent Railways which was represented by counsel, did not object to decision of the representation as prayed for by the learned counsel for the petitioner on any ground, and in particular that the petition filed by the petitioner for the desired claim was barred by time by virtue of provisions contained in Section 21 of the Central Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
The operative part of the order passed by the Tribunal in first OA filed by petitioner reads as follows :  "In view of the submissions made before us, we direct the respondents to decide the representation, if filed by the applicant, within 15 days from today, by a reasoned and speaking order within two months from the date of receipt of representation and the same shall be communicated to the applicant within 15 days thereafter.
The applicant will be at liberty to approach the proper forum for redressal of his grievance, if he is so advised."
(Emphasis supplied) 7.
In the context of the facts as fully detailed above, the question that arises for determination is as to whether by virtue of provisions contained in Section 20 and 21 of the Act the OA for the claim, as mentioned above, was barred by limitation.
8.
We have carefully heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.
By virtue of provisions contained in Section 20 of the Act, the Tribunal would not entertain a petition unless the remedies as provided under Section 20 have first been exhausted.
The Tribunal would thus not ordinarily admit a petition unless it was satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant Service Rules as to redressal of his grievance.
The remedies available to him under the Service Rules, by virtue of sub-section (2) of Section 20 would mean that a final order has been made by the Government or an authority and then an appeal or representation that may be made by such a person in connection with the grievance or where no final order has been made by the Government or any other authority with regard to the appeal or representation, the period of six months from the date on which appeal or representation was made, has expired.
The relevant provisions contained in Section 20 reproduced below would thus manifest that before a petition for any relief is made before the Tribunal, such a petition would not be admitted if the applicant has not availed his alternative remedy of appeal or representation, as the case may be, and if no appeal or representation is decided, when filed, then petition shall not be entertained unless six months have expired :  "20.
Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted - (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances, - (a) if a final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such per son in connection with the grievance; or (b) where no final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired".
9.
Section 21 of the Act provides for limitation.
The same in so far as it is relevant for the purpose of deciding the present case reads as follows:  "21.
Limitation - (1) A tribunal shall not admit an application, - (a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause (a) of sub- section (2) of Section 20 has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from the date on which such final order has been made; (b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of the said period of six months.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where, - (a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the matter to which such order relates; and (b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced before the said date before any High Court, the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b) of sub- section (1) or within a period of six months from the said date, whichever period expires later.
(3) ........" 10.
By virtue of the provisions contained in Section 21 of the Act which provides for limitation, the Tribunal shall not admit an application beyond a period of one year from the date on which final order as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been passed.
By virtue of sub-clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 21 the Tribunal shall not admit an application beyond a period of one year from the date of expiry of the period of six months when the appeal or representation as mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made.
In other words, petition filed beyond an year and six months from the date of making application or representation shall be barred by time.
By virtue of provisions contained in sub-section (3) of Section 21, the Tribunal has ample power to extend the period of limitation if the applicant might satisfy that he had sufficient cause for not making application within such period.
11.
Perusal of Sections 20 and 21 of the Act would reveal that before a person might approach the Tribunal for redressal of his grievance, he has to exhaust the remedies that may be available to him under the service rules which means either an appeal against the order and if there be no such order, then a representation.
The Tribunal shall also not entertain an application unless six months might expire from the date of making appeal or filing the representation.
What thus transpires is that before approaching the Tribunal, one has to either file an appeal against the order that might have been passed against the employee or if no such order has been passed, then to make representation.
The facts of the present case reveal that no order had been passed by the concerned authorities at any given time.
There was thus no question for the petitioner to have approached the appellate authority but in the circumstances the petitioner could only make a representation.
He had made three successive representations which when invoked no interest as no orders thereon were ever passed, the petitioner filed his earlier OA with the order already indicated above.
The respondent Railways contested the earlier OA of the petitioner on the ground of delay as well and despite that, the Tribunal ordered the respondent Railways to decide the representation and gave a right to the petitioner to approach the appropriate forum for redressal of his grievances if the order was to be passed against him.
There is nothing in the statute - Section 20 or 21, that no representation could be filed beyond a specified period from the date of accrual of cause of action.
The terminus quo of limitation as per the statute is thus the date when appeal or representation is decided or not decided within the specified period i.e. six months.
In considered view of this Court, when the language of the statute is unambiguous with regard to the terminus quo of the limitation from the date of decision of the appeal or representation or non-decision thereof within the specified period, the principles governing limitation under the Limitation Act, 1961 from the date of accrual of cause of action could not be imported.
The three representations made by the petitioner before filing the OA were not decided at all and surely, the second OA of the petitioner was against the order that came to be made pursuant to the orders passed by the Tribunal itself and the same was filed within limitation specified in Section 21 of the Act.
That apart, when the Tribunal passed order in the first OA of the petitioner it gave a right to the petitioner to challenge orders that might be passed.
Surely, it cannot be said that the earlier order passed by the Tribunal was illegal and without jurisdiction.
The order was not challenged in any forum, on the contrary, the order was complied with and an order deciding the representation of the petitioner was indeed passed.
In these circumstances, it could not be held that the second OA filed by the petitioner was barred by limitation as per the provisions contained in Section 21 of the Act.
The findings of the Tribunal on the issue of limitation are thus reversed.
12.
The contention of the learned counsel with regard to the entitlement of the petitioner for grant of over time allowance on the basis of proviso to Section 132(4) of the Railways Act, as noted above, in our considered view, has no merit whatsoever.
However, to evaluate the contention of the learned counsel, it would be appropriate to reproduce Section 132(4) of the Railways act along with the proviso.
The same reads thus -  "132.
Limitation of hours of work :- (1) to (3) ....... (4) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, temporary exemption of railway servants from the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub- section (3) may be made by the prescribed authority if it is of opinion that such temporary exemptions are necessary to avoid serious interference with the ordinary working of the railway or in cases of accident, actual or threatended, or when urgent work is required to be done to the railway or to rolling stock or in any emergency which could not have been foreseen or prevented or in other cases of exceptional pressure of work : Provided that where such exemption results in the increase of hours of employment of a railway servant referred to in any of the sub-sections, he shall be paid overtime at not less than two times his ordinary rate of pay for the excess hours of work."
13.
A perusal of sub-section (4) of Section 132 of the Railways Act reproduced above would manifest that the prescribed authority could give temporary exemption of railway servants to the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub- section (2) or sub-section (3) if it is of opinion that such temporary exemption is necessary to avoid serious interference with the ordinary working of the railway or in cases of accident, actual or threatened or when urgent work is required to be done.
The duty hours as prescribed in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 132 of the Railways Act could thus be extended in circumstances mentioned in sub-section (4).
But in that case, the proviso to sub-section (4) would make railway servant entitled to payment for extra hours put in by the railway servant.
It is significant to mention that the entitlement is of `railway servant'.
There is no mention in the rule as to whether the entitlement would be of all railway servants or such railway servants as the competent authority may decide.
The rule also does not specifically say that every railway servant would be entitled to over time allowance.
There is also no embargo in the rule from where it may be possible to spell that the competent authority would not be entitled to specify the railway servants who may be entitled to over time allowance.
14.
In the facts and circumstances mentioned above, the question that arises is as to whether by virtue of instructions issued from time to time, the railway authorities would be within their right to specify 'railway servant' who would be entitled to over time allowance.
15.
We have given our anxious thoughts to the question as mentioned above and are of the considered view that the mention of 'railway servant' in Section 132 of the Railways Act does not necessarily mean every railway servant whatever post he might be holding.
Further, non-mention of the words "every or all" 'railway servant' as also there being no provision specifically debarring the competent authority to specify 'railway servant' entitled to over time allowance, would necessarily lead to the conclusion that the competent authority could well specify 'railway servant' who may be entitled to over time allowance.
If the instructions might be issued which may not militate against the rules or may pertain to the situation which may not be specified in the rules, in our view the instructions in such matters can always be issued.
A perusal of the Railway Board's letter No. D(LL)80/HER/2-14 dated 17-1-1981 (Annexure-11 to the writ petition) identifies 'supervisory staff' in the railway establishment for the purpose of Hours of Employment Regulations.
The petitioner was indeed a member of the supervisory staff.
Vide letter dated 27-1-1983 (Annexure-12 to the writ petition) issued again in connection with the Hours of Employment Regulations and payment of over time to supervisory staff, it has been clarified that the members of supervisory staff would not be entitled to payment of over time allowance.
The relevant part of the letter aforesaid reads as follows :  "It may be noted that the supervisory staff are not entitled for -payment of overtime in terms of the orders contained in their letter No. E. (Adj) 53/14 dated 29-11-54 which has also been quoted under para 4(5) of Section 6 of the H.E.R.
Hand Book of this Railway."
16.
The petitioner admittedly being a member of the supervisory staff, in view of Annexure-11 and 12 to the writ petition, as detailed above, was not entitled to payment of over time allowance.
17.
That apart, it has been the consistent case of the respondent Railways that the petitioner was regularly granted compensatory and weekly rests.
He was given two compensatory rests and one weekly rest for every trip of journey performed.
He was given compensatory rests to compensate for any extra hour of work put in by him.
This part of the pleadings made by the respondent Railways was not controverted by the petitioner.
The finding of the learned Tribunal that the specific stand of the respondents that the applicant was performing only the supervisory duties and in lieu of extra hours of work performed by him he was granted two compensatory rests and one weekly rest and in view of letters Anx.
R-1 and R-2 he was not entitled to payment of over time allowance, cannot be faulted at all.
Surely, the petitioner cannot ask for payment on account of extra hours of work put in by him.
18.
In so far as the contention of the learned counsel with regard to the discrimination is concerned, it is not disputed that the point was not raised either in the pleadings before the Tribunal or before this Court.
It appears that when the matter came up before this Court on 1-2-2005, it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that over time allowance was being granted to all Train Examiners running all trains except the Palace on Wheels.
This contention of the learned counsel was controverted by the counsel defending the Railways.
We would have given more time to the counsel for the Railways to bring on record affidavit of some responsible officer of the Railways to controvert the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, as noted above, but the learned counsel defending the Railways, states that even if the contention raised by the learned counsel with regard to payment of over time allowance to Train Examiners running all trains be taken to be correct, still the petitioner would not gain anything inasmuch as, per his own contention, no Train Supervisor employed in the Railways and discharging the duties on Palace on Wheels is given any over time allowance.
It would be a case of valid classification based upon rationality for which adequate material has already been placed on records.
We find merit in the contention of the learned counsel defending the Railways.
Even though the point pertaining to discrimination without pleadings either before the CAT or this Court could not be gone into at this stage, yet, even if it is assumed that over time allowance is being paid to all Train Examiners but for those who are attached with Palace on Wheels, it would be at the most a case of valid classification.
The respondent Railways in the written statement filed on their behalf have clearly mentioned that the petitioner was working as Train Supdt.
on the prestigious highly maintained train Palace on Wheels and the nature of his duties was supervisory.
The train Palace on Wheels is very properly maintained and nothing is required to be done.
It does not stop at all stations; it does not have ordinary passengers to create problems of chain pulling or any kind of nuisance.
It stops only at Delhi, Agra, Jaipur, Jaisalmer and Ajmer.
It is relevant to mention at this stage that by virtue of the provision contained in Section 132 of the Railways Act reproduced above, one is required to put in extra working hours normally when it may be necessary to avoid serious interference with the ordinary working of the Railways or in cases of accident, actual or threatened, or when urgent work is required to be done.
If no emergent work or other kind of work as mentioned in sub-section (4) of Section 132 is required to be done by a supervisory staff on Palace on Wheels, the proviso would clearly not come into play.
It is further made out from the pleadings of the parties that the petitioner was given compensatory rests, as mentioned above, because he was working as Train Supdt.
on Palace on Wheels.
What really appears to this Court is that so far as the supervisory staff is concerned, the Railways instead of making them payment for extra hours of work put in by them rather chose to give them compensatory rests.
As mentioned above, having availed compensatory rests for the extra hour's of work put in by the petitioner, he cannot claim for over time allowance as well.
19.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same thus upholding the order dated 6-6-2003 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.