Arun Kumar Mitra, J - The instant Writ Petition centres round a claim of the petitioner for appointment and or absorption of the petitioner in the post of his category which has fallen vacant or which will fall vacant very soon.
2.
According to the petitioner on 09031973 he joined the service of the University of Kalyani as a Junior Assistant in the Department of Animal Husbandry, Faculty of Agriculture.
W.e.f.
09041974 Kalyani University was bifurcated.
One part continued to be known as University of Kalyani, the other part was named as Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya (hereinafter termed as said Vishwavidyalaya).
As per the averments of the petitioner made in the Paragraph 4, by virtue of an arrangement which was temporary in the nature, the petitioner was transferred to the said Viswavidyalaya w.e.f.
03.11.1974.
3.
Thereafter, the petitioner's service was permanently conferred to the said Viswavidyalaya w.e.f.
01.12.1974.
The said Viswavidyalaya confirmed the petitioner as Junior Assistant with retrospective effect from 09.03.1975 by an order contained in a Memo dated 10031978.
The writ petitioner thereafter moved this High Court and Hon'ble Justice Mukul Gopal Mukherjee (as his Lordship then was) on 30091986 in CR No. 1231(W) of 1981 passed an order.
On the basis of the said order the petitioner was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant with retrospective effect from 01.04.1982.
By a notification dated 21041993 the said Viswavidyalaya published an advertisement inviting applications from the eligible candidates for filling up the vacancies of four posts of Superintendent and Accountant required at the North Bengal Campus.
The petitioner applied through proper channel for one of the said four posts of Superintendent and Accountant.
4.
By an order dated 22.06.1993 the Vice Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya appointed the petitioner to the Post of Superintendent (the petitioner claimed Senior Superintendent) in the North Bengal Campus of the said Viswavidyalaya at Pundibari, Cooch Behar in the Scale of Rs. 1550-70-1830-3030-100-3530.
The petitioner in Paragraph 7 of the Writ petition stated that the said appointment was given to the petitioner on certain conditions which are as follows :  (a) His initial pay in the scale of Rs. 1550-3530/- shall be fixed after allowing three additional increments on the date of joining in terms of the resolution of the Executive Council; (b) He will be on probation for a period of two years from the date of actual joining to the post subject to the conditions : (i) the period of probation may be extended by the Viswavidyalaya at its discretion, (ii) during the period of probation their services may be terminated on one month's notice on either side or by payment of salary for one month in lieu of notice, (iii) Their confirmation in the posts shall depend on satisfactory work and conduct during the period of probation and (iv) after confirmation in the posts their services may be terminated on three months' notice or three month's pay in lieu of notice on either side;  (c) He shall be whole-time employee of the Viswavidyalaya and their services will be governed by the provisions of the BCKV Act, 1974, subsequent Amendment Act, 1981, Ordinances, Statutes, Regulation and Rules framed thereunder and resolutions of the Appropriate Authority of the Viswavidyalaya;  (d) He will not accept any other employment either full-time or part-time with or without remuneration except with prior permission of the Competent Authority of the Viswavidyalaya;  (e) He will be required to serve any where in West Bengal;  (f) He shall be treated as `Direct Recruitee' for the posts and their seniority shall hereafter be fixed from the date of joining in the posts at NB Campus;  (g) He shall not be entitled to claim any service benefit that might accrued upon them had they continued in their present posts;  5.
By the said order the petitioner was directed to report for duty to the Professor-in-Charge, North Bengal Campus of the said Viswavidyalaya at Pundibari, Cooch Behar immediately after being duly released.
The petitioner was also directed to communicate his consent in writing stating the date of the joining within seven days from the date of issuance of the said order.
He was also informed that in the event of the failure to communicate the same, the offer of appointment made by the said order would stand automatically cancelled without any further communication.
Annexure P-1 to the Writ Petition is the said appointment letter.
6.
Thereafter getting the said appointment letter the petitioner asked for clarification and in reply the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya through his memo dated 05.08.1993 and 06.08.1993 informed the petitioner in the manner as follows :  (a) On joining to the post of Superintendent at NB Campus your Basic Pay will be fixed as per terms applicable to direct appointment and as per terms mentioned in order of appointment : (b) Your presumption about the service condition is not correct.
Confirmation is related to a post and hence every appointee requires to undergo a fresh period of probation in every new assignment within the University.
(c) Clause (g) of the Appointment order shall be clarified likewise;  (i) Your previous service shall be counte towards pension, leave salary and other terminal benefits at the time of your final retirement from University service; (ii) All sorts of leave of your previous service shall be carried forward when you join your new assignment and you will be able to enjoy the leave lying to your credit;  (iii) You will be allowed to enjoy your entitlements of financial benefits, if any, for your past service.
Copy of this communication is annexed to the Writ Petition as Annexure P-2.
The Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya also asked the petitioner to communicate his willingness to join the post within seven days and accordingly the petitioner submitted his willingness.
7.
Subsequently by Memo dated 13.10.1993 the petitioner's pay was fixed at Rs. 3030/- (rupees three thousand thirty only).
The concerned authority directed that this pay would be made effective from 01101993 and the petitioner was allowed his next increment to be due on 01.10.1994.
8.
On 05051994 the petitioner made a representation to the concerned authority through proper channel stated that the authority under whom he was working at Kalyani could not release him before 29th September afternoon 1993 and therefore, he could not join the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus before 1st October, 1993.
This delay was caused according to the petitioner, for no fault of his own.
The petitioner claimed that he should be deemed to have joined the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus earlier than the date of actual joining.
The petitioner also applied for proper fixation of his pay as per terms of the appointment.
9.
The petitioner made another representation on 28th September, 1994 as the date of his appointment and joining the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus and for the proper fixation of his pay.
According to the petitioner that was not done by the authority and the representation was also not disposed of.
10.
After the publication of the Seniority List of those employees who were appointed as Junior Assistants and promoted to the post of Senior Assistants by the Kalyani University and subsequently transferred to the said Viswavidyalaya, the petitioner found that owing to the adoption of a wrong process, there was a gross mistake in the fixation of his salary.
On 26091993 the petitioner submitted to the concerned authority through proper channel, two representations requesting him to rectify the mistake and in support of his contention the petitioner cited the case of Sri Tapan Bhowmick but the concerned authority did not comply with his prayer.
11.
By an order dated 08.11.1994 the concerned authority promoted as many as 23 Senior Assistants and Assistant Accountants to the post of Junior Superintendents which became effective on 01.04.1989 and 24011991 respectively.
12.
According to the petitioner the promotions were given completely ignoring the position which he was occupying in the Seniority List.
The petitioner further states that by the said order the concerned authority promoted six Senior Assistants/Assistant Accountants to the higher post of Junior Superintendent.
However, the petitioner contended that his right was jeopardised or ignored.
He submitted representation on 12121994 to the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya for fixation of his pay according to the relevant rules and giving him pro rata promotion to the post of Junior Superintendent for the period from 01.04.1989 to 10.09.1993.
Subsequently on 07011995 the petitioner submitted further representation to the Vice Chancellor and Chairman of the Executive Council of the said Viswavidyalaya but none of the said representations could produce any result.
13.
It has been stated by the petitioner that in 2000 the Government of West Bengal through Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2000 established Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya and it started functioning on and from 1st February, 2001.
Section 57 of the said Act runs as follows :  S.57(1) - Every employee, who, immediately before the appointed day, was employed in the North Bengal Campus, regional research stations and sub-stations of Hill and Old Alluvial Zone, and Krishi Vigyan Kendra at Kalimpong of the former University shall, on and from the appointed day, be the employee of the University and shall cease to be an employee of the former University : Provided that such employee may exercise option for his retention by the former University and, thereupon, the former University shall absorb such employee in the vacant post of the same category, if any, in the former University : Provided further that the employees who have exercised option under the first proviso shall continue to remain to be the employees of the former University and shall be treated to be on deputation without payment of any deputation allowance till such employees are absorbed in the vacant posts of the same category in the former University;  (2)(a) - The process of absorption of the employees of the former University exercising option under the proviso to sub-section (1) in the vacant posts in the former University shall remain open for such period, not being less than five years, as may be decided by the committee constituted by the State Government under Section 60.
(b) Till such time as the process of absorption of the employees of the former University exercising option under the proviso to sub-section (1), in the various posts which have fallen vacant or will fall vacant in the former University in the same category is completed the former University shall not fill up such vacancies in the same category, either by way of promotion or otherwise.
(3)(a) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the State Government, in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor and the former University, may, by general or special order, transfer such employees of the former University, who seek option for transfer to the University, other than those mentioned in sub-section (1), on the day immediately before the appointed day, as the State Government may consider necessary, and, thereupon, such employees shall, with effect form such date as may be specified in the order, stand transferred to the University : Provided that no such order shall be issued without the consent of the employee concerned.
(b) Upon such transfer, the employees shall, with effect from the date specified in the order under this sub-section, be the employees of the University and shall cease to be the employees of the former University : Provided that such process of transfer of employees of the former University to the University shall remain open for such period, not being less than five years, as may be decided by the committee constituted by the State Government under Section 60.
(4) Every employee referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall hold office in the University on the same terms and conditions and on the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity as were admissible to such employee on the day immediately before the appointed day or on the date specified in the order, as the case may be, as if this Act had not been passed.
14.
It has been contended by the petitioner that in pursuance of provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 57 of the said Act, the Government of West Bengal directed the Vice-Chancellor of the said Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya to invite option from the erstwhile employees of the said Viswavidyalaya posted in areas falling under the jurisdiction of the said Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya for retention of their services in the said Viswavidyalaya.
The Vice-Chancellor invited option from all employees of the said Viswavidyalaya posted in the areas falling under the jurisdiction of the said Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya.
Thereafter the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya issued a notification showing the names of the employees who had exercised option for retention of their services in the said Viswavidyalaya.
Copy of the notification has been made Annexure P-3 to the Writ Petition.
15.
According to the petitioner, at the beginning of July 2001, the petitioner came to know that the said Viswavidyalaya was going to consider in the meeting of the Executive Council to be held on 20th July, 2001, cases of promotion of some Junior Superintendents to the post of Senior Superintendents which had by then fallen vacant in the said Viswavidyalaya.
The petitioner made representation for his absorption/placement in a vacant post of Senior Superintendent.
16.
The petitioner specifically mentioned that in accordance with the relevant provisions of the said Act he was declared a deputed employee to the said Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya by Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya by notification dated 17th May, 2001.
By the said notification it was declared that he would be taken back and absorbed in the vacant post of the same category in the said Viswavidyalaya.
The petitioner specifically pleased that his application was forwarded to the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya by Dr. AK Pal, Registrar (Acting) under Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2001.
Dr. SK Brahmachari, the Vice-Chancellor of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya also forwarded petitioner's application to the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya recommending strongly.
Copy of the said application containing the recommendation is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure P-4.
17.
Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya, however, did not consider the petitioner's application at all, as alleged by the petitioner.
The petitioner further contended that in a meeting presided over by the Vice- Chancellor, the Executive Council took a decision giving an appointment to the said three posts of Superintendent in favour of three Junior Superintendents viz. (1) Sri Krishna Mukherjee (2) Sri Siba Prasad Banik (3) Sri Dipendra Nath Seal who were not eligible to be promoted to the said posts before the absorption of the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of Section 57 of the Act.
18.
The petitioner contended that this fact will appear from the order of the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya issued on 10092001 which is Annexure P-5 to the Writ Petition.
19.
On 10092001 the Joint Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Agriculture Department wrote to the Vice-Chancellor to look into the case of petitioner's transfer personally as that seemed to be a clear case inasmuch as the desired transfer of the petitioner to the said Viswavidyalaya was permissible under the provisions of UBKV Act.
Copy of the said Memo is Annexure P-6 to the Writ Petition.
20.
Copies of other representations given by the petitioner are Annexure P-7 and P-8.
21.
In paragraph 20 of the Writ Petition it has been stated that on 19102001, Sri Sumantra Chowdhury, Principal Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Department of Agriculture also wrote to the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya for absorption of the employees from UBKV in terms of Section 57(2)(b) of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2000.
The said Principal Secretary requested the Vice-Chancellor to the said Viswavidyalaya to implement the provisions very strictly and not to fill up any vacancy in the said category either by way of promotion or otherwise till the process of absorption is completed.
Copy of the said Memo has been made Annexure P-9.
22.
On the question of petitioner's transfer, the Executive Council of the said Viswavidyalaya took a decision on 14022002 to the effect that the petitioner could be transferred on certain conditions.
The said conditions are mentioned hereinbelow :  (i) He will have to (sic) back to his previous post of Senior Assistant at BCKV on the date on which he was released from the said post of Senior Assistant in order to enable him to join the post of Superintendent at the earstwhile North Bengal Campus, Pundibari, Cooch Behar.
(ii) The difference of pay in between the post of Senior Assistant (which he would have drawn had he been continued to this post) and Superintendent (which he has drawn last) will be treated as personal pay to him on and from the date on which he physically joins his previous post of Senior Assistant at the Registrar's Department having been released from his present post of Superintendent.
(iii) His such personal pay as referred to in the foregoing para, will be gradually absorbed in future increment of pay.
(iv) His promotion to the next higher post of Junior Superintendent from respective effect, however, will be considered by the Promotion Committee after his joining the post of Senior assistant.
Copy of the said Memo has been made Annexure P-10.
23.
The authorities of the said Viswavidyalaya, according to the petitioner, were very much pressurized not to complete the process of absorption but to promote the employees of the said Viswavidyalaya to the post which had fallen and would fall vacant there.
24.
According to the petitioner most of the terms and conditions mentioned in the said Memo are illegal as they are contrary to the provisions enshrined in Section 57 of the said UBKV Act, 2002.
25.
The petitioner further contended that the Executive Council took a decision regarding the absorption of the petitioner on 14022002 but they communicated the decision through Memo dated 08.05.2002.
26.
The petitioner further stated that by 05.08.2002 the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya absorbed and or placed and or re-deployed almost all the members of the teaching staff who are transferred to the UBKV but insofar as the petitioner is concerned, did not pass any order.
27.
Under the same and one notification both the members of the teaching and non-teaching staff which included the petitioner were transferred and or treated on deputation to the said Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya.
28.
The petitioner contended that by a letter which is Annexure P-11 dated 05.08.2002 the teaching staffs have been absorbed and or re-deployed in the said Viswavidyalaya.
29.
According to the petitioner in spite of the said illegalities in the Memo dated 05.08.2002, since he was suffering from a number of insurmountable problems including problems of his health in the said UBKV at Cooch Behar, the petitioner by his letter dated 05.06.2002 informed the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya that he was agreeable to join the service of the said Viswavidyalaya at Mohanpur Campus without prejudice to his rights and privileges.
He also informed that he would join there as soon as he will be released from the deputation service at the said UBKV.
The petitioner requested the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya to take up the matter.
The letter of the petitioner is Annexure P-12.
30.
On receipt of such a letter, the Registrar informed the petitioner through his letter dated 7082002 that his prayer for absorption could not be accepted by them as the term "without prejudice to my rights and privileges" were not clarified by him.
The said Registrar, however, asked the petitioner to take further step in that regard.
Copy of the said letter has annexed to the Writ Petition and marked with letter P-13.
31.
Accordingly the petitioner by his letter dated 04.09.2002 informed the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya that by the above mentioned term he meant to say that he shall not deprived of any right or privilege allowed to him by the law of the land.
32.
According to the petitioner in spite of receiving his clarification the concerned authorities of the said Viswavidyalaya did not absorb him and copy of this letter of the petitioner has been made Annexure P-14.
33.
The petitioner alleged violation of provisions of Article 14 and stated and or submitted in the Writ Petition as well as in the written submission that the action and or inaction of the authorities are illegal, mala fide and arbitrary.
34.
The petitioner in paragraph 32 submitted that he has come to know that on and w.e.f.
1st January, 2003 there shall arise at least on vacancy in the said Viswavidyalaya in which the petitioner can very rightly and according to the law, be absorbed and or re-deployed.
35.
The petitioner formulated certain grounds and submitted that non- absorption of the petitioner by the said Viswavidyalaya is illegal, arbitrary, mala fide, discriminatory and is in violation of Section 57 of the Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2000.
36.
The petitioner also referred to the proviso of Section 57(i) of the said Act and ultimately the petitioner made the following prayers :  (a) Rule NISI upon the Respondents calling upon them to show cause why a writ in the nature of Mandamus shall not issue directing them to forbear from giving effect to and/or continuing to give effect to and/or giving further effect and/or withdraw, and/or cancel and/or rescind the impugned decision, if any, taken not to fill up the post of the same category by absorbing the petitioner which is now vacant and/or which will become vacant in the said Viswavidyalaya;  (b) Rule NISI upon the respondents calling upon them to show cause why a writ in the nature of Mandamus shall not issue directing them to fill up the post of the petitioner's category which has fallen vacant and/or which will fall vacant not by promoting any employee of the said Viswavidyalaya but by absorbing the petitioner and thus give effect to Section 57 of the said UBKV Act;  (c) Rule NISI upon the Respondents calling upon them to show cause why a writ in the nature of Certiorari shall not issue directing them to certify and transmit to this Hon'ble Court records pertaining to the non- absorption of the petitioner in the said Viswavidyalaya by appointing him to post of his category which has fallen vacant or which will fall vacant very soon; (d) Issue of appropriate writ or writs and/or order or orders and/or direction or directions, if no cause or insufficient cause is shown to this Rule;  37.
On behalf of the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 i.e. Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, the Vice-Chancellor and its Registrar, affidavit-in-opposition has been filed.
38.
In the affidavit-in-opposition the affirming respondents denied the allegations made by the petitioner.
39.
The respondents alleged that the petitioner was appointed in the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus in Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya by way of direct recruitment.
The petitioner was confirmed in the said post w.e.f.
01.10.1995 after completion of two years of service.
Respondents stated that the petitioner after getting the appointment letter wrote a letter to the said Viswavidyalaya for clarification of some Clauses mentioned in the order dated 22/24/06/1993 on the following points :  (a) Regarding basic pay in the post of Superintendent.
(b) Question was raised about two years in spite of his long service of twenty years.
(c) Clause (g) of the appointment order dated 22/24/06/1993.
40.
The respondents further stated in the opposition that in reply to the said representation dated 29.06.1993 the Registrar, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya informed him categorically that on joining to the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus, basic pay will be fixed as per terms applicable to direct appointment and as per terms in the order of appointment.
Clause (g) of the appointment order was also clarified by the Registrar by his letter dated 05.08.1993.
41.
In the opposition the respondents further submitted that after introduction of Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, Government of West Bengal, Agriculture Department, Education Branch introduced promotional benefit w.e.f.
1st November, 1985 for the non-teaching employees other than officers of the State aided Universities.
The said Government Order dated 17101985 contains the following clauses :  (i) The ratio of the number of non-teaching employees between the base post, first promotional post, second promotional post and third promotional post for different categories of employees shall be as below : (a) For categories of posts where there is one promotional channel the member of posts at the base level and the promotional level shall be in the ratio of 65 : 65 (i.e. 1:1)  (b) For categories of posts wherethere are two promotional channel, the number of posts at the base level, the first promotional level and the second promotional level shall be in the ratio of 65 : 65 : 2;  (c) For categories of posts where there are three promotional channels, the number of posts at the base level, the first promotional level, the second promotional level and the third promotional level shall be in the ratio of 65 : 65 : 2 : 1;  (ii) The eligibility period of the first promotion shall be 9 (nine) years from the date of first appointment.
That for the second promotion shall be 7 (seven) years from the date of promotion in the first promotional post and for the third promotion, eligibility shall be 5 (five) years from the date of promotion in the second promotional post;  (iii) The eligibility of promotion shall be determined strictly on seniority-cum-efficiency.
42.
The respondents further stated in the opposition that the petitioner was directly recruited in the substantive post of Superintendent which was created by the Government for Satellite Campus under BCKV at Cooch Behar in North Bengal.
The petitioner joined the said substantive post by way of direct recruitment.
The post of Superintendent now lying at the said Viswavidyalaya, Nadia at Mohanpur Campus are of promotional post which can be filled up by promotion only from the base post following the Government Order of 17th April, 1985.
The post held by the petitioner at North Bengal Campus was a substantive post and was filled up by way of direct recruitment.
The petitioner was a Senior Assistant before he was appointed to the post of Senior Superintendent.
43.
The respondents in their opposition submitted that the petitioner was appointed in a substantive post and entitled to get career advancement and the other non-teaching employee were promoted to the post of Senior Superintendent of Mohanpur Campus, are entitled to get stagnation increment.
If the petitioner is brought to the post of Senior Superintendent which were promotional posts, then the promotional channel of the eligible candidates would be affected.
44.
The respondents further submitted that in Service Law "Cadre" means the strength of a service or a part of a service sanctioned as a separate unit, in the instant case the petitioner was holding ex-Cadre post.
It is also submitted that the Cadre post cannot be filled up by ex-Cadre.
45.
The respondents relied on Section 57(2) (b) of the Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act and also relied on a Supreme Court decision reported in AIR 1974 S C. Page-1755 and submitted that the seniors in the Cadre post should not be affected by reason of transfer of establishment or integration of Cadres.
The respondents submitted that the Act has provided a limit of 5 (five) years for absorption and the petitioner cannot claim the post as a matter of right.
46.
The respondents submitted that the Writ Petition should be dismissed.
47.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties and considered their respective submissions, considered also the averments made in the Writ Petition and the affidavit-in-opposition, considered the written notes on submissions of both the parties.
48.
Let me see the admitted position insofar as the services of the petitioner is concerned.
Admittedly the petitioner joined the University of Kalyani on 09031973.
Admittedly Kalyani University was bifurcated w.e.f.
09041974.
One part of the same was named as Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya and other part remained as Kalyani University.
The petitioner as a temporary measure was placed under Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya (hereinafter termed as said Viswavidyalaya) and the services of the petitioner was transferred to the said Viswavidyalaya w.e.f.
01.12.1974 and he was confirmed as Junior Assistant with retrospective effect from 09.03.1975 and the order of confirmation was issued by the said Viswavidyalaya through its Memo dated 10031978.
It is, therefore, admitted and settled that the petitioner remained under said Viswavidyalaya.
A notification admittedly was published on 21041993 by the said Viswavidyalaya inviting applications from eligible employees for the post of Superintendent and Accountant required at North Bengal Campus.
Posts were four.
49.
By an order dated 22.06.1993 the Vice-Chancellor of the said Viswavidyalaya appointed the petitioner to the post of Superintendent in North Bengal Campus of the said Viswavidyalaya.
His pay was fixed and it was said that the petitioner shall be treated as direct recruit.
The petitioner reported for duty, he remained on probation for a period of two years from the date of joining to the post.
Along with other terms, there was a term that the petitioner will have to serve anywhere in West Bengal.
The Registrar admittedly through his office Memo dated 06.08.1993 communicated that on joining the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus, the basic pay of the petitioner will be fixed as per terms.
From the next letter dated 05/06/08/1993 issued by the Registrar of the said Viswavidyalaya it appeared that basic pay in the post of Superintendent at North Bengal Campus will be as per terms applicable to direct appointment and in the said Memo it was also stated that the petitioner will be allowed to enjoy his entitlements of financial benefits for his past service.
The said Memo was addressed to the petitioner.
50.
Now Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya (in short UBKV) was established through a notification dated 22nd August, 2000 and the same started functioning w.e.f.
1st February, 2001.
In pursuance of sub-section (1) of Section 57 under Chapter VIII, the State Government directed the Vice- Chancellor of UBKV to invite option from the earstwhile employees of BCKV (said Viswavidyalaya) poste n areas falling under the jurisdiction of UBKV for retention of their services in BCKV.
Accordingly, the Vice-Chancellor, UBKV invited option from all employees under the jurisdiction of UBKV.
So many employees exercised option for retention of their services.
The invitees of option included the name of the writ petitioner.
The said Memo was issued by the Registrar (Acting) under the order of the Vice-Chancellor, BCKV.
From the said Memo all the employees were directed to prefer option regarding transfer of Campus in pursuance of sub-section (1) of Section 57.
It was stated in the said Memo that the employees of the said Viswavidyalaya shall be treated as to be on deputation without payment of any deputational allowance till such employees are absorbed in the vacant posts of the same category in BCKV.
51.
From this Memo at appeared that Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya was started and the employees of Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya who were posted in areas falling under the jurisdiction of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya were asked to give option as to whether they are agreed to retain their services under Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya.
52.
The petitioner was one of them and he wrote a letter to the Vice- Chancellor praying for his absorption and placement against the vacant post of same category.
This letter has written by the petitioner on 17th July, 2001.
In the said letter the petitioner stated that he is suffering from some critical chronic disease for which he needs consultation with specialist physician and there is no such specialist doctor available at Cooch Behar for which he is to move at least for Kalyani or Calcutta.
53.
It further appears from Memo dated 10092001 of Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Mohanpur, Nadia that some employees were given promotion.
54.
From Annexure P-6 it appears that Joint Secretary, Agriculture Department, Government of West Bengal recommended the claim of the petitioner to the Vice-Chancellor, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Mohanpur, Nadia in the following manner :  "You are requested kindly to look into the case personally as this seems to be a clear case...... under your authority."
55.
It appears further from Annexure P-7 to the Writ Petition, which is a letter written by the petitioner to the Vice-Chancellor making same prayer once again.
56.
P-8 of the Annexure appears to be an appeal for justice where the petitioner made the same prayer to the Vice-Chancellor on 24.09.2001.
In the conclusion of this appeal for justice the petitioner prayed for his absorption against the existing vacancy of Senior Superintendent which is the same category of post as the petitioner holds at present being appointed for the post of Superintendent under the administrative authority of BCKV at its North Bengal Campus.
It was also stated by the petitioner in the said appeal for justice that when a new Agriculture University named Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya was started functioning, the petitioner along with other employees in terms of Section 57 of the West Bengal Act, XX of 2000 became the employee of Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya.
The petitioner stated in this appeal for justice that disappointing him from being absorbed in Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya service against the existing vacancy of Superintendent, the same category of post as the petitioner holds at present were filled up by promoting three incumbents dishonouring the provision in the sub-section 2(b) of Section 57 under Chapter 8 of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2000.
Thereafter a Memo comes from the Registrar (Acting) of the said Viswavidyalaya where it was written that the petitioner now serving at Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya on deputation, is transferred to Mohanpur Campus of the said Viswavidyalaya subject to fulfilment of four conditions.
57.
First condition out of the said four is that the petitioner will have to go back to his previous post of Senior Assistant at Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya on the date on which he was released from the said post of Senior Assistant in order to enable him to join the post of Superintendent at the earstwhile North Bengal Campus.
In the said Memo it was also stated that the difference of pay in between the post of Senior Assistant (which he would have drawn had he been continued to this post) and Superintendent (which, he has drawn last) will be treated as his personal pay to him on and from the date on which he physically joins his previous post of Senior Assistant at the Registrar's Department having been released from his personal post of Superintendent.
58.
In the conclusion of the Memo the petitioner was directed to communicate the Registrar in writing as to when he will be able to join at Mohanpur Campus accepting the above terms and conditions in the matter of his transfer to Mohanpur Campus within a month from the date of issuance of the letter.
59.
The petitioner on 05.06.2002 in answer to the earlier Memo informed about his willingness to join in Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya service at Mohanpur Campus without prejudice to his rights and privileges and he may join the post immediately after released from deputation.
60.
The Registrar in turn informed the petitioner that his letter cannot accepted by the administration as connotation of the words "without prejudice to my rights and privileges" were not clarified by him.
The petitioner, however, through a letter dated 04.09.2002 informed the Registrar in the manner as follows :  61.
In acknowledging the receipt of the Memo No. Admn/BCKV/P6- 35/76/D1165, Dt. 08.08.2002 I am humbly to state the following :  The clarification to the words as quoted from my letter is that, I have mean to state I shall not be deprived of any right or privilege allowed to me by the law of the land.
62.
It is a fact that the petitioner was appointed in a regular manner and was posted as Superintendent/Senior Superintendent lastly.
The relevant statutory provisions for the purpose of consideration of the claim of the petitioner may be quoted hereunder which is Section 57(1) with its 2 proviso of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act :  "Provided that such employee may exercise option for his retention by the former University and, thereupon, the former University shall absorb such employee in the vacant post of the same category, if any, in the former University."
63.
The second Proviso to Section 57(1) of the said act provides as follows :  "Provided further that the employees who have exercised option under the first proviso shall continue to remain to be the employees of the former University and shall be treated to be on deputation without payment of any deputation allowance till such employees are absorbed in the vacant posts of the same category in the former University."
64.
When considering the aforementioned provisions of the Act it may also be considered that the petitioner submitted option for retention of his service in Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya and thereafter he continued to remain as employee over there.
When an option has been invited on behalf of the University and in terms of the said option the employee has informed the University about his acceptance of the offer, the contract becomes concluded.
65.
Section 57(2)(b) of the Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya Act, 2000 also becomes relevant to the context which is quoted hereinbelow :  "(b) Till such time as the process of absorption of the employees of the former University exercising option under the proviso to sub-section (1), in the various posts which have fallen vacant or will fall vacant in the former University in the same category is completed, the former University shall not fill up such vacancies in the same category, either by way of promotion or otherwise."
66.
The respondents relied upon a decision reported in AIR 1974 SC Page-1755 (The General Manager, South Central Railway v. A.V.R.
Siddhanti & Ors.).
67.
In this judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that the personnel drawn from three different sources and subsequently integrated into a single Cadre, such personnel from Category-I always treated as distinct unit while personnel from Categories 2 & 3 becoming members of some class and governed by some conditions of service and in such event on winding up of grains of department of railway where the employees were there, if they are appointed in other permanent departments classification of grains of staff for seniority etc., in permanent departments, if there is any differentiation, that does not contravene the provisions of Article 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
68.
With respect to the learned counsel for the respondents, I disagree with such formulation of law.
It is a fact that Section 57(1) with its provisos 57(2)(b) and the appointment of the petitioner as Senior Superintendent are not disputed.
69.
The learned counsel for the petitioner in this context has referred to the citations reported in AIR 1964 SC Page-962 (CS Rawjee and Experts Newspaper's case) reported in AIR 1986 SC Page-872 and sought to establish the doctrine of non-traverse which I propose not to deal with further inasmuch as i.e. the settled position of law.
70.
From the part of the opposition and or the respondents the only contention that it is a unified Cadre and the petitioner at best can claim career advancement benefit and not absorption permanently in the post he retained.
The suggestion or the theory from the part of the opposition is obvious, when there is no scope for promotion question of stagnation benefit or career advancement benefit arises.
It can also be said that promotion is the prerogative of the management.
But is it a case of promotion ?
The answer with respect will be in the negative or a big zero.
It is a case or claim of reasonable expectation and doctrine of legitimate expectation comes into play.
If the correspondence and the sequence of facts are studied in a careful manner, it will appear that the petitioner deserves absorption in the regular post in which he was acting and the statutory provision quoted above also pushes him to the said direction.
In that view of the matter in my opinion, the petitioner is entitled to absorption in the post which will fall vacant in the promotional post inasmuch as already three persons have been promoted following the statutory provisions and that discrimination at that point of time was time was made but the petitioner did not challenge the same and now also admittedly he is not interested to challenge those three promotions.
71.
On careful consideration it appears that the provisions of Articles 14 & 16 enshrined in the Constitution have been violated in the instant case and though the Court can only direct consideration of promotion, but in the instant case because of the admitted gross violation of the Constitutional provisions this Court thinks the petitioner should be given promotion which will fall vacant and which suits in correspondence with the present posting of the petitioner.
72.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioner such promotion within a period of three months from the date of passing of the order.
73.
The petitioner will be entitled to all the benefits available or consequent to such promotion.
74.
The Writ Petition is thus disposed of with the above direction on the respondent authorities.
In the circumstances there will be no further order as to costs.
Urgent Xeroxed certified copy, if applied for will be given to the parties expeditiously.
Order accordingly.