SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP No. 3030 of 1989 and CWP No. 6718 of 1989 as these involve the same questions of law and facts.
Facts have, however, been taken from CWP No. 3030 of 1989.
2.
The petitioners, who were borne on the seniority list of Masters/Mistresses of the Punjab Education Department, were temporarily adjusted against the posts of Lecturer.
Some of them were promoted as officiating Headmasters/Headmistresses before 111978.
During that period, the Second Pay Commission submitted its report with regard to the revision of pay-scales of the Punjab Government employees and the revised pay was to be fixed on the basis of Punjab Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979 which came into force w.e.f 111978.
Complete formula is given in the aforesaid rules with regard to the fixation of pay of different cadres and different posts.
According to the petitioners, a decision was taken by the State of Punjab on 13.3.1980 that where the Government employee had reached the maximum of the existing scale subsequent to 1.1.1977, the next increment in the revised scale shall be granted in completion of service for the full incremental period from the date on which the employee reached the maximum of the existing scale.
In the case of an employee, who had reached the maximum of the existing scale for more than a years on 111978, the next increment will be allowed on 2nd January, 1978.
Subsequently, the aforesaid rules were clarified.
The petitioners were holding the posts of Lecturers and were held up at the maximum of the pay-scale of Lecturers for a period of more than 1 year prior to 111978.
All the petitioners were promoted as Headmasters/Headmistresses prior to 111978.
The Lecturers and Headmasters/Headmistresses were granted the pay-scales of Rs. 700-1300 and Rs. 700-1580 + Rs. 20 P.P respectively w.e.f 111978.
The pay of the petitioners as Lecturers and Headmasters/Headmistresses was fixed separately, on or about 211978.
After a period of ten years, they pay of the petitioners has been re-fixed, on the basis of a letter issued by the Finance Department on 20121988 (Annexure P- 5).
In the aforesaid order the Treasury Officers have been directed to make recovery for the over payment of salary to the petitioners.
One of the petitioners submitted representation complaining that the aforesaid order/refixation of pay has been passed without observing rules of natural justice and was therefore, non-est in the eyes of law.
The respondents did not take any decision on the representation.
Hence, the petitioners filed the present petition seeking the issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 20121988 Annexure P-5.
The petitioners also seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents not to change the pay fixation of the petitioners.
3.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
It has been stated that the pay of the petitioners had been wrongly fixed because the posts of Lecturers are out of normal line of service and not covered under the rules providing for the promotion to the posts of Headmasters/Headmistresses.
From the post of Master/Mistress, an employee can be either promoted as a Headmasters/Headmistresses or as a Lecturer.
There was no provision for a Lecturer to be promoted as Headmasters/Headmistresses.
Consequently, the pay had been wrongly fixed by the impugned order and the bona fide mistake which had been committed in fixation of the pay of the petitioners has been corrected.
Therefore, it was not necessary to give any opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
In any event, the recovery, if any, will be effected only after the rules of natural justice have been observed.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties.
Mr. Chopra submits that the impugned order Annexure P-5 is liable to be quashed as it had been passed without giving any opportunity to the petitioners.
As a consequence of the aforesaid order, the pay of the petitioners would be reduced with retrospective effect.
In fact, in the aforesaid order, it has been categorically directed that the over payment already made be recovered from the petitioners.
On the other hand, Ms. Tuli submits that the order Annexure P-5 does not take away any legal right of the petitioners, inasmuch as only a mistake inadvertently committed has been corrected.
Under the rules, the petitioners would not be entitled to the revised pay which was wrongly granted to them.
Therefore, it would not be correct to say that the pay of the petitioners is sought to be reduced with retrospective effect.
5.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
It is a settled proposition of law that no order causing civil consequences can be passed without observing rules of natural justice.
Before any such order is passed, it is necessary to issue a show-cause notice, seeking the explanation of the employee against whom the said order is proposed to be passed.
Reduction of pay, especially with retrospective effect, would undoubtedly cause civil consequences.
In such circumstances, it was necessary to give an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
I find support for this view from a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, 1986 RRR 341 : AIR 1981 SC 136.
In the aforesaid case, it has been held by the Supreme Court that "the requirements of natural justice are met only if opportunity to represent is given in view of proposed action.
The demands of natural justice are not met even if the very person proceeded against has furnished the information on which the action is based, if it is furnished in a casual way or for some other purpose".
It has further been observed that "the term "Civil Consequences" undoubtedly covers infraction of not merely property or personal rights but of civil liberties, material deprivations and non-pecuniary damages.
In its comprehensive connotation, everything that affects a citizen in his civil life inflicts a civil consequence".
The Supreme Court also observed as follows :-  "24...
In our view the principles of natural justice know of no exclusionary rule dependent on whether it would have made any difference if natural justice had been observed.
The non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice independently or proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary.
It comes from a person who has denied justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced.
As we said earlier where on the admitted or indisputable facts only one conclusion is possible and under the law only one penalty is permissible, the Court may not issue its writ to compel the observance of natural justice, not because it is not necessary to observe natural justice but because Courts do not issue futile writs.
We do not agree with the contrary view taken by the Delhi High Court in the judgment under appeal."
This view was subsequently followed by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Virender Chawla v. The Chandigarh Administration and another, 1984(1) SLR P&H 452.
I am unable to accept the accept the submission of Ms. Tuli that the impugned order would not cause any civil consequence.
Even if the pay of the petitioners had been wrongly fixed they were entitled to demonstrate before the authority that the pay had been correctly fixed.
This opportunity of hearing is to be given by the competent authority.
A decision which is rendered without observing the rules of natural justice is void ab initio.
It is liable to be set aside on this short ground alone.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 20121988 (Annexure P-5).
The respondents shall be at liberty to pass fresh orders after giving an opportunity to the petitioners and observing the rules of natural justice.
Petition allowed.