GS Singhvi, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against order dated 6.9.2001 passed by the learned Single Judge vide which he allowed Civil Writ Petition No 8538 of 2001 filed by respondent-Ram Niwas and quashed his compulsory retirement from service.
2.
The respondent joined service as Constable in the erstwhile State of Punjab on 1021966.
On the creation of the State of Haryana w.e.f.
1111996, his services were allocated to the new State.
After passing Lower School Course in April, 1975, his name was brought on List `C'.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 31121976.
In March, 1998, he passed Intermediate School Course.
His name was brought on List `B' w.e.f.
17.11.1988 and he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector (A.S.I.)
with effect from that date.
He was promoted as ad hoc Sub Inspector vide order dated 2631991 passed by Superintendent of Police, Karnal (copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure A-I along with C.M.
No. 1650 of 2002).
3.
While he was posted as ad hoc Sub Inspector, a departmental enquiry was got conducted against the respondent by Superintendent of Police, Ambala and vide order dated 6.9.1993, he was reverted to the post of A.S.I.
He challenged that order in Civil Writ Petition No 18383 of 1994 which was allowed by the learned Single Judge on 681998.
4.
After about 3-1/2 months of the quashing of his reversion by this Court, Superintendent of Police, Ambala vide his order dated 27111998 dismissed the respondent from service.
However, that order was not given effect to and another order of dismissal was passed by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala on 30121998.
The appeal filed by the respondent was dismissed by Director General of Police, Haryana vide his order dated 10.1.1999.
The respondent challenged the order of dismissal in Civil Writ Petition No 9121 of 1999 which was allowed by the Single Bench of the High Court on 9121999.
L.P.A. No. 6 of 1999 filed by the appellants was dismissed by the Division Bench on 3152000 and Special Leave Petition No. 2222/2001 was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 342001.
5.
Immediately thereafter, Superintendent of Police, Ambala issued notice dated 29/3052001 for compulsory retirement of the respondent under Rule 918 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Volume-I (for short, `the Rules') read with Rule 5.32 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
For the sake of convenient reference, the notice of retirement is reproduced below:-  "Notice for Retirement You, Ad hoc S.I.
Ram Niwas No. 102/A of this district attained the age of 55 years on 922001, being your date of birth is 10.2.1946.
Your services are no more required by the department.
You are, therefore, served with a three months retirement notice as provided under Rule 918 of Punjab Police Rules, Vol.
I read with Rule 5.32 of C.S.R.
Vol. II you shall stand retired from Govt. service on the expiry of this three months notice.
Sd/- Superintendent of Police Ambala, 2952001."
6.
The respondent challenged the aforesaid notice in Civil Writ Petition No 8538 of 2001 on several grounds including the following :-  (a) Superintendent of Police, Ambala was not competent to compulsorily retire him from service; (b) there was no adversity in his service record of last ten years which could justify his compulsory retirement from service; and (c) the order of retirement was vitiated due to mala fide and arbitrary exercise of power.
7.
The appellants contested the writ petition.
In the written statement filed on their behalf, it was pleaded that the writ petitioner (respondent herein) was retired because he had earned adverse remarks relating to integrity in the Annual Confidential Report of the year 1993-94 and four punishments of warning and censure.
It was further pleaded that the respondent's case was placed before the Officers' Committee as per the policy framed by the government and on receipt of letter No. 8/34/2001-6HGI dated 1552001 from Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Home Department, Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala directed Superintendent of Police, Ambala to retire the respondent after giving him three months notice.
A copy of letter dated 1552001 was annexed with the written statement as annexure R-6.
8.
The learned Single Judge relied on the judgments of this Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana, 1989(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 61 : 1989 SLR 345(2); Hira Lal v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) SCT 422 (P&H) : 1999(1) RSJ 88 and Ram Lal v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) SCT 237 (P&H) : 1997(2) SLR 421 and held that Superintendent of Police, Ambala was not competent to order compulsory retirement of the respondent, who was holding the post of ad hoc Sub Inspector and accordingly, quashed notice-cum-order dated 2952001.
9.
Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate General argued that the view expressed by the learned Single Judge on the issue of competence of Superintendent of Police, Ambala to compulsorily retire the respondent is patently erroneous and the order passed by him is liable to be set aside.
He pointed out that the respondent had been promoted as ad hoc Sub Inspector by Superintendent of Police, Karnal and argued that the notice of retirement issued by an officer of the co-ordinate rank under Rule 918(1) of the Rules did not suffer from any jurisdictional or legal infirmity.
Shri Dahiya also relied on Rule 121 of the Rules and argued that Superintendent of Police, Ambala was competent to compulsorily retire the respondent, who was holding the post of ad hoc Sub Inspector because he is empowered to make appointment on that post.
He then referred to the decision taken in the Officers' Committee for premature retirement of the respondent and argued that the direction given by Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala for implementation of the decision taken at the level of the government cannot be nullified on the ground that Superintendent of Police, Ambala did not have the power to compulsorily retire the respondent.
10.
Shri IS Balhara, learned counsel for the respondent supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that Superintendent of Police, Ambala did not have the power to retire the respondent, who was holding the post of ad hoc Sub Inspector.
He further argued that even if, the Court comes to the conclusion that the Superintendent of Police was competent to retire the respondent under Rule 918(1) of the Rules, the order of the learned Single Judge may not be disturbed because the officer concerned had acted under the dictates of the superior authorities and did not independently apply his mind on the issue of desirability and propriety of compulsorily retiring the respondent.
In the end, Shri Balhara submitted that the Court may not interfere with the order of the learned Single Judge because during the pendency of the appeal, the respondent had superannuated from service.
11.
We have given serious thought to the retire matter.
Rule 918(1) and (2) of the Rules, which has direct bearing on the decision of this appeal, reads as under :-  "9.18(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, a retiring pension is granted to an officer - (a) who is permitted to retire from service after completing qualifying service of twenty-five years or such lesser period of as may, for any class of officer be prescribed; or (b) who is compulsorily retired under sub-rule (2) after completing twenty- five years' qualifying service; or (c) who is retired by the appointing authority on or after he attains the age of 55 years, by giving him not less than three months notice; or (d) who retires on or after attaining the age of 55 years by giving not less than three months' notice of his intention to retire to the appointing authority : Provided that where the notice is given before the age of fifty-five years is attained, it shall be given effect to from a date not earlier than the date on which the age of fifty-five years is attained.
Note :- Appointing authority retains an absolute right to retire any Government servant on or after he has attained the age of 55 years without assigning any reason.
A corresponding right is also available to such a Government servant to retire on or after he has attained the age of 55 years.
(2) The Inspector-General of Police may, with the previous approval of the State Government, compulsorily retire any Police Officer, other than an officer belonging to Indian Police Service or Haryana State Police Service who has completed twenty-five years' qualifying service, without giving any reasons.
An officer who is so compulsorily retired will not be entitled to claim any special compensation for his retirement.
Note 1 :- The right to retire compulsorily shall not be exercised except when it is in the public interest to dispense with the further services of an officer, such as on account of inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct.
Thus the rule is intended for use - (i) against an officer whose efficiency is impaired but against whom it is not desirable to make formal charges of inefficiency or who has ceased to be fully efficient i.e., when an officer's value is clearly incommensurate with the pay which he draws but not to such a degree as to warrant his retirement on a compassionate allowance.
It is not the intention to use the provisions of this rule as a financial weapon that is to say the provisions should be used in only the case of an officer who is concerned (considered ?)
unfit for retention on personal as opposed to financial grounds.
(ii) in cases where reputation for corruption, dishonesty or infamous conduct is clearly established even though no specific instance is likely to be proved.
Note 2 :- The officer shall be given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make against the proposed action and such representation shall be taken into consideration before his compulsory retirement is ordered.
In all cases of compulsory retirement of enrolled police officers, the Inspector-General of Police shall effect such retirement only with the previous approval of the State Government in accordance with the instructions, if any, issued by the Government on the subject from time to time.
Note 3 :- The officer whose duty it would be to fill the post if vacant, shall record his orders on the application to retire, which, if in vernacular, should be accompanied by a translation in English.
If the officer who applies for pension is permitted to retire, the application shall be forwarded with the pension papers."
An analysis of the above reproduced provisions shows that in terms of the Note appended below sub-rule (1) of Rule 918, the appointing authority can, without assigning any reason, retire an employee on or after his attaining the age of 55 years.
Likewise, an employee can seek voluntary retirement after attaining the age of 55 years.
Sub-rule (2) postulates compulsory retirement of any police officer other than an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service or Haryana State Police Service, who has completed 25 years' qualifying service.
This power is to be exercised by the Inspector General of Police with the previous approval of the State Government.
Note-1 appended to this sub-rule lays down that the right to compulsorily retire a police officer shall not be exercised except when it is in public interest to dispense with the services of such officer on the ground of inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct.
Note-2 requires that before ordering compulsory retirement of an officer, the competent authority shall give him adequate opportunity of making representation against the proposed auction.
12.
In the light of the above, we shall now consider whether the learned Single Judge erred in quashing the compulsory retirement of the respondent.
A reading of the notice of retirement extracted hereinabove shows that Superintendent of Police, Ambala had invoked Rule 918(1) of the Rules under which the appointing authority has an absolute right to retire any official on or after attaining the age of 55 years.
The argument of Shri IS Balhara which found favour with the learned Single Judge is that in view of Rule 139 of the Rules, Deputy Inspector General of Police alone will be deemed to be the appointing authority for the post of Sub Inspector and as such, Superintendent of Police, Ambala did not have the power to compulsorily retire the respondent.
As against this, the argument of Shri Vijay Dahiya is that in terms of Rule 121 of the Rules, Superintendent of Police is the appointing authority for the post of Sub Inspector.
In our opinion, in the peculiar facts of this case, it is not necessary to finally adjudicate on the controversy whether the Superintendent of Police or the Deputy Inspector General of Police is the appointing authority for the post of Sub Inspector and whether Superintendent of Police, Ambala was competent to compulsorily retire him because it is an undisputed position that the respondent had, in fact, been promoted as ad hoc Sub Inspector by Superintendent of Police, Karnal vide his order dated 2631991 and as on the date of compulsory retirement, he was holding that post.
In this view of the matter, it is not possible to agree with the learned counsel for the respondent that Superintendent of Police, Ambala was not competent to order compulsory retirement of his client.
13.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned conclusion, we are convinced that the order of the learned Single Judge does not call for interference.
A look at the Note appended below Rule 918(1) of the Rules shows that the power to compulsory retire an employee is to be exercised by the appointing authority.
This necessarily means that the appointing authority has to make its own assessment regarding the suitability and desirability of retaining an employee, who has attained the age of 55 years.
For this purpose, it is required to consider the entire service record of the employee including his Annual Confidential Reports and the Departmental enquiries and punishments, if any, with greater emphasis on the record of immediate past and then decide whether the employee should be allowed to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years.
In the present case, no exercise was undertaken by Superintendent of Police, Ambala to evaluate the service record of the respondent for the purpose of forming an opinion whether or not it would be in public interest to retain him in service beyond the age of 55 years.
Rather, he acted under the dictates of Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala, who too did not independently apply mind to the service record of the respondent and simply forwarded the decision taken by the Officers Committee.
Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that compulsory retirement of the respondent is vitiated due to non-application of mind by the appointing authority.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.