VK Bali, J (Oral) - By this common order, we propose to dispose of two Letters Patent Appeals bearing Nos. 958 and 959 of 2002, as common questions of law and facts arise in both these appeals.
The bare minimum fact that need necessary mention have, however, been extracted from LPA No. 958 of 2002.
2.
Challenge in the present appeal is to order dated 1612002 recorded by learned Single Judge in CWP No. 17469 of 1998, by which the writ petition filed by the respondents herein seeking regularisation of service was allowed.
The operative part of judgment passed by learned Single Judge reads thus :-  "I do not subscribe to the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
The object of the policy was that a person who had put in three years service should be considered for regularisation as per the terms of the policy.
Admittedly, the petitioners have put in three years service though under the interim orders of this Court.
Therefore, they are entitled to be considered for regularisation as per the policy dated 2312001."
3.
It is not disputed during the course of arguments that relief asked by the respondents has been given only on the ground that the respondents had put in three years service.
The three years aforesaid includes the period, under which the respondents had worked on account of order of interim stay during pendency of the writ petition.
This Court is of the firm view that the position with regard to continuance of an employee for a specified period entitling him to regularisation of the service has to be seen on the date when the petition is filed and the period for which the employee works by virtue of ad-interim stay granted by the Court cannot be counted towards the requisite period.
4.
This question has precisely been dealt with by a Division Bench of this Court in Gurpal Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, (1993-1) Punjab Law Reporter 232, relevant part whereof runs thus :-  "It will, thus, be seen that the interim order passed by this Court staying the termination of the services of adhoc employees operated first to delay and later as a bar to the appointment of regularly selected candidates - a consequence that could never have been intended.
Be that as it may, there can be no manner of doubt that in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution pertaining to regularisation of services of adhoc employees on the completion of the specified period or conditions, the position to be seen is as on the date of the filing of the petition.
In other words, the petitioner cannot, in such a case, be permitted to add on the period of his continuance in service by virtue of an interim order passed by the High Court, and to thereby fulfil the requisite length of service to claim regularisation of his service."
5.
Mr. Sharma, learned senior counsel representing the respondents, however, contends that there are number of other points involved in this case, based upon pleadings and the accompanied documents.
The respondents were even otherwise entitled to regularisation of their service.
He also mentions that such points that have been taken in this petition, have also been taken in Civil Writ Petition No. 3124 of 2003, which was ordered to be listed for hearing alongwith this LPA  6.
We do not, at this stage, want to comment upon the merit of the other contentions, that might have been raised in the writ petition.
Suffice it however, to say that the respondents are, indeed, entitled to decision on the said points but however, insofar as, the present LPA is concerned, the same has to be allowed, as the writ petition has been allowed only by taking into consideration that the respondents answered pre-requisite of the regularisation of having put in three years of service on the dint of interim stay granted in their favour.
This order cannot possibly sustain.
That being so, we allow this LPA and set aside order passed by learned Single Judge dated 1612002 and remit case to learned Single Judge, with liberty to the respondents to take all points that might have been raised in the petition seeking regularisation.
Surely, the respondents would be entitled to seek decision of connected writ petitions alongwith the present case before learned Single Judge.
Appeal allowed.