VK Bali, J (Oral) - Whether a military personnel is entitled to disability pension if he suffers an injury in midst of his sanctioned leave, is the only question that has been posed for an answer in the instant Letters Patent Appeal filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent by the Union of India against the judgment of learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 11550 of 1997 decided on 10072000.
2.
The learned Single Judge found claim for disability pension sustainable even if a person belonging to armed forces had sustained an injury resulting into unfitness for service, in midst of his leave.
3.
The undisputed facts of the case reveal that the petitioner in the Civil Writ Petition and the respondent in the Letters Patent Appeal joined the Indian Army as Sepoy in the year 1965.
In October, 1990, he submitted his leave application which was sanctioned by the respondent and he was granted leave from 08101990 to 24.10.1990.
Unfortunately, on 11101990, he met with an accident and sustained injuries.
It is the case of the petitioner himself that he was plying a tractor and while crossing the road, he fell down.
He was got admitted to Military Hospital, Amritsar on 11101990 itself.
He had suffered multiple injuries.
Thereafter, he was examined by the Medical Board and it was found that he had sustained multiple injuries and had become disabled and his disability was more than 25%.
Consequent upon his disablement, he was discharged from military service.
It may, however, be mentioned that the case of the Union of India has been that the petitioner was discharged on 31122001, but the same was on the completion of his term of engagement.
We, however, need not to go into this question as concededly even if the petitioner might have been discharged on completion of his term of engagement, but as he had suffered disability to the extent of more than 25%, he would still be entitled to service element of the disability pension.
Therefore, the only question, as mentioned above, is, as to whether a person would be entitled to disability pension on sustaining injuries in the manner as mentioned above.
4.
While issuing notice of motion on 18122000, a Division Bench consisting one of us (VK Bali, J), passed the following order :-  "Inter alia contends that it is not a case where petitioner/respondent might have met with an accident while coming back to unit after availing casual/annual leave, as the case may be.
Quite to the contrary, petitioner met with an accident during the vacation that he had at his native place and far before the expiry of the leave.
In support of his contention, learned counsel relies upon Jarnail Singh v. Union of India, 1997(2) PLR 580 : 1997(3) SCT 484 (P&H).
5.
The only, but forceful contention raised in support of this appeal is that the petitioner suffered injuries resulting into disability for such reasons which were wholly unattributable to the military service.
The injury/ies suffered by him cannot, thus, be termed as attributable to military service or aggravated due to military service.
For the aforesaid contention, the learned counsel relies on a Division Bench judgment of this court in Jarnail Singh v. Union of India (supra).
6.
The Division Bench judgment of this court in our view fully covers the case in favour of the appellant.
The facts of the cited case reveal that the petitioner was selected as a Sepoy in the Indian Army on 08091988 and consequently became subject to the provisions of the Indian Army Act and other rules and regulations.
On 2141991, the petitioner proceeded on casual leave and he was to return on 28041991.
Unfortunately, the right hand of the petitioner was crushed at home when he was operating wheat thresher.
This injury resulted in amputation of his right hand and consequent disability to him.
He was invalidated out of Army Service on 30121991.
He raised a claim for grant of disability pension, which was declined vide order dated 17.09.1992 and his appeal also brought no tangible results.
Thus, writ petition was filed, which was dismissed after taking into consideration the entire case law on the issue as also the relevant provisions like Paras 173 and 175 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, Rule 2 of Appendix II and Para 13 of the Entitlement Rules to Casualty Pensionary Awards to the Armed Forces Personnel, 1982.
After taking into consideration the relevant provisions of the Army Rules as also the consistent view taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and various High Courts, it was observed, "Thus from the consistent view taken by various Courts including the Hon'ble Apex Court, it appears to us that the first question has to be answered against the respondents as it is really no longer res integra and has been fairly and elaborately answered in the above pronouncements.
Therefore, we have no hesitation in holding that a person subject to the provisions of the Army Act, even if proceeds on casual leave, would be treated on duty and would be entitled to the benefits accruing therefrom in accordance with law."
These judgments came on facts where the concerned army personnel being on casual leave or ordinary leave, was going to his home from his unit for from home to the unit for joining his services, whereas, in the present case, the petitioner was at his home and enjoying leave period.
7.
Learned Division Bench made distinction in paragraph 14 of the judgment as follows :-  "As noticed in the aforesaid case a member of the force who proceeds on casual leave or returns from casual leave or while on casual leave goes to get a ticket or warrant for his return etc. suffers an injury which ultimately results in invalidating from Army, of the member of the force, that could be termed as an injury or disability attributable to military service.
While on the other hand a person who may be doing some act at home which even remotely does not fall within the scope of his duties or functions as a member of the force nor is remotely connected with the function of the military service and expected standard and way of living of such member of the force cannot be termed as an injury or disability attributable to military service.
For example, a person who gets drunk while on casual leave, fights with his neighbours, inflicts injuries or suffers injuries, resulting in some disability to him as a result to which he is invalided out of Army with some extent of disability, to our mind cannot be said to be a disability attributable to or aggravated by military service."
It is apparent from reading of the various judgments on the issue as also the observations made by the learned Division Bench that for entitlement of disability pension, some connection even though remote with the functions of the military service has to be shown.
The disability claim of the petitioner in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) was declined.
8.
Mr. Kathuria, the learned counsel representing the petitioner in original lis, relies on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Joginder Singh v. Union of India, 1996(2) SLR 149 and a Division Bench of this Court in Shri Krishan Dahiya v. Union of India, 1997(1) SLR 607 : 1996(4) SCT 426 (P&H).
It is significant to mention that both these judgments have been referred to in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) and distinction has been made on the basis of facts of these cases with the facts of that case before learned Division Bench, which are akin to the facts of the present case.
No further elaboration is required.
Thus, in the facts as narrated above, we are in complete agreement with the view taken in Jarnail Singh's case (supra).
In view of the discussion made above, we allow this Letters Patent Appeal and set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and dismiss the writ petition.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.