NK Sud, J - Union of India has filed this appeal against the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh dated 16101982 dismissing its appeal against the judgment and decree of the Sub Judge Ist Class, Chandigarh dated 3031981.
2.
Respondent No. 1 had filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he was lawfully entitled to promotion as Senior Store Superintendent and that the action of Union of India in promoting respondent No. 2 on 3121973 ignoring his legitimate right was illegal and arbitrary.
This claim was based on the assertion that he was senior to respondent No. 2 and there was nothing adverse in his service record because of which respondent No. 2, who was junior to him, could have been promoted before him.
Thus, he claimed that it be declared that he was entitled to the post of Senior Store Superintendent from the date his junior-respondent No. 2 had been promoted with all the consequential benefits.
The suit was decreed by the Sub Judge 1st Class, Chandigarh, vide order dated 3031981.
3.
Union of India filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, against the judgment and decree of the Sub Judge which has been dismissed vide the impugned order dated 16101982.
4.
Ms. Manisha Gandhi, learned counsel for Union of India, contended that respondent No. 1 was not right in claiming that he had been ignored when respondent No. 2 was promoted as Senior Store Superintendent.
According to her, there were two posts to be filled-up from out of Scheduled Caste candidates.
Four candidates, including both the respondents, fell within the zone of consideration at the relevant time.
However, while adjudging their merit, it was found that although respondent No. 2 was junior to respondent No. 1, but his evaluation as per the Annual Confidential Report was better than that of respondent No. 1.
Accordingly, he was promoted in preference to respondent No. 1.
She further pointed out that the Courts below had misread Rule 12.2(c) of the Brochure on Reservation for Schedules Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Services (Fifth Edition) (for short `the Brochure') to hold that promotion in the present case was governed by principle of `Seniority-cum- Fitness' and not `Seniority-cum-Merit'.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel for respondent No. 1, supported the judgments of the Courts below.
6.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and perused the record.
On the asking of the Court, a copy of the minutes of the Departmental Promotion Committee by which respondent No. 2 was promoted, have also been furnished by the counsel for Union of India.
As per these proceedings, it is clear that the following four Scheduled Caste candidates, who fell within the zone of consideration, were considered for these two posts:-  i) Shri VS Shinde  ii) Shri Yam Bahadur  iii) Shri LM Shaiwal (respondent No. 1)  iv) Shri PK Das (respondent No. 2) 7.
The above list is in order of there seniority.
However, the Committee examined their services record and found that Sarvshri VS Shinde and PK Das had been assessed as `Very Good' whereas Sarvshri Yam Bahadur and LM Shaiwal had been assessed as `Good'.
In view of the above, Sarvshri VS Shinde and PK Das, having a better assessment than the other two candidates, were promoted.
It is, thus, clear that it cannot be said that the case of respondent No. 1 was not considered by the Committee at all.
8.
The case of respondent No. 1 is that since he had been assessed as `Good', it could not be said that he was not fit for promotion and, therefore, as per Rule 12.2(c) of the Brochure, he could not be denied promotion on the ground that his junior had a better assessment.
According to him.
the principle for promotion as per Rule 12.2.
(c) of the Brochure is `Seniority-cum-Fitness' and not `Seniority-cum-Merit'.
The Union of India, on the other hand, maintains that the criteria for promotion as per the said rule is `Seniority-cum-Merit'.
9.
It is, thus, clear that the only point for determination in the present appeal is as to what is the principle governing the promotion as per Rule 12.2(c) of the Brochure.
To resolve this issue, the provisions of the said rule may first be noticed, the same read as under :-  "12.2(c) Promotions by selection in Group C&D (Class III & IV) appointments : As indicated in para 2.1(iii)(b), there is a reservation at 15% and 7-1/2% of the vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively in promotions made by selection in Group C and D (Class III and IV) posts, in grades or services in which the element of direct recruitment, if any, does not exceed 66-2/3 per cent.
For such posts, the Select List of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes officers should be drawn up separately to fill the reserved vacancies.
Officers belonging to these classes should be adjudged separately and not alongwith other officers and if they are fit for promotion, they should be included in the list irrespective of their merit as compared to other officers.
Promotions against reserved vacancies will be subject to the candidates satisfying the prescribed minimum standards.
For determining the number of vacancies to be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, a separate roster on the lines of the roster prescribed in Annexure I to O.M.
No. 1/11/69-Est(SCT) dated 2241970 (in which points 1, 8, 14, 22, 28 and 36 are reserved for Scheduled Castes and points, 4, 17 and 31 are reserved for Scheduled Tribes) should be followed.
The following instructions will apply to the filling of vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in such promotions :-  (1)(a) Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe officers who are within the normal zone of consideration should be considered for promotion along with others and adjudged on the same basis as others and those Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes amongst them who are selected on that basis may be included in the general select list in addition to their being considered for separate select lists for Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively.
(b) If candidates from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes obtain on the basis of their positions in the aforesaid general select list, less vacancies than are reserved for them, the difference should be made up by selected candidates of these communities who are in the separate select lists for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively.
(2) In the separate select lists drawn up for (i) Scheduled Castes and (ii) Scheduled Tribes, Officers belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, will be adjudged separately amongst themselves and not along with other officers, and, if selected, they should be included in the concerned separate select list, irrespective of their merit as compared to other officers.
It is needless to mention that officers not belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes will not be considered whilst drawing up separate select lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
For being considered for inclusion in the aforesaid separate select lists, the zone of consideration for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, would be of the same size as that for the general select list, that is, if for the general selet list, the zone of consideration is 5 times the number of vacancies likely to be filled, the zone of consideration for the separate list for Scheduled Castes will also be 5 times the number of reserved vacancies for them, and likewise for Scheduled Tribes, subject of course to the condition that officers coming within such zone are eligible, by length of service etc. as prescribed, for being considered for promotion.
(3) If, owing to non-availability of suitable candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, it becomes necessary to dereserve a reserved vacancy, a reference for dereservation should be made to the Department of Personnel and Admn.
Reforms indicating whether claims of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates eligible for promotion in reserved vacancies have been considered in the manner indicated in (1) and (2) above.
When dereservation is agreed to by the Department of Personnel and Admn.
Reforms the reserved vacancies can be filled by other candidates, subject to the reservations being carried forward to three subsequent recruitment years and subject to exchange of vacancies between Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the last year to which reserved vacancies are carried forward.
(4) Where promotions in the above manner are first made on a long- term officiating basis, confirmations should be made according to the general rule viz., that an officer who has secured earlier officiating promotion on the basis of his place in the select lists should also be confirmed earlier and thus enabled to retain the advantage gained by him, provided that he maintains an appropriate standard vide para.
1(iii) of the Ministry of Home Affairs Office memorandum No. F.1/1/55-RPS, dated the 17th February, 1955.
But the principle of reservations would not apply again at the time of confirmation of promotees."
(Emphasis supplied) 10.
A perusal of the aforesaid rule shows that the for promotion by selection to these posts, the following steps are required to be taken :-  a) a select list of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe officers has to be drawn separately to fill the reserved vacancies; b) officers in this list have to be adjudged separately and not along with other officers of general category and if they are found fit for promotion, they have to be indicated in the list irrespective of their merit in the general list; and  c) the promoted candidates have to satisfy the prescribed minimum standards.
11.
The claim of respondent No. 1, which has been upheld by both the Courts, below, appears to be based on the language used in second para of this rule which says that officers belonging to these classes should be adjudged separately and not along with other officers and if they are fit for promotion, they should be included in the list irrespective of their merit as compared to other officers.
However, if the instructions which have been made applicable for filling-up these vacancies are perused, the position becomes clear.
As per Instructions (1)(a) and (1)(b), it is absolutely clear that the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Officers, who are within the normal zone of consideration, have to be first considered and adjudged on the same basis as the other officers and a common merit list has to be prepared.
However, from out of this merit list, a separate list in respect of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe officers is also required to be prepared so that if the reserved vacancies cannot be filled up by the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe officers on the basis of their merits in the general list, the same can be filled up from out of the separate select list made for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, respectively.
Thus, the words `fit for promotion' used in the earlier part of the rules would only mean fit for promotion on the basis of separate list for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The only restriction placed is that the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Officers have to be adjudged on the same basis as applied in the case of other officers.
In the present case, it is clear from the confidential proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committee that the candidates for all categories have been adjudged on the basis of their confidential reports.
12 candidates were required to be promoted in the general category.
For this, 36 officers in order of their seniority, fell within the zone of consideration.
These 36 officers included two Scheduled Caste candidates; namely VS Shinde and Yam Bahadur, who were at seniority Nos. 20 and 33, respectively.
All these candidates were adjudged on the basis of their confidential reports.
The candidates at Seniority Nos. 2, 4, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 29 and 36 had `Outstanding' reports and, thus, they were selected for the first nine posts in preference to some officers who were senior to them but who had `Very Good' or `Good' reports.
Thereafter, candidates at Seniority Nos. 1, 3 and 6 having `Very Good' reports were adjusted against the remaining three posts.
Here again, officer at seniority No. 6 was preferred to officer at seniority No. 5 as the latter had only `Good' report.
Since two posts reserved for Scheduled Caste officers could not be filled-up from out of the general list, a separate list of four persons including the two respondents, who fell within the zone of consideration, was prepared.
As already observed, VS Shinde and PK Das (respondent No. 2) had `Very Good' reports whereas Yam Bahadur and LM Shaiwal (respondent No. 1) were assessed as `Good'.
Thus, VS Shinde and PK Das, on the basis of their better confidential reports, were promoted on the same basis as adopted in the case of general category.
12.
In view of the above, I am of the considered view that the Courts below were not justified in holding that as per Rule 12.2(c), promotions were to be made on the principle of `Seniority-cum-Fitness' and not `Seniority-cum- Merit'.
The proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committee clearly show that all the promotions have been made from out of the offers falling within the zone of consideration on the basis of `Seniority-cum-Merit' and the same yardstick has been applied while selecting the candidates from the separate select list of the Scheduled Caste officers.
Thus, the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Senior Store Superintendent on 3121973 in preference to respondent No. 1 was in conformity with Rule 12.2(c) of the Brochure and could not be faulted with.
13.
Before parting, I may also mention that counsel for respondent No. 1 had also contended that a concurrent finding of fact had been recorded by both the Courts below that respondent No. 1 was entitled to promotion from the date his junior was promoted and, as such, this Court cannot interfere in the second appeal.
This contention is being noticed only to be rejected.
There is no dispute about the proposition of law being canvassed.
However, the question in the present case is about the interpretation of Rule 12.2(c) of the Brochure.
In fact, at the end of para-15 of his judgement, the Additional District Judge himself has observed that "the question is purely legal one and is to be determined by `BROCHURE' referred to above containing the guide-lines for promotion having force of law".
I am, therefore, of the view that the finding under challenge in this appeal requires interpretation of the rule and, therefore, is a question of law.
In view of the above, the findings recorded by the trial Court as affirmed by the Additional District Judge cannot be maintained.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and decree of the trial Court as also that of the lower Appellate Court are set aside and the suit of respondent No. 1-plaintiff is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.