Viney Mittal, J - The present Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the plaintiff Anil Mehta, whose suit for declaration had been originally decreed by the learned Subordinate Judge, Rohtak but on appeal filed by the State of Haryana (defendants), the said suit was dismissed after accepting the aforesaid appeal.
2.
A suit for declaration was filed by the plaintiff stating that he was a member of the Civil Services of the State of Haryana serving in the Medical Hospital, Rohtak, employed as Senior Photographer since January, 1978.
The plaintiff claimed himself to be a regular Government employee.
Vide order dated April 10, 1980 passed by the Director Principal Medical College, Rohtak, he was ordered to be removed from service.
The aforesaid order was challenged by the plaintiff on the ground that the same was punitive in nature and although framed innocuously, was in fact meant to inflict punishment on him for no fault of his whatsoever.
It was further stated by the plaintiff in the plaint that earlier also on August 12, 1978, a termination order had been passed against the plaintiff.
The plaintiff had filed a civil suit challenging the aforesaid earlier order dated August 12, 1978.
The State Government had filed a written statement in the aforesaid case and the stand taken was that the matter against the plaintiff would be enquired into and necessary orders as per the Rules would be passed in case he was found responsible for any charge.
The plaintiff maintained that on the aforesaid stand taken by the defendant in the written statement, he withdrew his suit.
Thereafter the plaintiff was allowed to continue in service.
According to the plaintiff, the present order dated April 10, 1980 is founded on charges of serious misconduct, which have never been enquired into nor any charge sheet had ever been served upon him and therefore, although he was infact sought to be removed on the charges of misconduct but the order of removal has been couched in a simplicitor language of termination.
The validity of the aforesaid order has been challenged on various grounds.
3.
The defendant, upon a notice of the suit, appeared.
It contested the suit.
A written statement was filed, wherein the stand taken by the defendant was that the appointment of the plaintiff was made as a Senior Photographer.
It was stated that the plaintiff could not apply in pursuance to the advertisement No. 13/77 published in different newspaper but be merely submitted an application on a plain paper.
The plaintiff was also required to give the proof of his experience for 7 years as photographer in some recognized Government/public or private organisation/Agency.
The defendants maintained that the certificates provided by the plaintiff were examined in the Rohtak University and it was found that the plaintiff was not eligible for the post and as he was merely self-employed and his experience certificates were not authentic, the Selection Committee of the University considered his name as a special case subject to his furnishing the eligibility certificate with regard to experience.
Thereafter the plaintiff arranged to obtain a certificate dated October 27, 1977 to the effect that the plaintiff was running a Photography Establishment at Rohtak since June 26, 1968.
Even this certificate did not fulfil the eligibility conditions laid down by the Selection Committee.
However, the plaintiff was appointed on purely temporary basis against a temporary post with further condition that he was not to be treated as a member of the civil Services of the State of Haryana.
A categorical stand was taken by the defendants that the termination order did not imply to inflict any punishment on the plaintiff but since the plaintiff did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications/eligibility, therefore, the order of termination had been passed.
The defendants have further maintained that the services of the plaintiff were terminated as per the terms and conditions of his appointment letter dated April 10, 1980, wherein it was specifically provided that his services were terminable without any notice on either side till he becomes a regular employee.
Thus asserting that the order of termination of the plaintiff was a simplicitor order of termination, casting no stigma upon him, and was therefore, fully was legal and valid and was in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter issued to the plaintiff.
4.
The learned trial Court decreed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
The matter was taken up in appeal by the State of Haryana.
The learned District Judge, vide his judgment and decree dated July 16, 1982 accepted the aforesaid appeal filed by the defendant and consequently dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
The plaintiff has now filed the present regular second appeal challenging the aforesaid judgment and decree passed by the learned District Judge.
5.
I have heard Shri DS Bali, learned Senior counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri GPS Nagra, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
6.
Shri DS Bali, learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiff has reiterated the various pleas raised by the plaintiff in his plaint, to challenge the order dated April 10, 1980, whereby the services of the appellant have been terminated.
Shri Bali has submitted that in fact prior to the passing of the order under challenge, an earlier order had been passed against the plaintiff on August 12, 1978.
The aforesaid order had been challenged by the plaintiff by filing an earlier suit.
In the written statement filed by the State of Haryana, in the aforesaid civil suit, it was conceded by the State that the case of the plaintiff would be "enquired into and necessary order will then be passed as per Rules, if found responsible for any charge........." On the basis of the aforesaid stand taken by the defendant in the earlier written statement, Shri Bali submits that the present order dated April 10, 1980 was not different from the earlier order and once the defendant had undertaken to proceed into the matter by holding an enquiry, it was not open to the authorities now to pass the order of termination without taking resort to the disciplinary proceedings.
7.
On the other hand, Shri GPS Nagra, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that the stand taken by the defendants in the earlier written statement could not be used as a defence by the plaintiff in the present case in as much as in the earlier written statement also the defendants had merely stated that the case of the plaintiff would be examined and if he was found responsible for any charges, then enquiry into the matter would he held.
However, according to Shri Nagra, the present order has been passed by the defendant not on the basis of any charges but in terms of the appointment order itself and was an order simplicitor for dispensing with the services of the plaintiff.
On that basis Shri Nagra has further submitted that since the plaintiff was a temporary employee and was not fulfilling the requisite eligibility conditions with regard to his experience, therefore, his services were liable to be dispensed with/terminated without any notice in terms of the appointment letter itself.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
In my considered opinion, the order dated April 10, 1980 by means of which the services of the petitioner have been terminated could not be termed to be an order casting any stigma upon the plaintiff giving him any cause for making a grievance.
The said order was not shown to be founded on any misconduct.
Nothing has been pointed out by Shri Bali from the record of the case to show that the defendant authorities had ever found the involvement of plaintiff in any case of misconduct or that any charges were sought to be levelled against him or that any disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against him.
The order dated April 10, 1980 passed by the Director Principal of the Medical College is exhibit P-4 on record.
It reads as under :-  "As your services are no longer required, the Governing Body of Medical College, Rohtak has terminated your services with immediate effect under the terms and conditions contained in your appointment letter No. 1/ME- II/78/287 dated 711978."
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon a judgment of the Gujrat High Court in 1981(2) SLR 622, Bhavansinh Ravsinhji Rathod v. State of Transport Corporation Ahmedabad and another, wherein it has been held that even in a case where there is an innocuous order of termination of services, the Court is competent to screen and X-ray innocent looking order.
It may be that order in the garb of discharge is in fact a penal order.
The learned counsel has further place reliance on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Gujarat Steel Tubes Limited v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896, to canvass the proposition that the form of the order of termination or the language in which it is couched is not conclusive and the Court is well within its powers to lift the veil to see the true nature of the order.
9.
I have gone through the aforesaid judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant, but in my considered view both these judgments are not applicable to the facts of the present case.
There is nothing on record to show that the plaintiff was involved in any misconduct or that at any stage any action for any such misconduct was envisaged against him.
In fact the plaintiff was appointed vide appointment letter dated January 7, 1978.
A copy of the aforesaid appointment letter is proved on the record as exhibit R-1.
It might be pertinent to notice Clause 6 of the aforesaid appointment letter at this stage :-  "This appointment is terminable without any notice on either side till it becomes regular after the verification of your antecedents."
10.
It has not been shown by the plaintiff that at any stage his services were ever regularised.
No order in this regard has been produced on record by him.
Thus the plaintiff, till his termination, was apparently a temporary employee.
In such a situation, Clause 6 of the appointment letter empowered the authorities to dispense with the services without the issuance of any notice.
11.
Shri GPS Nagra, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has also relied upon the law laid down by the Apex Court in Birla VXL Ltd v. State of Punjab and others, 1999(1) SCT 263 (SC) : 1998(4) RSJ 311 and Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of UP and others, 2000(2) RSJ 741, to contend that in the case of a temporary employee, the services can be terminated on the ground of unsuitability and in such a situation the order of termination was a simplicitor order and did not attract the provisions of Article 16 nor the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
It was also held that such an order did not cast any stigma unless and until it was shown that the order had been passed on some other considerations.
On the basis of the aforesaid law it is maintained by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that the order dated April 10, 1980 was not stigmatic and was perfectly within the power and domain of the competent authority.
12.
I agree with the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent and find that the order dated April 10, 1980 passed by the Director Principal of the Medical College did not cast any stigma upon the plaintiff nor was the same punitive in nature.
13.
Thus finding no merit in the present appeal, the same is hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.