Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner, who was enrolled with the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) as No. 871340174/L/NK/Dvr was summoned by the Commandant 105 BN, RAF, Ludhiana exercising the powers of Chief Judicial Magistrate to appear before him on 9.11.1993 to answer the charges of acting prejudicially to good order and discipline under Section 10(n) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (in short the "CRPF Act").
During the proceedings, the petitioner was found guilty and vide order dated 5111993, he was convicted and sentenced to 30 days imprisonment.
After the conviction, he was served with a show cause notice dated 16.11.1993 requiring him to explain as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
The reply, which was submitted, was not found to be satisfactory and this led to the dismissal order being passed on 27.11.1993.
The petitioner chose not to file the statutory appeal and revision and instead has moved this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for the issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order dated 15111993 Annexure P3, order dated 27.11.1993 Annexure P6 and order dated 2121993 Annexure P7.
These orders are sought to be assailed primarily on various grounds inter-alia that Section 16(2) of the CRPF Act is not a valid place of legislation in view of the fact that it runs counter to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure under which the powers of Chief Judicial Magistrate can only be conferred by the High Court.
It is further submitted that in any case the powers of the Chief judicial Magistrate as conferred under CRPF Act cannot be used by the Commandant to try a person for an offence under that very Act.
It is also submitted that for the misconduct alleged to have been committed by the petitioner, he has been punished twice inasmuch as he has been sentenced to undergo imprisonment for 30 days as also terminated from service.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, the preliminary objection which has been raised is with regard to the maintainability of the present petition in view of the fact that the petitioner has not exhausted an equally efficacious alternative remedy against the order of dismissal, which was available by way of appeal and revision under Rules 28 and 29 of the CRPF Act.
It was also submitted that the objection regarding the conferment of the powers of Chief Judicial Magistrate is clearly mis-conceived when seen in the light of the terms in which Section 16(2) of the CRPF Act is framed.
It was also submitted that the objection on the ground of double jeopardy is equally mis-conceived because the petitioner was punished for imprisonment for a lapse under the CRPF Act, which misconduct was sufficient for the disciplinary authority not to retain him in the disciplined force.
The respondents state that the petition should be dismissed.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the petition.
4.
On behalf of the petitioner, it is submitted that the order dated 15111993 passed by the Commandant 105 Bn.
RA, CRPF, Ludhiana and the order dated 2121993 terminating his services are not sustainable in law.
The first order has been passed by the Commandant while exercising the powers of the Chief Judicial Magistrate conferred on him under Section 16 of the CRPF Act.
Such conferment of powers cannot run counter to the separation of Judiciary from the Executive and, therefore, have got to be struck down and the order dated 15111993 passed by the Commandant has got to be set aside.
The second order is assailed on the ground that the petitioner is being punished twice for the same offence, which would thus be hit by the principle of double jeopardy as enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Learned counsel for the Union of India contested the validity of the submissions by urging that what is the power of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, which has been conferred on a Commandant of the CRPF Battalion is limited to the offences mentioned in Sections 9 and 10 of the CRPF Act.
These offences are related mainly to misdemeanour committed by a member of the Force during the discharge of his duties and are not offences under the general law of the land, which are to be tried as per the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
With regard to the second argument, it was submitted that the petitioner has only been convicted of one criminal offence and was dismissed from service by the Commandant after issuing show cause notice under Section 12 of the CRPF Act as like any other service case where government officials can be removed/dismissed from service on account of conviction in a criminal offence and since Section 12 of the CRPF Act specifically vests in the Commandant power of taking such action, no legal infirmity can be found in either of the two orders.
6.
I have carefully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel and have perused the record.
While section 9 of the CRPF Act gives a list of the offences, which are considered to be more heinous offences punishable with transportation for life for a term of not less than seven years or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or with fine which may extend to three months pay or with fine to that extent in addition to such sentence of transportation or imprisonment, Section 10 of the CRPF Act gives in detail the offences, which are considered to be less heinous offence, if committed by a member of the Force, punishment whereof may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to three months pay or with both.
For the purpose of trying the members of the Force who commit the said offences, which are listed in Sections 9 and 10 of the CRPF Act, the Commandant or Assistant Commandant can be invested with the powers of the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate Ist Class and if prescribed authority i.e. the Commandant so directs the offences can be tried by a Criminal Court having jurisdiction in the matter.
The petitioner was tried for an offence under Section 10(n) of the CRPF, Act and was found to be guilty vide judgment dated 15111993 and was sentenced to 30 days imprisonment.
This punishment, he could have challenged in revision before the Sessions Judge as has been held in Sham Lal v. State and others, 1971 Crl.LJ 1489.
No such challenge having been preferred on the basis thereof the Commandant decided to issue notice under Section 12 of the CRPF Act, which reads as under :-  "Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment.
-- (1) Every person sentenced under this Act to imprisonment may be dismissed from the Force, and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay, allowance and any other moneys due to him, as well as of any medals and decorations received by him.
(2) Every such person shall, if he is so dismissed, be imprisoned in the prescribed prison, but if he is not also dismissed from the Force, he may, if the Court or the Commandant so directs, be confined in the quarter- guard or such other place as the Court or the commandant may consider suitable.
7.
The petitioner had filed reply to the show cause notice, copy whereof is Annexure P5 and after considering the same, the impugned order dated 2121993 was passed.
Order dated 15111993 imposes the punishment under Section 10(n) of the CRPF Act and Order dated 2121993 awards dismissal in terms of Section 12 of the CRPF Act.
What is the punishment given for violation of Section 10(n) of the CRPF Act is totally independent of the disciplinary action, which has been taken against the petitioner under Section 12 of the CRPF Act.
In these circumstances, there is no question of the order dated 15111993 being hit by the principle of double jeopardy so as to warrant intervention by this Court.
While the first order has become final because of the failure of the petitioner to assail the same before the appropriate Sessions Judge, failing to challenge the same successfully provides a ground for not maintaining the petitioner in a disciplined force.
This order too has not been challenged in appeal before the departmental authorities.
No infirmity can be found in the orders dated 15111993 and 2121993.
Consequently, this petition fails ad the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.