AS Naidu, J - The State of Orissa, represented through the Principal Secretary to Government of Orissa, Department of Water Resources, has filed this writ application assailing the Award dated November 27, 1995 passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Orissa in ID Case No. 20 of 1988.
2.
Bereft of all unnecessary details, the short facts which are necessary for appreciating inter se disputes are stated hereinbelow :  A multi-purpose "Hydro Electrical Project" (commonly called as "Rengali Dam Project") with hundred per cent aid of the World Bank, was established in the year 1972.
For smooth management of the project, different categories of employees having sound technical knowledge were employed in the project.
The "Rigger" is one of the categories of technical workers, whose job is to install heavy workload in the project, the Government had also entrusted a portion of the work to M/s. Orissa Construction Corporation Ltd, which is fully owned by the State Government.
The said Corporation had also engaged several employees including "Riggers" who discharged similar duties as that of the petitioners.
While matter stood thus, in the year 1974, the Government revised the scale of pay of different categories of employees including that of the "Riggers".
Surprisingly, however, the scale of pay of "Riggers" was fixed at a lower rate in compensation to other categories of workers.
Being aggrieved by such discrimination the workers holding as the post of "Riggers", submitted their grievance before the Government, None consideration of such grievance by the authorities caused discontentment and the conciliation machinery under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was invoked by initiating a proceeding under Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter called as the Act').
The disputes, however, could not be mutually settled and the Conciliation Officer submitted a failure report.
Thereafter, the dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication vide order dated 5-11- 1988, the reference reads as follows : "Whether the demand of the "Riggers" of 'Rengali Dam Project' for appropriate scale of pay from 1974 onwards at par with other corresponding categories is proper and justified ?
If so, what should be the details ?"
3.
In course of the proceeding, the "Riggers" employed in the Rengali Dam Project, demanded rationalization of their scale of pay at par with similarly situated workers working in the said project as well as the other similar projects.
Admittedly prior to 1974 the "Riggers" were enjoying the same scale of pay as the Amins, Fitters, Time Keepers, Painters and Pump Drivers, the scale being Rs. 70 - 95/- per month, whereas the Work Sarkar, Blacksmith and Operators were placed in lower scale carrying the scale of pay of Rs. 65-85/- and Rs. 70-95/- respectively.
In 1974 Pay Revision, the scale of pay of Amins etc. were fixed at Rs. 240-315/- per month whereas the scale of pay of the "Riggers" was fixed at Rs. 215-265/- which is equivalent to the pay of the employees who were drawing the scale of pay of Rs. 60-75/- prior to 1974.
In the year 1981 and 1985 there was further rationalization of scale of pay of different categories of employees in which the scale of pay of "Riggers" was fixed at Rs. 585-845/- whereas those who were in the lower scale of pay such as Operators, Blacksmith, Painters.
Fitters, Drivers and Time Keepers working in the same project was fixed at Rs. 625-940/-.
In support of their case, the employees examined three witnesses and exhibited a number of documents which revealed that they were discriminated in course of pay rationalization.
To substantiate the case, the workmen also exhibited the awards passed by the Industrial Tribunal in similar cases of Operators, Pump Drivers and Carpenters as Exts.
1 to 5.
The wage structure prevailing in the Orissa Construction Corporation was also exhibited as Ext-6.
4.
At the other hand, the Management (Govt.) neither examined any witness nor exhibited any document and it took the stand that wage structure prevailing in Orissa Construction Corporation has no application to the employees working in the project run by the Government and there can be no parity between the "Riggers" working under the Government and the "Riggers" working in the Corporation.
The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal after discussion of the inter se pleadings arrived at a conclusion that Operators working in the "Rengali Dam Project" were admittedly getting a lower scale of pay than the "Riggers" prior to 1974.
After 1974, their scale of pay has been revised thrice and during such revision the Operators have been placed at a higher scale of pay than the "Riggers".
It is further observed that the scale of pay of Operators has been enhanced in pursuance of Award passed by the Industrial Tribunal and the said Award has attained finality.
On the basis of analysis of evidence both, oral and documentary, the learned Presiding Officer held that the 'Riggers" engaged in the project discharge the same duty as the "Riggers" engaged by the Corporation and held as follows :  (a) The "Riggers" richly deserve parity with the Operators in the matter of pay and emoluments.
(b) The Riggers are entitled to be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-410/- with effect from 1-1-74 and the pay scale of Rs. 800-1240/- with effect from 1-1-85.
(c) While computing the arrears.
management shall deduct the amount already paid to the Riggers and in future it should be ensured that at least parity is maintained between the Riggers and the Operators.
The said Award is assailed by the State Government, on the ground that the Government after careful consideration of the recommendation of the Pay Revision Committee has fixed the scale of pay of the "Riggers" and the other employees and the said decision could not have been interfered with by the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal has also erred in law in making equity in the scale of pay of the "Riggers" employed in the Orissa Construction Corporation with the "Riggers" working under the Government establishment though their service conditions are different.
5.
The Opp.
Parties after receiving notice of the writ application, has filed a counter affidavit controverting allegations levelled in the writ application and reiterating their stand taken before the Tribunal.
The Opp.
Parties have also submitted that the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal has rightly directed to enhance the scale of pay of the "Riggers" and bring it at par with 'Operators' and the direction that the "Riggers" are entitled to be placed in the scale of pay of Rs. 300-410/- with effect from 1-1-1974 and at Rs. 840-1240/- with effect from 1-1-1985 is just, proper and in accordance with law.
6.
We have heard Mr. G Mohanty, learned Addl.
Government Advocate for the petitioners-State and Mr. Satyabadi Das, learned counsel for the Opp.
Parties.
Learned Addl.
Government Advocate in course of argument submitted that the "Riggers" engaged by the Corporation cannot be equated with the Riggers working in the Project.
It is further submitted that the work discharged and the service conditions are not pari materia the same.
However, in support of such contention no document was produced either before the Industrial Tribunal or before this Court.
In the absence of any material we are not inclined to accept the said submission.
7.
Admittedly in the same project, the Opp.
Parties appointed by the Government are working as "Riggers".
The Government has entrusted similar work to the Orissa Construction Corporation Ltd, an organization fully owned by the Government, which has also appointed "Riggers" who are discharging the same type of work, whereas the scale of pay of the "Riggers" appointed by the Government (Opp.
Parties) is only Rs. 215-645/-, in 1974 and Rs. 585-845/- in 1985, and the scale of pay of the "Riggers" engaged by the Orissa Construction Corporation is Rs. 965-1468/- in 1985.
Thus, there is gross discrimination.
It is pertinent to mention here that the Industrial Tribunal in separate Awards had directed refixations of the scale of pay with regard to Mason, Operator, Carpenter etc. who are drawing pari materia scale of pay with that of "Riggers".
The said Awards were challenged before this Court and the writ application were dismissed.
The order passed by this Court was challenged before the Apex Court, but the SLP was dismissed by the Apex Court.
Thus, the Award passed has attained finality.
The present Award is also passed on the same ratio as the earlier ones.
In the circumstances, we have no hesitation to hold that the case of the petitioners cannot be discriminated and that there is clear infringement of equality clause enshrined in the Constitution of India.
For the aforesaid reasons there is absolutely no valid ground to deny the petitioners scale of pay of Rs. 300-410/- with effect from 1-1-1974 and Rs. 840-1240/- with effect from 1-1-1985 with subsequent corresponding revision of the said scale as directed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal in its Award dated 20th November, 1995 (Annexure-1).
It is no more res integra that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution, the High Court can only interfere with the decision of the Industrial Tribunal, if it is satisfied that the Award violates the principle of Natural Justice or involves non-exercise of jurisdiction or there is grave dereliction of duty or fragrant violation of law.
On scrutiny of the impugned Award, we are satisfied that the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal has not committed any patent irregularity in procedure or any error of law apparent on the face of record.
Therefore, we decline to interfere with the same.
8.
In course of argument, Mr. Das submitted that the work discharged by the "Riggers" appointed in the project by the Government and the "Riggers" appointed by the Orissa Construction Corporation engaged in the project, is one of the same and that the petitioners are also entitled to the same scale of pay which is enjoyed by the Riggers working in M/s. Orissa Construction Corporation Ltd, an establishment fully owned by the Government which comes to Rs. 965-1468/-, but the Industrial Tribunal has only directed to revise the scale of pay of Riggers and directed that they are entitled to be placed at Rs. 300-410/- with effect from 1-1-1974 and Rs. 840-1240/- with effect from 1-1-1985.
But then, this Award has been accepted by the Opp.
Parties and they have not challenged the said fixation of scale of pay and for which we are not inclined to interfere with the Award.
In view of the observations made above, we are not inclined to interfere with the Award passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal in ID Case No. 20 of 1988 and the present writ application is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.