JG Chitre, J - Two show cause notices have been given to the petitioner which are at Annexure F dated 7-12-1990 by which the petitioner was directed to hand over vacant possession of the government quarter to the government within 30 days of the receipt of the said notice on the following grounds :  (i) That it has been alleged that the petitioner has violated the terms and conditions on which the government quarter was allotted; (ii) It is alleged that the petitioner has purchased another flat with the financial assistance from the Government.
2.
The petitioner replied to this notice on 1-1-1991 as indicated by Annexure G by which he wanted to have personal hearing before any action was to be taken.
3.
Thereafter another show cause notice was issued on 6-2-1992.
Another notice has also been issued to the petitioner directing him to show cause as to why damages be not recovered from him.
The petitioner did not show cause in response to this notice also but filed the present Writ Petition challenging both these notices and the action which was proposed to be taken by the competent authority.
4.
In the present petition the main contention of the petitioner is that he has taken the loan for constructing his own house, by virtue of Government Resolution and Circular dated 24-7-1972 and 28-11-1972.
By placing reliance on these circulars the petitioner contended in the present Writ Petition that as he happens to be staying in government allotted quarter which is away from his office at a distance of more than 5 kms., he should not be evicted from the official quarter which has been allotted to him though he had constructed a house by taking the loan from the Government.
The petitioners, contended that on account of' these two circulars and policy enunciated by the Government in respect of such government employees, the Executive Engineer, was in error in issuing a notice for vacating the government quarter/accommodation which was allotted to him as a government employee.
5.
Mr. Menezes, counsel appearing for the petitioner elucidated this point while advancing the submissions on behalf of the petitioner.
He submitted that the provisions of Section 4 of the Bombay Government Premises Act have not been followed by the competent authority which wanted to evict the petitioner from his government allotted quarter.
Mr. Mokashi justified the order which has been assailed by this petition by submitting that the contentions which the petitioner has raised in this Writ Petition could have been submitted before the competent authority by showing the cause as indicated by those notices by the petitioner did not do so and by this Writ Petition had delayed the process.
He submitted that the petition of the petitioner be dismissed.
6.
Mr. Menezes placed reliance on the Judgment of this Court in Writ Petition Nos. 253 of 1991 and 754 of 1991 and submitted that similar orders be passed quashing the show cause notices which have been assailed by this petition.
Mr. Mokashi opposed the prayer.
7.
We do not find it necessary to pass similar orders like the orders which have been passed in Writ Petition Nos. 253 of 1991 and 754 of 1991 because the facts and circumstances of the present matter are different and, therefore, they need a different treatment.
8.
The certain difference which the petitioner did not notice is that the circulars on which he places reliance are speaking of the cases where a government employee obtains loan from the government for construction of the house under a different scheme.
In that case, the government servant may make a prayer to the government or competent authority that he be not dislodged from the quarter allotted by the government to him when the house which has been constructed by him is at the distance of more than 5 kms.
away from the office of such government employee.
In the present case, the petitioner has not only obtained the loan from the government but has acquired a flat from 10% reservation quota.
Therefore, his case cannot be equated with those government servants who have constructed their houses simply on the loan obtained from the government.
The criteria in respect of 10% quota house or flat is totally different from the resolutions and notifications on which the petitioner is placing reliance.
He cannot get the benefit of those circulars or resolutions at all.
9.
This Court finds it necessary to point out that tendency is growing amongst the government servants to get maximum facilities from the government either in terms of loan, in terms of accommodation by milching every beneficial scheme and even after acquiring such house or flat by not vacating the government quarter which has been allotted to such government servant, they are doing injustice to not only the tax payers but their brothers in service also who are desirous of or waiting for getting the government quarter allotment for having a roof on their heads.
There are long queues of such claimants and they are not able to get the government accommodation only because of such tendency which is prevalent in some of the government servants.
They themselves should vacate the government accommodations as early as possible and immediately after the appropriate order or circular, indicating that period of retention is over.
The tendency is growing of retaining the government quarters or accommodation by finding out loopholes of circulars and, thereafter, filing the lis in the Courts of various jurisdiction only for the purpose of playing delaying tactics and that too at the cost of their fellows and brothers.
It is high time now.
The government has to think very seriously about this.
When the employee is putting forth the ground of his home being away from his office, such persons should be transferred to another offices near to their houses in the larger interest of the public cause.
Where is the guarantee that such persons would be attending the offices punctually by not putting forth the difficulties of their homes away from their offices.
Such distance would normalty be quoted as an excuse.
10.
Some clever litigants instead of following the procedure which has been laid down by law and waiting for the final decision of their dispute and controversy, abruptly, frequently rush to the Court by filing the lis of various types, obtain the stay orders, delay the hearing of the proceedings and finally achieve the desired goal in getting number of days by stay orders or pendency of litigations in the Court.
In the present matter, the petitioner should have submitted himself before the competent authority and, thereafter, should have placed his contentions before the competent authority for adjudication.
After getting the adjudication from the competent authority he could have come to this Court in Writ.
But he prematurely filed the Writ Petition and this Writ Petition is pending the today obviously for nine years.
One can consider the plight of the person who has been deprived of his lawful entitlement of gettinhg a quarter on account of the pendency of this Writ Petition for more than eight years.
11.
In the interest of justice for the purpose of deciding the case, the competent authority is hereby directed to issue fresh show cause notice to the petitioner and give him sufficient opportunity of putting his contentions.
Thereafter, following the due course of law, the competent authority should adjudicate over his points raised as early as possible.
12.
Thus, in view of the discussion above, this Court dismisses the contentions raised and dismisses this Writ Petition by awarding costs of Rs. 5000/- to Government.
13.
Parties to act on authenticated copy of this order.
Petition dismissed.