Tejinder Singh Doabia, J - Even if the facts stated by the respondents are taken into consideration even then the petitioner would be entitled to the relief as claimed by him.
The facts as stated in the objections preferred by respondent 1 to 3 are being taken note of.
The petitioner was brought on Regular Temporary Establishment vide order passed by Chief Engineer Ravi Tawi Irrigation Complex, Jammu on 02/07/1990.
He was appointed to the post of Gateman in the grade of Rs. 630-940/-.
This grade as per the respondents was upgraded as Rs. 750-940/-.
The fact that the petitioner came to be appointed on daily wages earlier is admitted in the reply given in paras 4 to 9 of the petition.
In this it is submitted that :-  i) respondents 4 to 8 were engaged on daily wage basis as Operator much after the petitioner;  ii) their services were brought on work charge establishment w.e.f.
01/12/1979 in the grade of Rs. 200-320/-;  iii) service record of the respondents 4 to 8 are unblemished;  iv) that so far as petitioner is concerned, when he was engaged as operator on daily wage basis, some theft took place in the department;  v) the matter was referred to the police, one man was also constituted.
It was on account of this factor, the case regarding conversion of the petitioner was delayed.
It was not considered on 01/12/1979 when the claims of private respondents were considered; and  vi) the police closed the case as untraced;  vii) however, in the departmental inquiry some findings were recorded against the petitioner.
This as per the respondents could not be given effect to because of the findings recorded by the police-authorities;  viii) that even though there was a proposal to terminate the services of the petitioner.
This was not done; and  ix) that it was above factor which lead to delayed consideration of the petitioner.
2.
It is, accordingly, submitted that it was not mandatory on the part of department to consider the petitioner on work charge establishment w.e.f.
01/12/1979.
It is submitted that the petitioner accepted the status w.e.f.
02/07/1990.
It is accordingly submitted that the petitioner cannot claim benefit of the grade of Operator i.e. Rs. 1400-2600/-.
The position of law is well settled even where some criminal case is pending against a person but if ultimately he is acquitted then he cannot be deprived of the service benefit.
This view was expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in `Mohd.
Ishaq Bhat v. State of J&K and others', reported as 2000 KLJ 274 : 2001(3) SCT 703 (J&K) (DB).
What is said in para 5 is reproduced below :-  "5.
The learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on AIR 1985 SC 84, Nepal Singh v. State of UP and others.
In the above case, the services of a Government servant on temporary appointment were brought to an end.
As the allegations of misconduct were attributed, the order of termination was held to be bad.
Again in Babu Lal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1991 SC 1310 : 1991(1) SCT 474 (SC), an employee was placed under suspension.
This was on account of pendency of criminal proceedings.
The Criminal proceedings ended in acquittal.
The Supreme Court of India was of the view that the termination of the services during the pendency of suspension pending criminal proceedings was bad and the appellant was held entitled to reinstatement and also to regularisation.
In the above case Babu Lal appellant was appointed on adhoc basis against the quota of ex-serviceman.
His appointment was purely temporary on adhoc basis and was not to exceed six months.
Even to such a tenure holder, relief of reinstatement was granted.
The fact that the appellant therein was placed under suspension was taken note of.
Appellant's counsel has also placed reliance on AIR 1986 SC 1790, Rajinder Kour v. State of Punjab.
In this case, it was observed that the court can go into the question whether the order of discharge is by way of punishment or is a simple order of discharge."
3.
The aforementioned observations would be fully attracted to the facts of the case.
As a matter of fact, the case of the petitioner, is on better footings.
He has never been convicted.
The police authorities have found no case against the petitioner.
As the lodging of F.I.R. was the only factor which led to the non-consideration of the claim of the petitioner for promotion on the date when he became eligible and as that factor is no longer relevant, the petitioner is entitled to the same relief w.e.f.
the same date as was given to private respondents 4 to 8.
4.
It is settled law that so far as service benefits are concerned, these are part and parcel of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
This is a fundamental right.
No person can be deprived of the advantages and the benefits which are conferred upon a person and which advantages flow from fundamental rights.
This is on the theory that fundamental right cannot be waived.
These can not only be not waived but a citizen cannot be deprived of these benefits.
The earliest view on the subject would be found reported as `Behram Khurshid Pesikaka v. State of Bombay', AIR 1955 SC 123.
It was observed that doctrine of waiver enunciated by some American judges in construing the American Constitution cannot be introduced in our Constitution.
The rights described as fundamental rights are a necessary consequence of the declaration in the preamble that the people of India have solemnly resolved to constitute India into a sovereign democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens justice, social, economic and political; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality of status and the opportunity.
These fundamental rights have not been put in the Constitution merely for individual benefit, though ultimately they come into operation in considering individual rights.
They have been put there as a matter of public policy and the doctrine of waiver can have no application to provisions of law which have been enacted as a matter of constitutional policy.
Reference to some of the Articles, inter alia, Articles 15(1), 20, 21 makes the proposition quite plain.
A citizen cannot get discrimination by telling the State "you can discriminate".
5.
In a still stronger language the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as `Basheshar Nath v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi and Rajasthan and another', AIR 1959 SC 149 observed that Articles 14 is, in form, an admonition addressed to the State and does not directly purport to confer any right on any person.
The obligation thus imposed on the State, no doubt, inures for the benefit of all persons, as a necessary result of the operation of this Article, they all enjoy equality before the law.
It was further observed that whatever breach of other fundamental right a person or a citizen may or may not waive, he cannot certainly give up or waive a breach of the fundamental right.
6.
A full Bench of Allahabad High Court in `Pradeep Tandon v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others', AIR 1975 Allahabad 1, considered this question.
It was observed that merely because a citizen has filled some form would not confer upon the State a power to discriminate in violation of the Constitutional injunction.
No question of estoppel or waiver arises where the State lacks the constitutional power to enforce a rule which is unconstitutional and thus ultravires.
7.
Another Division Bench in `Hon'ble Chief Justice HC Allahabad and others v. Abdul Wahid Khan and others', 1971 Labour and Industrial Cases 773, speaking through Shri RS Pathak later Chief Justice of India expressed the same sentiments and held in no uncertain terms that the State is not relieved of the obligation to comply with the Constitutional mandate merely because a person affected chose to exercise a particular option.
A right to discriminate against cannot be waived.
See Omega Advertising Agency v. State of Electricity Board, AIR 1982 Gauhati 37.
8.
In view of the aforementioned legal position, it is accordingly held :-  i) that there can be no waiver of fundamental right;  ii) that the state cannot act in a manner which leads to infringement of fundamental rights;  iii) that the only impediment in the way of petitioner was the pendency of some criminal investigation.
This was concluded and the petitioner has not been found guilty, therefore, he cannot be deprived of the service benefits to which he becomes entitled w.e.f.
01/12/1979.
This petitioner is accordingly is held that entitled to the grade claimed by the petitioner w.e.f.
01/12/1979.
iv) Let this benefit be calculated and released in favour of the petitioner within a period of two months from the date, a copy of the order passed by this court is made available by the petitioner to the respondents.
v) In case this is not done within the stipulated period, the petitioner would be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% payable by the person on whose account delay occurs.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.