L Mohapatra, J - The petitioners in all the aforesaid writ applications have challenged the directions issued by the Ministry of Surface Transport and the decision/resolution of the Board of Trustees, Paradip Port Trust by which the age of retirement of Class I, II and III employees of Paradip Port Trust has been reduced from 60 years to 58 years as well as the approval of the Central Govt. thereof.
2.
Petitioner in O.J.C.
No. 13265/2000 was appointed as Deputy Traffic Manager on 20.2.1976.
He was promoted to the post of Additional Traffic Manager on 1111988 and was appointed as Chairman, Management Committee, Paradip Port Trust on 791993.
He was further promoted to the post of Traffic Manager on 20102000 and is continuing in the said post.
Out of three petitioners in O.J.C.
No. 10134/2000 petitioners 1 and 2 are working in Class I and Class II posts in the capacity of Assistant Engineer and Engine Room Sarang respectively.
Petitioner No. 3 being an officer of the Port is interested in the proceeding as in view of the decision of the Board of Trustees and the Central Government he would be deprived of the benefit of the enchanced retirement age and therefore has approached this Court.
Sixteen petitioners in O.J.C.
No. 13282 of 2000 are also similarly placed as that of employees in O.J.C.
No. 10134/2000 and have approached this Court in the aforesaid relief.
Petitioner in O.J.C.
No. 763/2001 is working as Executive Engineer, Electrical in Class I service in the department of Project Implemented Officer under the Paradip Port Trust and the petitioners in O.J.C.
No. 1916/2001 are similarly placed as that of petitioners in other writ applications working in Class I, Class II and Class III employees under the Paradip Port Trust.
Since the grievance of the petitioners in all the writ applications is the same and prayers in the writ applications made are also same, all the cases were heard together and are being disposed of in this judgment.
3.
Case of the petitioners is that Fundamental Rule (F.R.
56) covering the field of retirement of Central Government employess prior to its amendment provided that every Government servant shall retire after he/she attains 58 years of age.
On 1351998 the Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievance and Pension vide office memorandum was pleased to inform that the President of India after careful consideration of the recommendations made by the Fifth Central Pay Commission was pleased to direct that every Government servant whose age of retirement is currently 58 years shall now retire from service in the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he/she attains the age of 60 years.
A copy of the said memorandum has been annexed to this writ applications as Annexure-2 in O.J.C.
No. 13265/2000.
Consequent to the notification by the Government of India dated 1351998 and in exercise of the powers under Art. 309 of the Constitution of India, the FR-56 was amended and the age of retirement was extended to 60 years from 56 (58 ?)
years.
On 28.5.1998 consequent to the amendment of the Fundamental Rules, the Government of India in the Ministry of Surface Transport (Ports Wing) intimated the Chairmen of all the Major Ports and Dock Labour Boards that the employees whose age of retirement is currently 58 years shall retire from the service of the Port at the age of 60 years.
On 29.5.1998 the aforesaid order of the Government of India dated 28.5.1998 raising the age of retirement from 58 years to 60 years was placed before the Board of Trustees and the Board of Trustees of the Paradip Port Trust approved the same.
On 29.5.1998 also the Ministry of Surface Transport conveyed the sanction of the Central Government to the Chairman, Paradip Port Trust in adopting the amendments to the provisions of FR-56 as per the Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules) Regulations, 1967.
On 3051998 after the approval of the Central Government the Paradip Port Trust issued an office memorandum extending the age of superannuation to 60 years.
While this state of affairs was continuing suddenly on 482000 after a gap of more than two years the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport issued a DO letter to the Chairman, Paradip Port Trust stating that there was a need to reduce excess manpower and for the sake of uniformity all the Major Ports should roll back the age of retirement of officers and employees from 60 years to 58 years.
Pursuant to the aforesaid direction contained in the letter, the matter was placed before the Board and the Board of Trustees suggested that the full impact of such reduction in terms of number of people to retire class-wise and the financial implication be put before the Board and the Agenda item was postopned.
This decision was taken in the Board meeting dated 2982000.
On 1392000 the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport issued a guideline and almost compelled the Chairman, Paradip Port Trust to take immediate action to get the proposal approved by the Board within 15 days.
In compliance of the aforesaid direction, the Board on 4102000 passed a resolution complying with the directives dated 482000 and 1392000 stating that the age of retirement of Class I, II and III employees which had been increased from 58 years to 60 years shall stand changed to 58 years with effect from 3112000.
Said resolution of the Board was approved by the Central Government on 17/2012000.
After obtaining approval from Central Government the Board issued office memorandum in this regard on 1122000.
This decision of the Board reducing the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 yeara as well as the approval granted by the Central Government have been challenged in this writ application.
4.
Shri Jagannath Patnaik, learned senior counsel for the petitoners in OJC No. 13263/2000 argued the matter on behalf of the petitioners in all the writ applications.
It was submitted by Sri Patnaik that when Fundamental Rules provided age of retirement at 58 years, it was adopted by the Paradip Port Trust pursuant to the provisions contained in Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules) Regulations, 1967.
When the age of retirement was enchanced from 58 to 60 years same procedure was adopted by the Paradip Port Trust, but while reducing the age of reitrement from 60 years to 58 years the said procedure was not followed and therefore the resolution of the Board reducing the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years is not in accordance with law.
It is stated by Sri Patnaik that when the age of retirement was enhanced by the Central Government from 58 years to 60 years, necessary amendments were made in the Fundamental Rules (FR-56) and in exercise of powers conferred under the Adaptation Regulation of Paradip Port Trust adopted the said amended provision of FR 56.
There has been no amendment to FR 56 by the Central Government and the age of retirement continues to be 60 years, whereas the Board of Trustees resolved to reduce the age of retirement without following the procedure or making Rules as provided under the Major Port Trusts Act.
Shri Patnaik has referred to S. 28 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
Said section runs as follows :  "A Board may make regulations, not inconsistent with the Act to provide for any one or more of the following matters, namely - (a) the appointment, promotion, suspension (reduction in rank, compulsory retirement), removal and dismissal of its employees; (b) their leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances and travelling allowances and the establishment and maintenance of a Provident Fund or any other fund for their welfare; (c) the terms and conditions of service of persons who become employees of the Board under section (f) of sub-section (1) of S. 29; (d) the time and manner in which appeals may be preferred under sub-section (2) of Section 25 and the procedure for deciding such appeals; (e) any other matter which is incidental to, or necessary for, the purpose of regulating the appointment and conditions of service of the employees."
Shri Patniak submitted that no such regulation has been framed by the Paradip Port Trust under S. 28 of the Act.
Board has the power to make amendment to any such regulation not inconsistent with the Act but in absence of any regulation with regard to conditions of service of its employees, the Board has no power to reduce the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years having adapted amended FR 56 in exercise of powers under the Adaptation Regulation.
5.
The Second contention of Sri Patnaik is that the letter of the Central Government dated 482000 speaks of need to reduce the age of retirement in order to reduce excess manpower and for maintenance of uniformity in all the Major Ports.
He further submitted that the Board of Trustees could not have resolved to reduce the age of retirement on the aforsaid two grounds, as the Board itself was not aware of the excess of the manpower existing in the Paradip Port Trust and the XLRI which had been entrusted to study manpower in the port had not completed its investigation and therefore the Board could not have passed resolution on the ground that there is excess manpower in the Paradip Port Trust.
In reply to the argument advanced by Sri Patnaik, Sri AK Parija, learned counsel appearing for the Paradip Port Trust submitted that there was no need to frame a separate regulation under S. 28 of the Act as Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules) Regulation, 1967 has in fact been made in exercise of the powers under S. 28 of the Act and has empowered the Board of Trustees to make such amendment as necessary.
He further submitted that the decision of the Paradip Port Trust to reduce the age of retirement is an administrative decision depending on the policy decision taken by the Central Government in the Ministry of Surface Transport and this Cout should not interfere with the said decision.
He also submitted that the resolution of the Board of Trustees reducing the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years is not on the ground of excess manpower, but to maintain uniformity in all the Major Ports.
6.
So far as the first point raised by Sri Patnaik, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner is concerned, it appears that the Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules), Regulation, 1967 had been framed in exercise of powers conferred under S. 126 read with Ss.
28 and 134 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
Regulation 3(d) defines "existing Rules" and orders in the following manner :  "`Existing Rules and orders' means the Rules and orders made under the various Acts and Rules in force prior to the appointed day in connection with the administration of the Port."
Regulation 4 of the aforesaid Regulation runs as follows" :-  "Existing Rules and orders and subsequent amendments thereto made on or after the appointed day relating to the following matters shall, to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or any regulations made thereunder, and until they are altered, repealed or amended by the Board, continue in force as if they were made by the Central Government under the Act, namely - (i) matters specified in clauses (b), (c) and (e) of S. 28 of the Act.
(ii) matters specified in clause (b) and clauses (e) to (n) of Section 123 of the Act.
Provided that any amendment aforesaid to the existing Rules and orders, either wholly or partly, or any alteration or amendment if made by the Board shall not be made applicable to such employees unless the Board obtains the previous sanction of the Central Government."
Referring to the said regulation Sri Patnaik submitted that the existing Rules and orders and subsequent amendments thereto made on or after the appointed day relating to the matters specified in clauses (b) and (e) of S. 28 of the Act, to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or any regulations made thereunder and until they are altered, repealed or amended by the Board, continue in force as if they were made by the Central Government under the Act.
According to Sri Patnaik said Rules do not confer any power on the Board of Trustees to make any alteration in the existing Rules or orders or subsequent amendments made thereto if they are consistent with the provisions of the Act or regulations made thereunder.
Therefore, since the Central Government has not made any amendment in the amended Fundamental Rules reducing the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years, said Rule continues and the Board has no power to make any amendment to the said Rule.
It is submited by Sri Patnaik that in order to amend the said provision and in order to reduce the age of retirement having adopted the amended Fundamental Rules 56, the Board is required to frame another regulation under S. 28 of the Act and in absence of any such regulation, the Board is left with no power to take a decision with regard to reduction of age for the purpose of retirement.
Interpreting the said provisions, Sri Parija, learned counsel appearing for the Paradip Port Trust submitted that the Paradip Port Trust (Adoption of Rules) Regulations, 1967 itself empowers the Board to amend or alter the existing provisons and therefore there is no need to make another regulation under S. 28 of the Act.
Adaptation Regulation, 1967 itself shows that the same had been framed in exercise of powers conferred in S. 126 read with Ss.
58 and 134 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, There is some force in the contention of Sri Parija that there is one regulation framed under S. 28 of the Act :  7.
Now it is required to examine as to whether under the said regulation the Board has power to take a decision to change the existing Rules or not.
Fact of the present case is that the existing Rule (Fundamental Rules 56) provides the age of retirement to be 60 years.
Regulation 4 of the said Regulation provides that the existing Rules and orders and subsequent amendments thereto made on or after the appointed day relating to the matters specified in Clauses (b), (c) and (e) of S. 28 of the Act shall continue to be in force until altered, repealed, or amended by the Board.
Section 28(e) of the Act speaks of matters which are incidental to, or necessary for the purpose of regulating the appointment and conditions of service of its employees.
This clause which includes conditions of service of employees obviously includes the age of retirement.
Regulation 4 of Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules) Regulations, 1967 indicates that until the existing Rules and orders or susbequent amendments made therto are altered, repealed or amended by the Board the same shall continue to be in force as if they were made by the Central Government.
I do not see any reason to accept the contention of Sri Patnaik that the aforesaid Regulation does not empower the Board to make any changes in the existing Rules or subsequent amendments made thereto.
On the other hand, it appears that the Board has power to alter, repeal or amend the existing Rules and orders and subsequent amendments thereto made after the appointed day and if no such amendment or alteration is made, the existing Rules and orders shall continue in force as if they were made by the Central Government.
I, therefore, accept the contention of Sri Parija that the FPT (Adaptation of Rules) Regulations, 1967 empowers the Board to make such amendment or alteration.
8.
Shri Parija, learned counsel for the Paradip Port Trust has referred to some decisions in support of this contention.
First decision referred to is reported in AIR 1931 PC 149 (Secretary of State v. Hindustan Cooperative Insurance Society Ltd) The Privy Council in the said decision held as follows :  "In this Country it is accepted that where a statute is incorporated by reference into a second statute, the repeal of the first statute does not affect the second.....
This doctrine finds expression in a common-form section which regularly appears in the Amending and Repealing Acts which are passed from time to time in India.
The section runs : "The appeal (repeal ?)
by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any Act.... in which such enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to."
The independent existence of the two, Act is therefore recognised; despite the death of the parent Act, its offspring survives in the incorporating Act.
Though no such saving clause appears in the General Clauses Act, their Lordships think that the principle involved is as applicable in India as it is in this country.
It seems to be no less logical to hold that where certain provisions from an existing Act have been incorporated into a subsequent Act, no addition to the former Act, which is not expressly made applicable to the subsequent Act, can be deemed to be incorporated in it, at all events if it is possible for the subsequent Act to function effectually without the addition.
From the aforesaid decision it appears that the Privy Council was of the view that in this country it is accepted that where a statute is incorporated by reference to a second statute, the repeal of the first statute does not affect the second.
It is also held that where certain provisions of the existing Act have been incorporated into a subsequent Act, no addition to the former Act, which is not expressly made applicable to the subsequent Act, can be deemed to be incorporated in it, at all events if it is possible for the subsequent Act to function effectually without the addition.
Shri Parija has also referred to a decision of the Allahabad High Court reported in AIR 1982 All 328, Ram Autar Pandey v. State of Uttar Pradesh.
In para 52 of the judgment the Court observed that the power to amend a Rule and to change it, whether to the detriment or to the advantage of the employees concerned, appears to be inherent in the Rule-making power of the authority concerned.
The circumstances in which the power can be exercised cannot be catalogued exhaustively.
It all depends on what the exigencies demand.
No one can say that because a particular Rule exists in a particular form on a particular date it should remain in that form for all times to come and should not be changed even if as a matter of policy the change is necessary."
Another decision relied upon by Sri Parija is reported in 1985(1) SCC 523 : AIR 1985 SC 551, K Nagaraj v. State of Andhra Pradesh.
The Apex Court while dealing with the case of Andhra Pradesh Government employees in which decision had been taken to reduce retirement age from 58 years to 55 years, observed that it is not possible to lay down an inflexible rule that 58 years is a reasonable age for retirement and 55 is not.
If the policy adopted for the time being by the Government or the Legislature is shown to be violative of recognised norms of employment planning, it would be possible to say that the policy is irrational since, in the event, it would not bear reasonable nexus with the object which it seeks to achieve.
The Court further observed that the question of age of retirement should always be examined by the Government with more than ordinary care.
Fixation of age of retirement has minute and multifarious dimensions which shape the lives of citizens.
Therefore, it is vital from the point of view of their well-being that the question should be considered with the greatest objectivity and decided upon on the basis of empirical data furnished by scientific investigation.
What is vital for the welfare of the citizens is, of necessity, vital for the survival of the State.
Care must also be taken to ensure that the statistics are not perverted to serve a malevolent purpose.
9.
Having held in the previous paragraphs that Board of Trustees of the Paradip Port Trust had powers to make alterations and amendments to the existing Rules, in exercise of Regulation 4 of the Paradip Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules) Regulation, 1967, the second question to be examined is as to whether such a decision by the Board was justified or not.
It is stated by Sri Patnaik that the Board was practically forced to take such a decision, whereas Sri Parija, learned counsel for the Paradip Port Trust submitted that Board is only following the policy decision of the Central Government and no force had ever been applied by the Central Government to amend the existing Rule.
Annexure-8, the letter dated 482000 addressed to the Chairman, Paradip Port Trust from the Ministry of Surface Transport, runs as follows :  "Excess manpower in the ports has been a matter of concern for quite sometime.
There is a need to reduce the excess manpower so that the ports become financially stable and more competitive vis-a-vis new private ports that are coming up.
Separately, this Department is considering introduction of Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) for port employees.
Menawhile, Mumbai, Tuticorin and Mangalore Port Trusts have shown initiative and the retirement age of their employees and officers has been rolled back to 58 years.
This major initiative enables these ports in partly "righ-sizing" their organisations.
For the sake of uniformity too it has been decided that all the Major Ports should roll back the age of retirement of officers and employees to 58.
I would, therefore, request you to place the matter immediately before the Board for a decision."
The letter no where shows that any force was applied to the Board of Trustees to reduce the age of retirement, rather the said letter indicates reason for rolling back the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years.
Because the policy decision was taken by the Central Government in view of the reasons indicated in the said letter, I do not see any reason for the Paradip Port Trust to ignore the same.
Having accepted the reasons indicated in the said letter, the Board of Trustees thought it appropriate to make amendment of the existing Rules providing age of retirement at 60 years and as per the said decision the age of retirement was reduced to 58 years.
No where there is material to show that the decision was taken by the Board because of excess man-power in the Paradip Port Trust.
Submission made by Sri Patnaik that in absence of any material as to whether the Paradip Port Trust had excess manpower or not, no such decission could have been taken by the Board, is of no relevance.
Resolution of the Board only shows that following the policy decision of the Central Government as contained in Annexure-8, it had decided to roll back the retirement age of 60 years to 58 years.
10.
Both the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners having failed, I do not find any justification to interfere with the decision of the Board of Trustees of Paradip Port Trust in reducing the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years.
Accordingly, all the writ applications are devoid of any merit and are dismissed.
Applications dismissed.