GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who was one of the candidates for recruitment as Punjabi Mistress, has sought intervention of the Court for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint her after adding the marks in lieu of the experience allegedly gained by her by working in St Andrew's School, Ferozepur Cantt.
2.
There is no contest between the parties that after assessing her academic attainments and performance in the viva voce the Departmental Selection Committee awarded 5671 marks to the petitioner.
However, she could not be appointed because of her lower merit which was less than the last candidate selected of her category who secured 5679 marks.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the failure of Departmental Selection Committee to award marks to the petitioner in lieu of the experience gained by her has resulted in arbitrary lowering of the petitioner and if even 1 mark is given to her for the past teaching experience, she will become entitled to be appointed on one of the advertised posts.
4.
Learned Assistant Advocate General pleaded for dismissal of writ petition with costs on the ground that the certificate Annexure P-2 produced by the petitioner is not the exact and correct copy of the certificate which she had produced along with the application form submitted in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the competent authority.
He invited our attention to Annexure R-1 to show that the petitioner had not worked as a Punjabi Teacher as is sought to be made out by her by producing Annexure P-2.
On our asking, the learned Assistant Advocate General gave photostat copy of the application form along with the photostat copy of the certificate submitted by the petitioner to the learned counsel for the petitioner for his perusal.
5.
We have considered the respective submissions and perused the record.
In our opinion, the petitioner cannot be given any relief.
In paragraphs 3, 5 and 6 of the written statement, the respondents have made the following statement :-  "3.
Admitted to the extent that the petitioner is BA, B.Ed.
and MA in subject of Punjabi and that the petitioner was called for interview on 12.9.1996.
Rest of the para is not admitted.
The petitioner was called for interview because her qualification and experience was to be verified and checked with reference to terms and conditions mentioned in the advertisement.
The issuing of roll number and calling for interview does not make a candidate entitled for appointment.
It is further submitted that the experience certificate of the petitioner was not that of a Punjabi Mistress.
A true copy of the experience certificate presented by the petitionr at the time of interview is attached as Annexure R1.
This experience certificate is different from the one which has been attached with this writ petition as Annexure P2.
The word "Punjabi Teacher" has not been mentioned in the experience certificate presented at the time of interview (Annexure R1), whereas these words have been included in Annexure P2.
In this way the petitioner has tried to mislead this Hon'ble Court so far as per experience certificate is concerned.
5.
Admitted to the extent that the petitioner was interviewed by the Selection Committee as per direction of this Hon'ble Court issued in CWP No. 18826 of 1996 and that she obtained 5671 marks in the interview.
It is further submitted that the experience certificate of the petitioner was not found proper as she had not worked as a Punjabi Mistress because there was no mention of word Punjabi Mistress in the said experience certificate.
Moreover, the petitioner was not qualified to teach Punjabi during the period mentioned in the experience certificate as she had neither passed Punjabi in her BA nor had passed her MA before she started working as a teacher.
It is, therefore, quite obvious/clear to mention here that the petitioner was not qualified to teach Punjabi during the period for which she has obtained the experience certificate and, therefore, no credit for this certificate was given to the petitioner by the Selection Committee.
6.
Denied.
As explained in foregoing paras the experience of the petitioner could not be considered because the petitioner was not qualified to teach Punjabi during the period shown in the experience certificate (Annexure R1).
She had passed MA Punjabi after the period mentioned in the experience certificate.
She has also not passed Punjabi in her BA It is pertinent to mention here that in the experience certificate (Annexure R1), nothing has been mentioned regarding the post on which she has worked.
It has been clearly mentioned in the advertisement that experience of teaching of the level of the post for which the applicant applies will be considered.
Therefore, her experience certificate was not found as proper and no credit could be given for this experience certificate.
The name of the petitioner has been shown at the proper merit in the merit list which is legal and valid."
6.
For the reasons best known to her, the petitioner has not filed replication to controvert the categorical statement made by the respondents that the certificate produced by her along with the application form does not show that she has worked as Punjabi Teacher in St Andrew's School from August 8, 1988 to August 31, 1989.
In the absence of this, we have no hesitation in recording a conclusion that the petitioner has intentionally filed Annexure P-2 with a view to mislead the Court in believing that she possessed one year's experience as Punjabi Teacher and the Departmental Selection Committee gravely erred in ignoring/over-looking her experience while awarding marks.
7.
In our opinion, there is no justification to over-look the fact that the alleged experience gained by the petitioner as a Teacher in St Andrew's School was not on the post of Punjabi Teacher and, therefore, no credit could be given to her for the said experience, particularly when the petitioner is guilty of trying to mislead the Court.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the failure of the respondents to offer appointment to the petitioner on the post of Punjabi Teacher does not suffer from any legal or constitutional infirmity warranting interference by the High Court.
9.
Consequently, the writ is dismissed.
The petitioner shall pay costs of Rs. 2,000/- to the respondents.
Petition dismissed.