GS Singhvi, J - The petitioners, who are working as Ziledars in Irrigation Department, Haryana, have challenged the selection and appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu as B-Class Tehsildar.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the issues raised in these petitions are that aggrieved by the non-consideration of Ziledars for recruitment as B-Class Tehsildars in accordance with the Haryana Revenue (Group 'B') Services Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the 1988 Rules), petitioner Balwan Singh filed C.W.P.
No. 1057 of 1996.
On receipt of the notice issued by the Court, the concerned departmental authorities, on an examination of the matter, found that Ziledars have been inadvertently left out of the zone of consideration determined for recruitment of B-Class Tehsildars.
Therefore, the Advocate General, Haryana was instructed to make a statement before the Court that appropriate steps will be taken in this direction and in view of the stand taken by the respondents, the Court disposed of the writ petition on 3081998.
3.
In the meanwhile the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Revenue Department wrote memo No. 650-E-II/98/9062 dated 1981998 to the Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department, Haryana to sponsor the names of eligible and suitable Ziledars of Irrigation Department for consideration for appointment by transfer as B-Class Tehsildar in Revenue Department.
The same was received in the office of the Engineer-in-Chief on 20.8.1998.
However, for the next 10 days, no step was taken to circulate the said memo among the Superintending Engineers and other competent authorities in order to enable them to forward the names of eligible Ziledars and only a day before the expiry of the dead line i.e. 291998, a copy of the memo was sent to the circle offices.
Due to the delayed communication of the circular, none of the eligible Ziledars except two persons, namely, petitioner-Balwan Singh and respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu could apply for recruitment as B-Class Tehsildar under the 1998 Rules.
Faced with this, Financial Commissioner (Revenue) issued memo No. 4082-E-II-98/10114 dated 991998 asking the Engineer-in-Chief that if any more names are to be recommended, then the same may be sent by 1491998.
Though, the last mentioned memo was put in circulation on 10.9.1998, for some unknown reasons name of no other eligible Ziledar was forwarded to the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
4.
The record produced by the learned Deputy Advocate General shows that even while forwarding the applications of petitioner-Balwan Singh and respondent- Atma Ram Bhadu, the concerned authority managed the sending of the ACRs of respondent Atma Ram Bhadu for the years 1984-85 to 1997-98 but in the case of petitioner-Balwan Singh the ACRs of 1993-94 to 1997-98 only were sent.
On receipt of these applications along with the ACRs etc., the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) recorded a note suggesting that for recruitment on the one past of B-Class Tehsildar there is no necessity to constitute selection committee.
The office also suggested that in view of his better service record, Atma Ram Bhadu may be appointed.
The Financial Commissioner (Revenue) approved the office note.
Thereafter, order dated 2591998 was issued appointing the non-official respondent as B-Class Tehsildar.
5.
The petitioners have challenged the selection and appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu on the ground of violation of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, the 1988 Rules and mala fide exercise of power by the competent authority.
They have pleaded that the exercise undertaken by the official respondents to appoint B-Class Tehsildar from among Ziledars was a farce and the appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu was a foregone conclusion.
They have alleged that the circulation of memo dated 1981998 was deliberately delayed with an ulterior motive to frustrate any possibility of consideration of other eligible Ziledars.
Petitioner-Balwan Singh has also alleged that the concerned departmental authority intentionally did not send his complete service record so as to facilitate the selection of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu without any real competition.
Petitioner-Hans Paul Sheokand has pointed towards the manipulative mechanism adopted by the departmental authorities by stating that the application of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu was recommended by the Executive Engineer, Fatehbad Division and Superintending Engineer, Hissar (II) on 3181998 i.e. even before the office of the Engineer-in-Chief circulated the memo dated 1981998 sent by the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
Not only this, after issuance of order dated 2591998 from the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Haryana, Chandigarh, respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu got prepared the documents showing that he was relieved from Fatehabad and he had joined as Tehsildar under the Commissioner, Hissar Division, Hissar on that very day.
He has also averred that the officials of the department withheld the relevant information from eligible Ziledars with an oblique motive of manipulating the selection of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 to C.W.P.
No. 18026 of 1998, Shri SD Arora, Under Secretary (Revenue) has averred that the General Manager (Project), Irrigation Department, Haryana sponsored the names of S/Shri Atma Ram Bhadu and Balwan Singh vide his letter No. 5869/3NGE-II/98 dated 291998 and after careful consideration of their records, Atma Ram Bhadu was accepted as B-Class Tehsildar on the basis of merit and seniority.
Shri Arora has also averred that petitioner-Hans Paul Sheokand and others cannot complain against the appointment of Atma Ram Bhadu because their names were not sponsored by the concerned authorities.
Shri SK Joshi, General Manager (Project), Irrigation Department who has filed written statement on behalf of respondents No. 2 to 4 and 9, has expressed surprise about the recommendation made by the Superintending Engineer, Hissar (II) in favour of Atma Ram Bhadu vide his letter dated 3181998 by stating that the letter dated 1981998 was not even endorsed to him up to that date.
He has also averred that the application submitted by petitioner No1-Hans Paul Sheokand was received in his office on 1481998 but his service record was not available in the concerned section and, therefore, his name could not be sent to the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
7.
Respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu has filed a detailed reply in order to justify his appointment.
In paragraph 4 of the written statement, he has made the following statement :  "That apart from this it is submitted that the petitioners have raised a controversy as to how the name of the answering respondent came to be recommended on 3181998.
In this regard it is submitted that to fill up one post of Tehsildar in Revenue Department by making appointment by transfers from Ziledars of Irrigation Department, respondent No. 1 vide letter dated 1981998 sent a requisition to respondent No. 4 and asked to sponsor the names of eligible and suitable Ziledars of his department up to 2.9.98 for consideration along with their up to date character rolls, attested summaries of A.C.Rs.
and service books.
A copy of letter dated 1981998 has already been attached an Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
The answering respondent came to know about the passing of order dated 1981998 in the end of August and he immediately submitted his application to his incharge i.e. respondent No. 13 and he recommended his case to Superintending Engineer i.e. respondent No. 12 and who processed the application of the answering respondent and recommended his name to the respondent No. 3 i.e. General Manager (Project) Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh.
Thereafter, respondent No. 3 vide his letter No. 5869/3NGE-II/98 dated 2.9.98 sponsored the names of Shri Atma Ram, Ziledar (answering respondent) and Balwan Singh for consideration in connection with their appointment by transfer to the post of Tehsildar on the basis of merit and seniority being a selection post."
He has filed an additional affidavit dated 841999 detailing the circumstances in which his application was forwarded on 3181998 by the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad, D/S Division and the Superintending Engineer, BWS Circle, No. II Hissar to the General Manager (Project), Irrigation Department, Haryana and the latter sent it to the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) on 291998.
He has also tried to justify the action of the department authorities to relieve him on 2591998 from Fatehgarh and also to allow him to join duty as Tehsildar in the office of the Commissioner, Hissar Division, Hissar by making the following statement :  "It was ultimately on 2591998 that the order of appointment came to be made in favour of the deponent.
On 2591998, the deponent happened to be in Chandigarh.
He came to know from the office of Irrigation Department that he had been selected as Tehsildar in the Revenue Department.
Deponent immediately approached the office of Financial Commissioner and Secretary, Department of Revenue and secured a copy of the order of his appointment dated 2591998 and after getting a copy of the said letter, depondent immediately left for Fatehabad where he was posted.
He reached Fatehabad at about 330 PM and was relieved by the Executive Engineer vide order dated 2591998.
A copy of the relieving order is attached as Annexure R.3/9 to this affidavit.
Thereafter, he went to Hissar and submitted his joining report in Hissar, the same day in the afternoon.
It may be mentioned here that the deponent was in hurry to join because always in this department, whenever appointment has been made of Tehsildar by way of transfer or for that matter for almost in other appointments there is invariably a writ petition filed in the High Court.
Petition were filed in the years 1991 and 1992 when appointments were made in the previous years.
Therefore, the depondent was keen that he should join as quickly as possible."
8.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents to the writ petition of Balwan Singh Shri SD Arora has made averments similar to those contained in the written statement of C.W.P.
No. 18026 of 1998.
In order to justify the selection and appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu, Shri Arora has in paragraph 12 made the following statement :  "It is submitted that to fill up one post of Tehsildar in Revenue Department as per the provisions of Rules 7 and 9 of Haryana Revenue (Group-B) Service Rules, 1988, by transfer from Zonal Ziledars of State Irrigation Department, the Enginner-in-Chief, Public Works Department (Irrigation), Haryana, Chandigarh was requested on 1981998 to sponsor the names of eligible and suitable Ziledars of his department for consideration alongwith their upto date character rolls, attested summaries of Annual Confidential Reports and Service Book.
The General Manager (Project), Irrigation Department vide his letter No. 5869-3NGEII-99 dated 2.9.98 sponsored the names of respondent No. 3 and the petitioner for consideration in connection with their appointment by transfer to the post of Tehsildar in Revenue Department along with their service record.
The Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation, Haryana, Chandigarh was again requested vide this office memo No. 4082-E-2-98/10114 dated 9998 to recommend more names of eligible and suitable officials along with service record and certificates about pendency of disciplinary proceedings/vigilance inquiry against them.
It was also requested that a certificate about the petitioner as to whether any disciplinary action/vigilance inquiry is pending against him, should be sent to this department.
The General Manager (Project), Irrigation Department, Haryana vide his letter dated 1691998 intimated that no more names of Ziledars had been recommended by the field Superintending Engineers and as such, the names of respondent No. 3 and the petitioner already recommended vide his office letter No. 5869/3NGE-II/99 dated 291998 may be considered as final for the post of Tehsildar on the basis of their available service record earlier sent to this office.
The petitioner was not interviewed as there were only two candidates recommended by the Irrigation Department, the names of respondent No. 3 and the petitioner, the selection was made strictly on the basis of service record and seniority which was clear of these two candidates.
Respondent No. 3 had joined as Ziledar in 1984.
He is 41 years in age.
He has 14 years service as Ziledar.
His total record of service from 1984 to 1997-98 is good and 'Outstanding' category.
His latest 8 years Annual Confidential Reports are Outstanding.
No disciplinary action against the official is pending in the Irrigation Department/Vigilance Department and his integrity is also clear.
The petitioner has joined as Ziledar since 1986 and has 12 years service.
He is 42 years in age.
His Annual Confidential Reports from 1993-94 to 1997-98 which were made available by the Irrigation Department, are total 4 in number and are of 'Very Good' category.
No disciplinary case/inquiry pending is against the petitioner in Irrigation Department/Vigilance Department and his integrity is also clear.
From the comparison of the merit of respondent No. 3 and that of petitioner, respondent No. 3 is senior to the petitioner and his record of service is far superior to that of the petitioner.
After careful consideration of the case, respondent No. 3 has been accepted as B-Class Tehsildar on the basis of merit and seniority.
Thus, the acceptance of respondent No. 3 as B-Class Tehsildar is not an arbitrary and discriminatory manner in haste.
The rest of the para is denied for want of knowledge."
During the course of arguments on 741999 and 941999, we repeatedly enquired from the learned Deputy Advocate General as to why the memo dated 1981998 sent by the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) to the Engineer-in- Chief, Irrigation Department, Haryana was not circulated to the concerned authorities of the Irrigation Department till 191998 and how the name of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu could be recommended by the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad and the Superintending Engineer, Hissar (II) on 3181998 i.e. a day before the General Manager (Project) circulated the instructions issued by the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
We also enquired from him as to how the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad relieved respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu on 2591998 and the Commissioner, Hissar Division could accept his joining report on that very day even before receipt of copy of the order of his appointment.
Shri Jaswant Singh could not give any satisfactory reply to either of these queries.
But Shri PS Patwalia, counsel representing respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu made valiant efforts to convince us that the recommendation of the name of his client even before the circulation of the memo dated 1981998, the action of the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad to relieve him and that of the Commissioner, Hissar Division to allow him to join duty on 2591998 are not tainted with bias or mala fides.
He submitted that respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu did so due to over enthusiasm and also with a view to frustrate any attempt of other Ziledars to stall his appointment by seeking stay from the Court.
However, he also expressed inability to explain the delay in the circulation of the memo dated 1981998 to the concerned authorities of the Irrigation Department under whom the petitioners and other Ziledars are working.
9.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have carefully scrutinised the record.
10.
There is no dispute between the parties that recruitment of B-Class Tehsildar is regulated by the 1998 Rules.
The source of recruitment is 40% by direct recruitment, 40% by promotion and 20% by transfer from amongst (i) Superintendents of the office of the Deputy Commissioners; (ii) Assistant Superintendents of Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners offices; (iii) District Kanungos; (iv) Ziledars of Irrigation Department; and (v) Head Assistant of the office of the Director, Land Records.
Rule 9 of the 1988 Rules, which contains the procedure for recruitment reads as under :  "9 (1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made : (a) in the case of District Revenue Officers by promotion from amongst Tehsildars; (b) in the case of Tehsildars :- (i) 40% by direct recruitment of persons recommended by the Commission for appointment to the post of the Tehsildar on the basis of HCS (Executive Branch) and Allied Service Examination; (ii) 40% by promotion from amongst Naib Tehsildars; and (iii) 20% by transfer from amongst :- (i) Superintendent of the office of the Deputy Commissioner; (ii) Assistant Superintendent of Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners Office; (iii) District Kanungos; (iv) Zonal Ziledars of P.W.D.
(Irrigation Banch); or (v) Head Assistant of Director Land Records Office.
(2) Appointment by promotion shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis and seniority alone shall not give any right to such promotions."
A bare reading of the above quoted rule shows that although five different categories of employees, including Ziledars of Irrigation Department, are eligible to be considered for appointment as Tehsildar by transfer, no separate quota has been earmarked for various categories.
Therefore, ordinarily an inter-laced seniority list of the officials of different categories is required to be prepared before appointment by transfer can be made on the post of Tehsildar.
However, the fact of the matter is that the department has been making appointment on the posts of Tehsildars without preparing such list.
This appears to be the sole reason why Ziledars of Irrigation Department were not considered for appointment as B-Class Tehsildars when others were given appointment and but for the filing of C.W.P.
No. 1057 of 1998 by petitioner-Balwan Singh, the official respondents may have altogether ignored Ziledars from being considered for appointment as Tehsildar by transfer.
It was good of the government to have realised the mistake committed by the officials of the Revenue Department by not inviting applications from eligible Ziledars of Irrigation Department to be considered for appointment as Tehsildar by transfer under the 1988 Rules but what followed this realisation is a glaring illustration of machination by respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu who pulled strings at various levels in the Irrigation as well as Revenue Departments to secure appointment as Tehsildar resulting in gross violation of the constitutional right of consideration vested in other Ziledars.
11.
At the cost of repetition, we consider it necessary to mention that the memo dated 1981998 issued by the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) requiring the Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department to sponsor the names of eligible candidates was not circulated among the competent authorities till one day before the last date fixed for the submission of applications.
This must have been done to ensure the selection of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu to the exclusion of the other eligible Ziledars, else the respondents should have given some tangible explanation as to how and why the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad and the Superintending Engineer, Hissar (II) recommended and forwarded his application even before they could know that names of eligible Ziledars are to be recommended in pursuance of memo dated 1981998.
The silence of the official respondents in this respect militates against the fairness of the procedure adopted by them.
This inference of ours is fortified from the fact even while forwarding the records of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu and petitioner-Balwan Singh [the latter had to be nominated by the General Manager (Project) because his name was mentioned in the memo dated 1981998], most of the A.C.Rs.
of Balwan Singh were withheld and were not sent even after receipt of the letter dated 991998 from the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
What has surprised us the most is that after receipt of the second memo from the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue), the authorities of the Irrigation Department did not bother to forward the names of other Ziledars although some of the petitioners and other Ziledars were working under those very officers who had sponsored and recommended the name of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu.
In our opinion, the abject failure of the concerned authorities to circulate the memo dated 1981998 in time so as to enable the eligible candidates to apply for consideration of their cases for recruitment and the consequential exclusion of their candidature is sufficient to hold that the selection and appointment of Atma Ram Bhadu is tainted with arbitrariness and is vitiated due to the patent violation of the right to equality in the matter of employment guaranteed to the eligible Ziledars to be considered for appointment under the 1988 Rules.
12.
The unusal haste shown by respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu in securing copy of the order dated 2591998, getting himself relieved by the Executive Engineer, Fatehabad and manipulate his joining under the Commissioner, Hissar Division, Hissar, while he was on leave clearly shows that the different officers of the department had gone out of way to help him.
13.
If the assertions made by Atma Ram Bhadu in his affidavit dated 841998 are examined in the backdrop of the fact that he was on leave on 2591998, there is no escape from the conclusion that he master-minded the entire exercise with perfection.
In the first place, he secured a copy of the order dated 2591998 from the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue).
Immediately after obtaining copy of the order he rushed from Chandigarh to Fatehabad and got himself relieved.
He then joined at Hissar.
All this was done in one day.
How he could manage to obtain copy of the order dated 2591998 directly from the office of the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) is a matter of mystery and deserves to be probed by the concerned authority.
But, what followed leaves nothing for guess work.
Rather, it is illustrative of the pervasive sickness with which the system suffers.
The Executive Engineer, Fatehabad and the concerned officer of the office of the Commissioner, Hissar were out to help Atma Ram Bhadu.
They danced to the tune of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu ignoring the basic norms of discipline, else there was no occasion to relieve him from Fatehabad or to allow him to join at Hissar while he was on leave and that too before receipt of copy of the order of his appointment through proper channel.
To us, all this appears to have been done due to extraneous reasons.
14.
Shri Patwalia made strenuous efforts to persuade us not to interfere with the impugned appointment by stating that respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu has been found suitable after a comparative evaluation of his record with that of petitioner-Balwant Singh and further that during the pendency of the writ petitions, the department has made another comparative evaluation of the record of the petitioners and respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu and have again found him the most suitable candidate.
However, we have not felt persuaded to agree with him.
It is an admitted fact that names of none of the eligible Ziledars were forwarded to the Financial Commissioner (Revenue) and most of them did not even know the process for recruitment of B-Class Tehsildar from among Ziledars has been initiated vide memo dated 1981998.
Petitioner-Hans Paul Sheokand and others are only few of them.
Therefore, the non-official respondent cannot derive any solace from the fact that on the basis of so- called comparative evaluation of records he has been found more suitable.
In our view, acceptance of the submission of Shri Patwalia would tantamount the Court becoming a party to the fraud enacted by the officers concerned and respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu and that we are not prepared to do that.
15.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the selection and appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu amounts to total negation of the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, and, therefore, the same is liable to be quashed.
16.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are allowed.
The selection and appointment of respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu is declared illegal and quashed.
He is ordered to be reverted forthwith and posted as Ziledar.
The official respondents shall pay costs of Rs. 2500/- to each of the petitioners.
This amount shall be recovered by the government from the officers/officials who may be found guilty of having derelicted in the discharge of their duties.
Respondent-Atma Ram Bhadu shall also pay Rs. 2500/- to each of the petitioners.
Petitions allowed.