Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 11.11.97 as modified by an order dated 21.11.97 by a learned single Judge of this court in Civil Order No. 19008(W) of 1992.
The fact of the matter lies in a narrow compass.
2.
The writ petitioner-first respondent passed his school final examination conducted by the Board of Secondary Education in the year 1956.
He was appointed in Sri Ramkrishna Sikshalaya, Howarh in the year 1960.
He also obtained appointment in Howarh Municipal Corporation, previously Howrah Municipality as a clerk in the year 1962.
The petitioner was placed under suspension by the corporation.
He filed a writ application questioning the order of suspension as also the disciplinary proceeding despite the fact that after the said order of suspension he did not report for duty.
The petitioner filed a writ application, which was registered as CR 764(W) of 1984.
In the meantime, the writ petitioner approached the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education for correcting his date of birth.
It appears that on the basis of the date of birth recorded in his service book i.e. 19.1.32, he having attained the age of superannuation in 1992, applied for and got extension.
It is accepted that the State of West Bengal issued various notifications in terms whereof while fixing the age of superannuation at 60 so far as aided and non-aided schools are concerned, an option had been given to them to apply for extension which could be granted subject to fulfilment of the conditions mentioned therein including an option to be exercised by the concerned teachers to get their pay on the basis of the scale of pay prior to coming into force of the ROPA Rules, 1987 which were applied in case of the teachers in the year 1990.
The petitioner filed an application before the District Inspector of Schools (PE), Howrah, for his second extension wherein, inter alia, it was alleged that he had applied for correction of his date of birth.
He has not brought on record his first application for extension.
As the petitioner's application for correction date of birth was not being disposed of by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, he filed the instant writ application impleading, inter alia, the Howrah Municipal Corporation and its Mayor, in the year 1992.
The school authorities were not impleaded as parties.
An application for further order was filed and affirmed on 12th April, 1996 wherein he, inter alia, prayed for the following reliefs:  "(a) Leave be granted to the writ petitioner to implead the proposed respondent as party in the instant petition; (b) Pass an order directing the proposed respondents not to act on the basis of the incorrect date of birth of the writ petitioner in respect of the service of the writ petitioner, in Sri Ramkrishna Sikshalaya, Howarh; (c) An order of injunction do issue restraining the proposed respondents from retiring the petitioner from his service in Sri Ramkrishna Sikshalaya, Howrah on the basis of the incorrect date of birth as recorded in Admit Card as well School Final Examination Certificate of the petitioner and also restraining the proposed respondents from effecting the superannuation of the petitioner with effect from 19197 on the basis of incorrect date of birth i.e. 19.1.32 till disposal of the writ petition."
The said application was filed on the ground that he is still working in Sri Ramkrishna Sikshalaya.
The petitioner in that application itself admitted that he was employed with Howrah Municipal Corporation and he had been placed under suspension and departmental proceeding had been initiated against him as regards his double employment and he moved a writ application which was numbered as CR 764(W) of 1984 and the same was still pending.
The petitioner filed the said application on the ground that after obtaining extension he was to retire on 19197 as per his date of birth as recorded in the service book.
It was stated that the petitioner would be permitted to work in the said school until he attains the age of sixty-five as he did not exercise the option and expressed to retaining the old scale in terms of the relevant Rules.
As per the original date of birth the petitioner would reach superannuation in the said school on 19.1.2002.
But as per incorrect date of birth petitioner would be permitted to work in the said school upto 18.1.97.
It was further stated that as per rule the petitioner is now on extension of service and upto the age of 65 years petitioner would be in service.
On the basis of incorrect date of birth the petitioner had to take extension of service on and from 19.1.92 during the pendency of the instant writ petition for age correction.
Allegedly the petitioner accepted the said his extension of a service as per incorrect date of birth without prejudice to his rights and contentions in the pending writ petition being No. 19008(W) of 1992.
A copy of the said letter written by the petitioner addressed to the concerned authority wherein the petitioner stated that extension of service is accepted without prejudice to his rights and contention in the pending writ petition being No. 19008(W) of 1992 was annexed to the said application and marked `X'.
On the basis the said application, the Chairman and others, Ad hoc Committee of the District Primary School Council were added as parties.
The petitioner has filed a writ application originally claiming, inter alia, for the following reliefs :-  "(a) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to act and proceed in accordance with law by rectifying the date of birth of the petitioner on the basis of Annexures `A', `B', `D' and `H' in the instant writ petition and by cancelling the impugned Memo.
being No 532- C/90/Age(R)5444/G dated 3192 issued by the Secretary, West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, which will be annexed with the impugned order; (b) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus do issue directing the respondents to rectify the correct date of birth indicated both in School Final Admit Card as well as School Final Certificate on the basis of Annexures`A', `B', `D' and `H', (c) A writ and/or in the nature of certiorari do issue directing the respondents to transmit the entire records of the case and to certify the same including file No. P-675/90, of the writ petitioner maintained in the Age Correction Department of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education."
Although, as noticed hereinbefore, he had filed an application for interim order and despite the fact that the said application for addition of party was allowed, the writ application stood unamended and thus no relief had been claimed as against the applicant.
During the pendency of the said writ application, the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education corrected the date of birth of the petitioner from 19132 to 20th March, 1937.
Admittedly such an application was filed in the year 1990.
From the certificate produced before us, it also appears that he had appeared as a private candidate.
3.
The question which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether despite the fact that petitioner's date of birth was corrected in the Matriculation certificate, the same is binding on the appellant.
A Division Bench of this court in Saroj Kumar Bhattacharya v. Bengal Immunity Limited and others reported in 1994(1) C.L.J 79 : 1995(2) SCT 121, I held that it would not be proper to correct the date of birth in respect of the private candidate.
Before us an attempt has been made by Mr. Basu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent writ-petitoner, to show that the petitioner had been reading in a school and correction of his date of birth had been made on the basis of the register maintained therein.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the petitioner at the time of his appointment relied upon his date of birth as stated in the School Leaving Certificate.
We do not intend to go into the correctness or otherwise of the letters exchanged between the school and in particular the letter which the petitioner allegedly wrote to the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education for correction of his date of birth, but even otherwise, we are of the opinion that apart from the decision referred to by Mrs. Choudhuri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, there are other decisions of other High Courts to that effect.
Reference in this connection may be made to 62 F.L.R.
766 and 68 FLR 1183.
Furthermore, the Apex Court in a decision reported in AIR 1988 SC 1796 which decision had been followed by a Division Bench of this Court in Chittaranjan Das v. Durgapur Project Ltd, reported in 99 CWN 897, categorically held that even in relation to entry of date of birth in the school register primary evidence should be produced.
No such primary evidence has been produced.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by this Court in Calcutta Port Trust and Ors. v. Ajit Kumar Deb reported in 1996 Lab.
I.C.
167 : 1996(4) SCT (DB) 413 (Calcutta).
It is further well known that at the fag end of the career, it is not permissible for any person to apply for change of date of birth.
Reference in this connection may be made to Pratul Kumar v Steel Authority of India reported in 1996(1) C.H.N.
347.
(Burn Standard Co Ltd v. Dinabandhu Majumbar).
Thus even if a date of birth has been corrected by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education the same is not binding on the appellant.
The appellant is not bound to change the service book and treat the petitioner to be in Service till 20th March,1997 as was directed by the learned trial Judge.
The learned trial judge recorded the concession made on behalf of the write-petitioner that he does not intend to serve after attaining the age of sixty, i.e. after 20th March 1997.
The learned trial Judge has given him a liberty to opt for revised scale of pay.
In this case, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner admitted that he, apart from serving the school was also serving the Howrah Municipal Corporation which shows his conduct, we are of the opinion that he is not entitled to any equitable relief.
Furthermore, only when his date of birth was corrected by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, he withdrew the writ application filed against the Howrah Municipal Corporation.
If he had claimed himself to be an employee of the Howrah Municipal Corporation and as even in his original writ application, Horawh Municipal Corporation was a party, admittedly he could not work in the school in question.
Such double employment on the part of the petitioner cannot be appreciated and in any event, encouraged by this Court.
Furthermore, in the event admittedly, the petitioner had worked upto 20th January, 1997 pursuant to the policy-decision of the State of West Bengal and thus, obtained the benefit of the extension of service.
Having obtained such benefit in terms of the notification he was bound to receive his salary on the basis of the pre- revised scale after serving the school upto the age of sixty-five years.
He now cannot be permitted to get double benefit only because in the meantime, the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education has corrected his date of birth inasmuch as by reason of the impugned order he would now be entitled to get his salary at the revised scale of pay in terms of the ROPA Rules to which he was not entitled to in terms of the aforementioned notification.
In that view of the matter, in our opinion, the petitioner is estopped and precluded from contending that the changed date of birth is not binding on the employer and it should act thereupon.
In our opinion, the learned trial judge erred in so far as it failed to take into consideration this aspect of the matter.
4.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be upheld, which is, accordingly, set aside and the writ application of the petitioner is dismissed.
The appeal is allowed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.