GS Singhvi, J - This petition was filed on August 23, 1995 for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to depute the petitioners for Foresters Training Course in accordance with their seniority and also to quash the orders deputing the non-official respondents for such course.
2.
When the case was taken up today, the learned counsel for the petitioners made a statement that he does not want to prosecute the writ petition against the non-official respondents.
In view of his statement, the Court ordered the deletion of the names of respondents No. 5 to 39 from the array of parties.
3.
In view of the fact that the respondents No. 5 to 39 have been deleted from that array of the respondents, no order to their prejudice can be passed by the Court and in our considered view the prayer made by the petitioners to quash the orders by which the private respondents were deputed for Foresters' Training Course has to be rejected.
4.
The only question which now survives is whether the petitioners are entitled to be deputed for Foresters' Training Course.
The averments made in the writ petition show that the petitioners have entered the Government service on their appointment as Forest Guard between 861971 to 18111977.
In the gradation list of Forest Guards, names of the petitioners appear at sufficiently high numbers.
Their grievance is that the official respondents ignored their seniority while deputing the candidates for Foresters' Training Course.
The petitioners have alleged that the persons junior to them have been deputed for training in total disregard of the Punjab Forest Subordinate Service (Executive Section) Rules, 1944, and the letter dated 23.4.1963 written by the Chief Conservator of Forests, Punjab to the Deputy Chief Conservator of Forests.
5.
The respondents have pleaded that despite their placement at higher position in the seniority list of Forests Guards, the petitioners are not eligible to be deputed for training course because they had not reached the age of 45 years as on 1461995.
6.
Shri SP Singh vehemently argued that the decision of the respondents to prescribe the requirement of 45 years age is contrary to the rules apart from being arbitrary and unreasonable.
He submitted that the seniority of Forest Guard cannot be ignored while deputing the eligible candidates for Foresters' Training which entitle them to be promoted on the post of Forester.
7.
Having thoughtfully considered the submissions of Shri SP Singh, we are of the opinion that no relief can be given to the petitioners because all the seats in the training college stand filled on account of the deputation of the persons who were added as respondents No. 5 to 39 in the writ petition, but whose names stand deleted on the basis of oral request made by the counsel.
It does not lie within the domain of the Court to increase the number of the seats available in the training college.
At best, the Court could have nullified the orders by which the persons junior to the petitioners have been deputed.
However, that cannot now be done because the so-called junior persons are no longer parties to the writ petition and while exercising the powers under Article 226, the court cannot issue a writ, order or direction adversely affecting the rights and interests of other persons who are not party respondents.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.