B Rai, J - The petitioner, who has been appointed as a Class-IV employee on compassionate grounds, has prayed for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to consider his case for appointment in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide circular dated 31st August, 1995.
2.
The averments made in the writ petition show that Shri Chanan Ram father of the petitioner died on 31.8.1993 while working as Electrician under the Civil Surgeon, Gurgaon.
The post of Electrician carried the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
The petitioner's mother as well as the petitioner applied for his appointment on compassionate grounds.
By an order dated 2361995, the Director General, Health Services, Haryana conveyed his sanction to the appointment of the petitioner as a Class IV servant.
After joining as Class IV Ward Servant on 1471995 the petitioner represented to the respondents that he should have been considered for appointment on a Class-III post carrying pay scale lower than the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
In the representations made by him the petitioner has relied on the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular letters dated 851995 and 3181995.
However, his representations have not been decided so far.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the pay scales prescribed by the Government of Haryana and argued that the respondents are under an obligation to consider the case of the petitioner for ex gratia employment on a post carrying one pay scale below that of the post held by his father but without any rhyme or reason the respondents have chosen to appoint him two pay scales below the pay scale of the post of Electrician which was held by his father at the time of his demise.
He also invited our attention to the order dated 1461996 issued in favour of Shri Anup Kumar who has been given ex gratia employment against Class-III post and submitted that the respondents have acted arbitrarily by not considering the case of the petitioner in a correct perspective.
4.
After having given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions of the learned counsel, we are of the opinion that the respondents must decide the claim made by the petitioner in his representations as well as the writ petition and there does not appear any reason why the respondents failed to decide the plea of the petitioner that he should be considered for employment in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide Circular letters dated 851995 and 3181995.
When a petitioner approaches the High Court for issuance of a writ of mandamus, the Court normally insists on the fulfilment of the requirement of notice for justice as a condition precedent to the entertaining of writ petition.
The purpose of serving a notice of demand for justice in the form of a formal notice through an Advocate or in the form of a representation is to enable the competent authority to take a decision on the claim made by the representationist/petitioner.
In large majority of cases the party may feel satisfied with the decision of the administrative authority and may not litigate in the Court.
That would save a lot of money which may be required to be spent by the petitioner as well as by the public exchequer to contest a litigation in the Court.
Therefore, it is always imperative for the competent departmental authority to take an early decision on the representation/notice of demand for justice.
It needs hardly to be emphasised that absence of any decision on the representation/notice of demand for justice results in unnecessary litigation in the Courts and substantial time of the Court is consumed in deciding cases which ought to be decided by the administrative authorities.
5.
We, therefore, dispose of the writ petition with the direction that the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 should examine the writ petition of the petitioner along with his representations and decide his claim for appointment in terms of instructions contained in the circular letters dated 851995 and 3181995 within three months of the submission of certified copy of this order together with a copy of the writ petition.
In case the respondents come to the conclusion that the petitioner is not entitled to ex gratia employment on the post carrying one pay scale lower than that of the post held by his father, then reasoned order should be passed and communicated to the petitioner within this period of three months.