P Shanmugam, J - The selection for one seat each to the MBBS and BDS courses from among the ``physically handicapped'' category is under challenge.
The question that arises for consideration is whether the ``degree of disability'' is a reasonable method of selection from among the physically handicapped.
The relevant portion of the prospectus for MBBS on this aspect is extracted as follows :  ``One seat for the 1st MBBS course will be reserved for orthopaedically and other handicapped candidates who are having more than 40% disability and are suitable for undergoing medical education and otherwise eligible for admission, as per clause I Selection will be made on the basis of the degree of disability assessed by the clinical experts associated with a committee constituted and approved by the committee at the time of interview and not on the basis of marks obtained by the candidates at the Pre Degree or equivalent examinations or the entrance test.
Selection will be made by the committee consisting of the Director of Medical Education (Chairman), Joint Director of Medical Education (M) (Convener), Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram and Director and Prosecutor/Professor of Orthopaedics, Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram (Members)''.
2.
The petitioner belongs to Scheduled Casts and has a degree of 45% permanent disability as per the certificate issued by the competent authority.
The petitioner has secured more than the minimum mark in the subjects in her Pre-degree examination.
Satisfying the eligibility she applied and appeared for the entrance examination for the selection to MBBS and BDS under handicapped category on 2561994 and was included in the rank list for the interview on 11101994.
The select list was published in the Notice Board on 15101994.
Copy of which is Ext.
P-6 has been challenged on the following grounds.
(i) The criteria of selection viz., the degree of disability is unreasonable and arbitrary; (ii) The selection of 5th respondent is on private influence and consideration and hence, illegal.
3.
An Administrative Assistant of Directorate of Medical Education, Thiruvananthapuram, has filed a counter affidavit on behalf of the Director of Medical Education.
According to the counter, the select list was prepared and approved by the selection committee after examination of each candidate where his/her percentage of disability and fitness to undergo the course was assessed.
The selection was based on the highest percentage of disability from among those fit to undergo the course.
4.
The fifth respondent has filed a counter.
He is suffering from Meningo Myelococle with Neurogenic bladder with disability above 60%.
According to him, the Court cannot sit in judgment over the selection.
5.
The sixth respondent has filed a counter.
He is suffering from Post-polio residual paralysis of both the lower limbs and his permanent disability is assessed as 50%.
According to him, the selection committee considered the suitability of candidates to undergo the course and it is beyond the jurisdiction of the court to go into the question of selection.
6.
The Government Pleader made available the Minutes of records relating to selection.
There were four members in the Selection Committee consisting of Director of Medical Service, Joint Director of Medical Service, Prof. of Phy.
Medicine and Rehabilitation and Prof. of Orthopaedics Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram.
It is seen from the minutes there were 82 candidates.
Of these two candidates were rejected by the Commissioner for Entrance Commission, 15 did not report for the interview held on 11th and 12th October, 1994.
Four were considered too disabled to undergo the course.
From the remaining candidates, the Committee prepared a list after evaluating their percentage of disability and considering their ability to undergo the courses of studies.
7.
In the assessment of disability of candidates, the Committee found the percentage of disability of the petitioner and respondent as follows :  Chithra C. (Petitioner) - 35% Naveen Philip Mammen (Respondent No. 5) - 67% Subu R (Respondent No. 6) - 65% 8.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondents are not fit to undergo the course as their disability is on the higher side and the finding that the petitioner's disability at 35% is erroneous.
In the case of respondent No. 5, it is submitted that he has lost his senses on both legs and as a crawling student he would not be in a position to undergo the strenuous study of Medicine.
According to him, he would not be in a position to study and perform surgery.
It is true that as Ext.
P2 certificate obtained by the petitioner from Associate Professor of Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Medical College Hospital, Kottayam her disability is assessed as 45% and as per the certificate produced by respondent No. 5 [Ext.
R5(b)] it is over 60% and for respondent No. 6 it is 50% [Ext.
R6b].
The discrepancy is unexplained.
As the assessment is made by a committee constituted for that purpose, in the absence of any contra evidence the assessment made by the Committee has to be accepted as authentic and binding.
I have no reason to doubt either their competence or assessment objectively to the effect that respondent No. 5 and 6 are fit to undergo the medical courses.
They have selected the candidates which as per the conditions laid down in the prospectus, viz., based on the degree of disability.
9.
The reservation is for handicapped students.
The minimum disability required for consideration is 40%.
It means that a candidate will come under the definition of `Handicapped' if he suffers 40% disability of his normal function.
Thereafter from among those disabled selection is sought to be on the basis of their maximum of disablement but the outer limit is upto his capacity to undergo the course with that maximum disablement.
This latter portion of norm in my view is not reasonable.
10.
Any reservation by virtue of executive power of State must stand the test of reasonableness, unlike other reservation like ``eminent sportsmen''.
Sportsmen are to be selected on the basis of their eminence.
But, in reservation categories like disabled, Ex-service men, etc. once they are within a particular category, there cannot be further differentiation based on their disablement.
Thereafter, it must be relevant to the selection to the course, i.e., based on their academic performance.
11.
A Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in Register, Andhra University N Venkateswarlu (AIR 1984 AP 248) in somewhat similar circumstances has taken the view that degree of disability of individual candidates could not enter the field of selection.
No weightage on the basis of degree of disability could be given thus picking up a more orthopaedically handicapped candidate.
12.
A learned Judge of Punjab and Haryana in Vimish Jain v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 613 (SC) : (AIR 1991 P&H 222) has taken the view that when the reservation is for a particular category their inter se merit cannot be ignored on the quantum of handicappness as they constitute one class.
13.
I am in respectful agreement with the above decisions.
14.
In Pradeep Jain v Union of India, (AIR 1984 SC 1420) the Supreme Court has held that the effort must always be to select the best and most meritorious students for admission to technical institutions and Medical Colleges by providing equal opportunity to all citizens.
The primary consideration in selection of candidates for admission to the medical colleges must therefore be merit.
The object of any rule which may be made for regulating admission to medical college must be to select the best and most meritorious students.
15.
Since the selection had not taken into account, the interview marks with is normally the criteria for selection, the question of comparison of the relative merit cannot be made.
Further, the petitioner does not satisfy the minimum requirement of 40% to come under the category of ``handicapped''.
No relief can be granted to the petitioner.
However, as a person who has got permanent disability of 45% as per the certificate is produced, she is an aggrieved person and is entitled to maintain the writ petition in so far as the third and fourth prayers are concerned.
The selection list was published in the Notice Board on 21.10.1994.
The petitioner has preferred the above Original Petition on 28101994.
This Court in CMP No. 26485 of 1994 dated 28101994 ordered that the admissions to the handicapped quota will be provisional and would be subject to the result of the Original Petition.
As the candidates have been undergoing the medical courses for the past 2 years and the person who would be eligible for being considered has not challenged the same this Court at the distant point of time would not unsettle the selection based on an erroneous application of reservation.
16.
For all these reasons, I hold that the provisions of Clause VII (1)(j) and Clause VI(II) of the prospectus for medical education which prescribes rule of selection based on degree of disability are unconstitutional, unreasonable, arbitrary and illegal.
I hold that selection of physically handicapped candidates with the minimum disability of 40% must be based on merit and not on the degree of disability.
17.
For the reasons stated above, the petitioner is not eligible to be considered under the reservation quota.
The Original Petition is disposed of accordingly.