Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the petitioner entitled to count his service rendered in a private transport society for the purpose of claiming retiral benefits on his retirement from the Transport Department of the State of Haryana ?
This is the primary question that arises for consideration in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a clerk in Karnal Cooperative Transport Society Ltd, Karnal in August 1948.
In the year 1971, the transport services were nationalised in the State of Haryana.
Resultantly, the private transport companies were unable to operate on various routes.
Various employees including the petitioner were rendered surplus.
On October 30, 1972, the petitioner was retrenched from the service.
Thereafter, he submitted an application for appointment in the Transport Department of the State Government.
He submitted his application on the prescribed proforma on March, 22, 1973.
He was asked to appear for interview.
He did.
On December 6, 1973, the Subordinate Services Selection Board recommended his case for appointment.
On May 30, 1974 the petitioner was offered appointment as an Assistant Accounts Clerk in the Transport Department.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P/5 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this document shows that the petitioner was placed on probation for a period of two years which could be extended.
His conditions of services were to be governed by the provisions of the rules and the orders issued by the State Government.
The petitioner was also called upon to produce certain documents.
After doing the needful, the petitioner actually joined on June 16, 1974.
He retired on January 31, 1984 when he had attained the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years.
3.
In the year 1990, certain persons working in the Haryana Roadways filed writ petitions praying for the issue of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the State of Haryana to give them the benefit of the service rendered by them with the private employers prior to their absorption in the Transport Department.
These writ petitions were allowed by a learned single Judge of this Court vide order dated September 24, 1993.
It was held that the petitioners were entitled to the benefit of service rendered by them ``in private organisations for determining their pensionary and super- annuatory benefits''.
Presumably, taking a clue from this, the petitioner also represented for the grant of similar benefits.
Having failed to get the requisite relief, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition in May, 1994.
He prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to count the service rendered by him ``in private co-operative society prior to his absorption and to release the pensionary and superannuatory benefits on the basis of his aforesaid total length of service.''
4.
The respondents contest this claim and point out that the petitioner is not entitled to claim the benefit of service rendered by him in the private organisation prior to his employment in the State Government.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. IP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the service rendered by him prior to his employment with the State Government.
The learned counsel has further submitted that even if the benefit of the past service is not given to the petitioner, he having been selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for appointment in December 1973, should have been given the letter of appointment immediately thereafter.
If that had been done, the petitioner would have completed ten years of qualifying service by the date of his retirement on January 31, 1984.
In that event, he would have been entitled to the grant of pension.
The action of the Department in delaying the appointment was arbitrary and it has resulted in a continuing recurring loss to the petitioner.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing on behalf of the respondents.
6.
Admittedly the petitioner was working with a private cooperative society from August 1948 to October, 1972.
At the time of retrenchment, all benefits as admissible under the law were given to the petitioner.
Mr. IP Singh concedes that even the provident fund was paid to the petitioner.
Thereafter, his selection and appointment by the respondent-department was a totally fresh act.
There was no element of continuity.
The petitioner had submitted an application.
He was considered and offered appointment vide letter dated May 30, 1974.
The petitioner had accepted this offer and joined his new post of Assistant Accounts Clerk on June 16, 1974.
It was a fresh employment under a new employer.
There was no rule or law under which the petitioner will be entitled to say that the benefit of service rendered by him with the private employer should be given to him towards retiral benefits by the State Government.
Neither any rule nor any executive order or instructions have been pointed out to show that the petitioner is entitled to any such benefit.
In fact, even a promise to that affect was not made by anyone at any time.
In such a situation the petitioner is not entitled to claim that the previous service should be counted for the purpose of determining his retiral benefits.
7.
While deciding civil writ petition No. 15088 of 1990 vide order dated September 24, 1993, a view had been taken by this Court that the benefit of previous service should be given.
However, it is the admitted position that this decision has been reversed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in civil appeal No. 12316 of 1996 vide order dated September 20, 1996.
Relying on the decision in Haryana State Electricity Board v. Radhey Shyam Garg and others, civil appeal No. 1304 of 1995 decided on October 31, 1995, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have been pleased to set aside the judgment and remit the matter to the High Court for a afresh decision of the case in accordance with law.
In Radhey Shyam Garg's case (supra) a similar claim was made by the employees of Haryana State Electricity Board for the grant of benefit of service rendered by them in the private electricity company.
This was negatived by their Lordships.
The decision of the learned single Judge in CWP No. 2045 of 1992 of March 8, 1994, which was affirmed by the Letters Patent Bench in LPA No. 89 of 1994, was set aside.
Similarly even in State of Punjab v. Dev Dutt Kaushal etc., JT 1995(3) SC 225 : 1995(4) SCT 575(SC), the claim of the teachers for the grant of benefit of the service rendered by them in the private educational institutions before their absorption in the Government schools/colleges has been negatived.
In view of these authoritative pronouncements, the petitioner's claim for the grant of benefit of the service rendered by him from August, 1948 to October 1972 with the Karnal Cooperative Transport Society cannot be sustained.
It is consequently rejected.
As a result, the question posed at the outside is answered in the negative.,  8.
It was also contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of relaxation.
He had joined service on June 16, 1974 and had retired on January 31, 1984.
If relaxation to the extent of four and a half months was given to the petitioner, he would become entitled to the grant of pension with effect from February 1, 1984.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
Relaxation is a concession.
It is not a right.
It cannot be claimed that a writ of Mandamus be issued directing the State to relax a rule.
Secondly, learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to refer to any rule or instructions under which the Government may be obliged or even competent to relax the specified period of qualifying service so as to entitle a person to claim pension.
Ten years of service is the minimum period prescribed by the Rules.
It is only when a person has rendered the minimum service of ten years that he can claim pension.
A person who has not served for 10 years in a Department of the Government is not entitled to claim pension.
Admittedly the petitioner had not served the State Department for a period of 10 years.
Consequently, he was not entitled to claim that he was entitled to the grant of pension.
Mr. IP Singh refers to the communication dated September 21, 1992 and points out that the State Transport Commissioner had recommended the petitioner's case for the grant of relaxation.
However, the learned counsel is unable to refer to any provision in the rules which may authorise the State Government or any other authority to grant relaxation.
The recommendation made by the State Transport Commissioner was not binding.
It was actually rejected by the State Government.
The decision in this behalf was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated December 9, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-11 with the writ petition.
The request for relaxation having been specifically rejected by the State Government, there is no ground for interference.
Resultantly, there is no merit in the writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.