MS Liberhan, J - This letters patent appeal arises out of an order dated January 21, 1994 passed by learned Single Judge in CWP No. 14498 of 1993, whereby the appellants were directed to admit Kamaljot Kaur, respondent- petitioner in Agricultural College, Ludhiana, after inviting options from the students higher in merit than the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner took the combined entrance test for admission to B.Sc.
(Agriculture) against 90 seats at the College of Agriculture, Ludhiana and 40 seats at the College of Agriculture, Faridkot.
The petitioner was at serial No. 132 in order of merit in the combined entrance test and at No. 14 in the waiting list.
The last date for admission at Ludhiana was September 30, 1993 and for Faridkot it as October 8, 1993.
In both the colleges classes commenced on 2.9.1993 and the mid-term examination for the semester was held from November 24, 1993 to December 1, 1993.
The petitioner claims that since she was higher in merit in the combined entrance test, consequently she was entitled to be admitted in the college of her choice at Ludhiana, particularly in view of the fact that students lower in merit in the waiting list were offered seats at Ludhiana.
The petitioner challenged the admission on 18111993.
3.
Learned Single Judge of this Court observed that the vacant seats cannot be allowed to go abegging as 13 seats at Ludhiana college are lying vacant.
Thus options were required to be invited from the students higher in merit against those 13 seats and if in case writ-petitioner was found entitled to admission on merit, she was required to be accommodated against the seats vacant at Ludhiana within 15 days.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellants contended that no admission can be made from the waiting list after the expiry of the last date for admission, as it would unsettle the settled things.
The question is not res integra.
Almost in pari materia facts and circumstances, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed in Civil Appeal No. 12926 of 1995 decided on 2991995, wherein admission granted to a student against the seat falling vacant on account of non-joining of another candidate after the last date for admission was directed to be accommodated by the High Court, which was set aside by observing that the course of MD being a technical course and to admit a student after a lapse of about 3 months after commencement of the Course would not be correct.
The waiting list could not be utilised for the purpose of granting admission by giving choice of the college to the student after the date of expiry of the admission.
5.
In view of the law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the judgment cited above, we are of the considered view that no admission can be granted in the Agriculture College, Ludhiana after expiry of the last date for admission to the Course after a lapse of about 2-1/2 months.
At this stage, it has been brought to our notice that Kamaljot Kaur, petitioner-respondent has already been accommodated at Ludhiana in terms of the order of this Court.
Keeping in view the totality of the circumstances, particularly in case of a student who ordinarily should not be made a shuttle cock, we may hasten to add that while admitting the appeal on March 7, 1994, admission of respondent No. 1 (Kamaljot Kaur) in Agriculture University, Ludhiana was protected.
The ends of justice would be squarely met if the admission of respondent No. 1 is not disturbed petitioner having been accommodated at Ludhiana.
However, prospectivelly we are of the view that no student can be admitted after the expiry of he last date of admission, particularly in a technical institution solely on the ground that some seats are lying vacant or some students have not joined and a student on merit is entitled to join the college of his/her choice, particularly when he has already exercised the choice and joined an alternative institution.
With the observations made above, the letters patent appeal is disposed of by laying down the principle of law prospectively, in terms of law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court as referred to above, though without interfering in the relief granted by learned Single Judge.
Order accordingly.