VK Bali, J (Oral) - Ram Phal, a Head Constable in the Haryana Police takes strong exception to order, Annexure P-2, dated 5121991 by which he was removed from list 'D' and reverted to the post of Head Constable from that of Assistant Sub Inspector as also order dated 411993, Annexure P-5, awarding him punishment of censure as also order, Annexure P-7, dated 12.8.1993, vide which his appeal against the orders, Annexure P-2 and P-5, was dismissed.
The brief facts, on which the relief asked for rests, need a necessary mention.
2.
Petitioner was enrolled in the Haryana Police as constable on December 17, 1970 after passing his matriculation examination and it is his case that with utmost devotion to duty and excellent service record, he was allowed to take up the examination of B-1 in January, 1978 and was selected and deputed to the Lower School Course which commenced from April 1, 1978.
He passed the said course on October 15, 1978 and was promoted as Head Constable in December, 1979 and was put on probation.
His confirmation was, however, for some reasons delayed and he came to be confirmed in 1984 instead of 1982.
In 1991 he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector and was transferred from District Hisar to District Jind.
On November 21, 1991 in the evening at about 8 PM he along with other four constables, was detailed for Nakabandi duty near Government High School, Pipaltha.
It is the case of the petitioner that all the five police officials including him were divided in two parties and whereas one party consisted of Constables Hukam Chand and Jai Kumar, second party consisted of Lajpat, Jai Vir and the petitioner.
The petitioner asked the party headed by Hukam Chand to reach directly to the Nakabandi and the petitioner's party was to come to Naka after patrolling in the area.
The party headed by Hukam Chand reached at the spot and they found two persons sitting there in a suspicious manner.
Constable Hukam Chand asked about their identity.
However, Jai Kumar Constable saw a barrel of a gun in their blanket and suspecting them to be terrorists, Jai Kumar immediately grappled with the said persons and asked Head Constable to fire at other terrorists.
The Head Constable fired at other terrorists but same was missed and the terrorists ran away.
There were two to three terrorists in the school, who started firing at the police officials.
In the meantime, petitioner alongwith his party also reached on the spot and he fired from his pistol three rounds in the direction of the terrorists.
The terrorists also started firing from automatic weapons and the petitioner's party had to retreat and inform immediately the Station House Officer at the police station.
One of the injured terrorists was grappled by Jai Kumar and the other terrorists ran away with their weapons.
Constable Jai Kumar was able to take into possession a AK 56 rifle of the terrorists which was later on deposited with the police station.
As neither the petitioner nor his partymen were trained to operate AK 56 rifle, they had to return back to the Police station.
On report of this incident, the Superintendent of Police, Jind, suspended the petitioner on November 24, 1991 and sent a report to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar to this effect.
Petitioner was transferred to Police Lines, Jind.
On December 5, 1991, the D.I.G., Hisar, without calling for any explanation and without issuing any show cause notice, removed the name of the petitioner from List 'D' and also reverted him to the post of Head Constable from the date aforesaid.
In addition to the orders passed, as have been referred to above, departmental enquiry was also ordered against the petitioner and he was issued a charge-sheet.
The main charge against the petitioner was that he along with Constables Hukam Chand, Jai Kumar, Laj Pat and Jaivir was deputed for Naka duty near village Pipaltha and when the above mentioned incident happened, he had not remained there and instead had come to the police station.
This, in view of the allegations of charges framed against the petitioner, amounted to dereliction of duty and gross indiscipline and a proof of cowardice.
In the departmental enquiry conducted against the petitioner, the officer concerned i.e. the Enquiry Officer exonerated him of the charges framed against him.
When, however, the report of the Enquiry Officer reached the Superintendent of Police, Jind he was of the view that the petitioner should not have been exonerated of the charges framed against him.
It is not disputed between learned counsel for the parties that the Superintendent of Police was competent to agree or disagree with the report of the Enquiry Officer, being the Punishing Authority.
The Superintendent of Police, as mentioned above, since did not agree with report of the Enquiry Officer, he issued a show cause notice to the petitioner conveying him that the case against him for censure had been made out.
The petitioner, in consequence of the notice issued to him, appeared and sought to support the findings recorded by the Enquiry Office.
However, by disagreeing with the Enquiry Officer, the Superintendent of Police proceeded in the matter to record a finding against the petitioner.
After mentioning the facts of the case, the Superintendent of Police recorded that he was in disagreement with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
The reasons for disagreement, if at all they can be called the reasons, need to be mentioned here in the words of the Superintendent of Police himself.
The same read thus:  "HC Ram Phal No. 392/HSR has displayed cowardice while on nakabandi duty near village Pipaltha PS Garhi on 22111991.
Although, the official has won over the PWs, yet the fact remains that he instead of chasing the terrorists, rushed to PS Garhi to inform the SHO.
Keeping in view the above facts, HC Ram Phal No. 392/HSR was served with a show cause notice vide this office No. 692/ST dated 14.12.92 proposing provisionally infliction of punishment of censure.
The defaulter submitted his written reply to the said show cause notice on 19121992.
In his written reply, he has stated that he was armed with a 9 mm pistol and VIP but could not use either of them because all the fires from his pistol were missed.
I do not agree with his contention as the same is after-thought story.
He has further contended that he has been reverted to the rank of Head Constable on the same account i.e. showing cowardice on 2211992 but there is no such evidence on the enquiry file that he had been awarded any punishment for his above mentioned guilt.
I am not satisfied with the explanation submitted by the defaulter and hence HC Ram Phal No. 392/HSR is hereby awarded a punishment of censure."
As mentioned above, this order as also order dated December 5, 1991, Annexure P-1, were subject matter of appeal preferred by the petitioner which came to be disposed of by the D.I.G., who chose to dismiss the appeal by simply mentioning "the appeal/representation of HC Ram Phal against the penalty of censure has been considered and filed."
3.
Mr. Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that order, Annexure P-2, removing the name of petitioner from list 'D' and reverting him to the post of Head Constable, very adversely affected him in his service career and such an order which affects a citizen, and has attached to it evil consequences, could not be passed without hearing the petitioner in the matter.
Not only the petitioner was not given a show cause notice, he was not at any given stage issued a charge-sheet and his reply was never asked for.
In fact and reality, it is after passing of order Annexure P-2, that the departmental proceedings were started which, as mentioned above, resulted into returning of a finding of 'not guilty.'
It is further the contention of Mr. Balhara that the Punishing Authority ie the Superintendent of Police, even though had power and jurisdiction to disagree with the report of the Enquiry Officer, he had to do so by a process of reasoning based upon evidence that might have been recorded during the enquiry proceedings.
Nothing of the kind was done and simply by assuming that the petitioner had won over the witnesses during the currency of the departmental proceedings against him, a finding of guilt was recorded.
It is further the contention of Mr. Balhara that the Appellate Authority i.e. the D.I.G., before whom the appeal was preferred against both the orders, referred to above, simply rejected the appeal by one word which obviously contained no reasons whatsoever.
4.
This matter has been contested and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 through Shri Anil Dawra, Superintendent of Police, Hisar, it has been averred that the petitioner was incharge of the police party.
Constable Jai Kumar, on seeing the terrorists, grappled with one of them and when the petitioner noticed that Constable Jai Kumar was grappling with the terrorist and on seeing other terrorists, he ran away from the spot due to fear and showed cowardness.
It is further pleaded that this way, the petitioner did not perform his duty and showed cowardness which amounted to gross dereliction of duty.
Various orders, referred to above, have been supported but all that is mentioned in support thereof is that the petitioner had shown dereliction in duty.
Insofar as the main contention of the petitioner contained in paragraph 10 with regard to non-calling of his explanation and affording him an opportunity of hearing before passing order, Annexure P-2 is concerned, the same has not been disputed.
In fact, in reply to para 10 of the petition wherein it is specifically mentioned that the petitioner was not given any notice nor he was afforded an opportunity of being heard, all that is explained in corresponding para 10 of the written statement is that the D.I.G.
has rightly reverted the petitioner due to cowardness.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that orders, Annexures P-2, P-5 and P-7 deserve to be quashed.
From the array of facts mentioned above, it is proved to the hilt that before passing order, Annexure P-2, petitioner was not heard in the matter at all.
He was removed from list 'D' and reverted to the post of Head Constable from that of the ASI This order very adversely affected the petitioner and visited him with evil consequences.
It is by now settled proposition of law that before passing adverse orders against a citizen affecting him in this civil or other rights, opportunity of hearing has to be given to him.
It is no doubt true that after passing order, Annexure P-2, a departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner over the charges for which, perhaps, he was reverted from the post of ASI to that of Head Constable and, perhaps, if that enquiry had ultimately turned against the petitioner, the Court might have protected order, Annexure P-2 from atleast the date when the departmental enquiry might have turned against the petitioner but, in considered view of this Court, the Punishing Authority, while disagreeing with reasons recorded by the Enquiry Officer, did not base its order on any legitimate, cogent or legal reasons.
The Punishing Authority was not competent to reverse the order of the Enquiry Officer on the sole ground that the witnesses were won over by the petitioner at the time when their statements were recorded during the currency of the enquiry.
Assuming that the petitioner had won over the witnesses, the question still arises as to on what evidence the Punishing Authority came to the conclusion that the charges framed against the petitioner, subject matter of enquiry against him, stood proved.
If the witnesses had deposed against the petitioner and yet the Enquiry Officer had come to a conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioner were not proved, the Punishing Authority, by holding such reasons to be incorrect or perverse, could come to a different conclusion but, as mentioned above, while returning a finding of guilt against the petitioner, no evidence whatsoever was taken into consideration.
If the petitioner had actually won over witnesses, it might be subject matter of second enquiry against him but insofar as the charges, subject matter of enquiry against the petitioner, are concerned, the same could be proved or disproved on the basis of evidence only.
It is again settled principle of law that even though the Punishing Authority may have power to differ with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer, the said Authority has to hear the delinquent official and by process of reasons alone it can reverse the order or findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
The Appellate Authority also, while rejecting the appeal preferred by the petitioner against orders, Annexures P-2 and P-5, in considered view of this Court, had not followed the law.
The appeal, as mentioned above, was dismissed by a non-speaking and cryptic order without even referring to the various grounds taken by the petitioner in his memorandum of appeal.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, there is no choice with this Court but for the quash all the impugned orders, Annexures P-2, P-5 and P-7.
Ordered accordingly.
6.
If it was perhaps a case where only order, Annexure P-2 was passed, the Court might have, after quashing the said order, given a fresh opportunity to the department to proceed against the petitioner in accordance with law but the facts of this case reveal that, even though after passing of order, Annexure P-2, departmental proceedings were held against the petitioner in which he was exonerated by the Enquiry Officer.
He was, of course, held guilty and given punishment of censure by the Punishing Authority but that order has already been quashed for the reasons mentioned above.
That apart, if the witnesses have not deposed against the petitioner, it would be a futile exercise to remit the matter to the authorities concerned for proceeding against the petitioner afresh in accordance with law.
That course does not appear to be correct in the facts and circumstances of this case.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders, Annexures P-2, P-5 and P-7 are quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits that he might be entitled to in pursuance of these orders having been set aside.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.