Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was initially recruited as a Clerk in the Punjab Civil Secretariat on April 6, 1960.
He was communicated an adverse repot for the year 1968-69.
His integrity was described as doubtful.
Thereafter, he was overlooked for promotion on June 15, 1970 when respondent No. 2 was promoted as an Assistant.
The petitioner represented.
Having failed to get the desired result, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that respondent No. 1 be directed to expunge the adverse remarks and to consider his case for promotion to the rank of Assistant with effect from June 15, 1970.
2.
It appears that a written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents in October, 1988.
It is, however, not available on the file.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has produced a photocopy of the written statement filed by Mr. MP Jain, Joint Secretary to Government, Haryana, Secretariat Establishment.
It has been taken on record.
In this written statement, it has been clearly pointed out that on account of the adverse report for the year 1968-69, the petitioner was overlooked for promotion in the year 1970.
The writ petition has been filed after an inordinate delay of 18 years.
On this ground alone, it deserves to be dismissed.
3.
On merits, it has been pointed out that the adverse remarks had been recorded against the petitioner on receipt of the complaints which were enquired into through a departmental enquiry.
The allegation that the Inquiry Officer had exonerated the petitioner, has been admitted.
It has, however, been pointed out that the competent authority did not agree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer and came to the conclusion that the conduct of the petitioner was not free from suspicion.
He was warned to be careful in future.
The petitioner had filed representations for expunction of remarks.
These were, however, rejected.
Since the petitioner's integrity had been suspected, he was not found eligible for promotion.
He was subsequently promoted in the year 1979 when the adverse remarks against his integrity had become over ten years old.
This was done in accordance with the Instructions, dated May 21, 1973 issued by the State Government.
It has been further admitted that the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar.
However, it has been pointed out that the crossing of the Efficiency Bar is different from the grant of promotion to a higher post.
On these premises, it is claimed that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief claimed for by him.
4.
The petitioner has filed replication.
In reply to the objection regarding the delay, it has been stated that the petitioner had submitted representations which had remained pending up to June 21, 1976.
Immediately thereafter, the petitioner had filed an appeal before the Chief Minister on December 17, 1976.
This appeal was rejected on January 18, 1985.
Thereafter, the petitioner had sent a legal notice on May 22, 1987.
On these premises, it is claimed that the petition does not suffer from the vice of laches.
On merits, it has been stated that the adverse remarks regarding integrity have been arbitrarily recorded.
The petitioner had already represented and requested respondent No. 1 that his confidential report may not be recorded by his immediate officer.
Still further, it has been pointed out that the complaints against the petitioner were under enquiry.
No adverse comment could have been made before the result of the enquiry was known.
The Inquiry Officer had exonerated the petitioner.
Thereafter, he was entitled to be "given promotion with retrospective effect".
Even the other averments made in the written statement have been controverted and the claim as made by the petitioner in the original petition has been reiterated.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
Mr. Rajnish Narula, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner having been exonerated during the course of enquiry, the adverse comment regarding his integrity cannot be sustained.
Since the petitioner had been overlooked for promotion only on the ground of the adverse report and the pendency of the enquiry, he had a right to be considered for promotion with effect from June 15, 1970 when respondent No. 2 had been promoted.
7.
On behalf of respondents, it has been submitted by Mr. Khetarpal that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of any relief on account of the inordinately long delay.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had not been completely exonerated.
His conduct was not found to be free from suspicion by the Chief Secretary.
Consequently a warning was administered to him.
In this situation, learned counsel submits that no ground for interference is made out.
6.
Admittedly, the adverse report had been conveyed to the petitioner in the year 1969.
He was superseded for promotion vide order, dated August 28, 1970.
The Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana had warned him to be careful in future.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner approached this Court though the present writ petition on April 23, 1988.
This was almost 18 years after the cause of action had accrued.
The only explanation given by the petitioner is that his representations were decided on June 21, 1976.
Thereafter, he had filed an appeal in December, 1976.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the appeal was maintainable.
However, even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that such an appeal was competent, the fact remains that it was dismissed by the Government on January 18, 1985.
The petitioner still waited for more than three years before approaching this Court.
Apparently, there is an inordinately long delay in filing the petition.
7.
Mr. Narula submits that since the petitioner had been continuously following his remedy before the Departmental Authorities, the delay should be condoned.
He refers to the decision in Rattan Singh v. The State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 711.
In Rattan Singh's case (supra), the claim was with regard to the grant of a higher scale of pay to the teachers who had improved their qualifications.
In this context, it was held that "no strait- jacket formula or wooden rule can be applied for declining or not declining the relief to a petitioner, who has approached the High Court for appropriate relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In each and every case the Court shall have to scrutinise the relevant facts for determining as to whether it will be appropriate to exercise jurisdiction in favour of a person who has approached it after a long lapse of time".
It was further observed that "Primary consideration, which must weigh in the mind of the Court while adjudicating upon an objection of delay or laches, is as to whether the petitioner has been grossly negligent in pursuing his remedy and whether the delay has resulted in a situation where rights of others have been settled and it would be inequitable to unsettle those rights".
There is no quarrel with this proposition.
The present is not a case where the petitioner may be claiming a higher scale only.
The inevitable effect of the acceptance of his claim would be the restoration of seniority above respondent No. 2 and a further claim for promotion to the next higher post.
This would certainly unsettle the position which has existed for the last more than twenty years.
In this situation, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay alone.
8.
Even on merits, the case calls for no interference.
Admittedly, Mr. Saroop Krishan, the then Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana, had vide order, dated August 28, 1970 found that the petitioner's conduct "was not free from serious suspicion".
Accordingly, he was "warned to be careful in such matters in future".
It was also directed that a copy of the warning shall be placed on the personal file of the petitioner.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents in superseding the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant cannot be said to be totally arbitrary or unfair.
It was a possible view that the Government had taken.
No ground for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is made out.
9.
Mr. Narula also submits that the petitioner is willing to forego his claim for arrears of salary.
Since he is due to retire in about one year's time, the respondent may consider his claim for promotion.
Since I have found no ground to interfere, it is not possible to give any such direction to the respondent.
However, the petitioner may, if so advised, make a representation to the Government in this behalf.
So far as the petition is concerned, no ground for interference is made out, which is accordingly dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.