TS Doabia, J - The present petition has been preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against an order passed by the competent authority whereby the managing committee of the petitioner-society has been superseded vide order, Annexure P/6.
This order has been passed on 20th of October, 1995, under section 33 (1) of the Madhya Pradesh Societies Registrikaran Adhiniyam, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Adhiniyam).
2.
As legal issues have been raised, it is not necessary to go into the facts.
Suffice it to say that a show cause notice, copy whereof is Annexure P/3 was issued to the petitioner-Society.
At the same time, in exercise of the powers conferred under section 33 (1) of the Adhiniyam, an administrator has been appointed.
Copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P/4.
It is not in dispute that in the show cause notice, Annexure P/1, it was indicated that action was proposed to take for certain acts of omissions and commissions.
A reply was given.
Copy of this has been placed on record as Annexure P/5.
This has been dealt with in the order, Annexure P/6.
All that has been stated is that the reply given is not satisfactory.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits as the supersession of the managing committee is likely to have grave consequences and it affects the status of the members of the managing committee of the society, therefore, it was necessary to afford oral hearing as well.
4.
The question as to whether the rule of audi alteram partem would be attracted to the facts of this case or not be examined.
5.
The stand taken by the State is that no provision exists in the Statute for providing oral opportunity, and therefore, none need be granted.
The stand taken by the State seems to be not in consonance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court.
Reference in this regard be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court reported as SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, 1986(*) RRR 341 : AIR 1981 SC 136.
A perusal of para 6 of the judgment indicates that the question as to whether the requirement to give oral opportunity is necessary or not was pointedly considered.
It was said that 'the first question whether the rule of audi alteram partem is attracted be examined.'
After taking note of the various provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 and more particularly section 238 as it then existed, it was held that notwithstanding the fact that the statute is silent regarding giving an oral opportunity yet the rules of natural justice do require giving of oral opportunity.
This becomes apparent if the observations made in the last portion of the para 11 of the judgment is noticed.
It was observed as under :  ".....Other statutes providing for speedy action to meet emergent situations may well be construed as excluding the principle audi alteram partem.
All that we say is that Sec. 238 (1) of the Punjab Municipal Act does not."
6.
The above judgment of the Supreme Court in SL Kapoor (supra) was taken note of by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case reported as Jathedar Jagdev Singh and others v. The State of Punjab, AIR 1982 P&H 16.
In the above case, the Members of the Marketing Board constituted under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961, were not given opportunity.
Following the ratio of the judgment given by the Supreme Court in the above case it was held that principles of natural justice should have been complied with by affording an opportunity of hearing.
In para 20 it was observed as under :  "Now applying the aforesaid authoritative enunciation, it would follow that merely because an opportunity to show cause is provided under Section 3 (7) of the Act and not so expressly provided under Section 3 (8) of the Act would not raise and irrebuttable inference that the principles of natural justice are deliberately excluded from the later provision.
Undoubtedly this is a relevant consideration but by itself it is not conclusive on the point.
Again the second consideration envisaged by their Lordships is - and what they have called the weightier one - whether the administrative action entails civil consequences.
As I have highlighted earlier, action under Section 3 (8) undoubtedly entails civil consequences of the most serious nature and indeed they may be termed as both penal and evil consequences in so far as in inference of either corruption or grave mismanagement would arise and cannot be easily separated from an order of the supersession of the whole Board.
Therefore, it is the later and the weightier consideration that has to be given pre-eminence in view of the dictum of their Lordships of the Supreme Court and a right of natural justice has to be read into Section 3 (8) and is not to be easily displaced by any possible inference of the exclusory rule."
7.
The position in the present case is no different.
The managing committee of the society has been superseded.
The members of the society were not afforded any opportunity of hearing.
As such, order Annexure P/6 cannot be sustained.
The same is quashed.
The authority which passed the order, Annexure P/6, would afford an opportunity of hearing to the members of the society and pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
Notwithstanding the quashing of Annexure P/6, the first order, Annexure P/4, by which an administrator was appointed would remain intact and would come into operation.
All the transactions of the society would be routed through the administrator of the society.
It is, however, made clear that the administrator of the society shall take steps with a view to see that salaries are disbursed to the teachers and other staff.
If the question arises as to how much salary is to be disbursed, this would also be examined by the administrator and salaries be disbursed by the Secretary.
The Secretary of the society would furnish the Cheque Book and other records to the administrator.
In case it is not done or there is lack of cooperation on the part of the secretary of the society then the administrator can sign the Cheque Book and these Cheques once presented would be honoured by the Bank.
The petitioners to appear before the officer who passed the order, Annexure P/6 on 19th of February, 1996.
It will not be necessary to issue any fresh show cause notice as the members are aware of the cause they are supposed to meet.
8.
This petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.