Srinivasan, J - We are not convinced that there is any merit in these two Appeals.
The writ petitions, out of which these writ appeals arise, are directed against the order in GOMs.
No. 788, Education (G2) Department, dated 3171991.
By that Government Order, the Goverment declared its decision that it would appoint only women teachers for handling classes in IV and V Standards in Primary/Middle Schools from the academic year 1991-92, in addition to the handling of classes I, II and III in Primary/Middle schools, as per the earlier Government orders, namely, GOMs.
No. 250, Education dated 28.2.1989 and GOMs.
No. 667 Education, dated 1751990.
The Director of School Education and the Director of Elementary Education are directed by the Government Order to issue suitable instructions to all the schools under their control to appoint only women teachers in standards IV and V in all future vacancies from the academic year 1991-92.
The existing teachers are directed to be re-employed to the possible extent to see that standards IV and V are handled by women teachers.
2.
Two contentions are put forward by the learned counsel for the appellants.
The first one is that the Government Order will lead to total reservation in favour of women teachers in so far as elementary schools are concerned.
According to him, that offends Article 15(1) of the Constitution of India, under which there is no scope for total reservation.
Alternatively he contends that there is reservation exceeding 50 per cent.
According to him, there are thirty thousand elementary schools and each school will require at least five teachers and thus 1 lakh and 50 thousand teachers would be required to be appointed.
According to him, that exceeds the 50 per cent of the total number of teachers to be appointed.
Hence, he contends that reservation exceeding 50 per cent is against Law.
The second contention is that under Article 15(3) of the Constitution of India, the Government is only enabled to make a special provisions for women but such provision will have to be subject to the limitations prescribed by the Constitution itself.
It is contended that there is no non obstante clause in Article 15(3).
Reliance is placed by him on the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Andhra Pradesh v. US V Balaram, (1972) 3 SCR 247.
In that case, the court had to consider the provisions of Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India.
Under that clause, the State Govt. is enabled to make any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
While referring to the said Article, the Supreme Court said that Article 15(4) has to be read as a proviso or exception to Articles 15(1) and 29(2) and the conditions which justify the departure from Article 15(1) should be strictly shown to exist.
While referring to the context in which the Article refers to the socially and educationally backward classes, the Supreme Court said that the backward classes for whom special provision was contemplated must be in the matter of their backwardness be comparable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
3.
The ruling will not apply to the facts of this case, Article 15(3) does not contain any condition as such.
It merely reads.
"Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children."
Thus, it expressly overrides the provisions contained in Article 15(1) of the Constitution.
The State is empowered to make a social provision for women and children.
4.
Moreover, in the present case even Article 15(1) is in no way offended by the impugned Government Order.
The reason for passing the Government Order is not based merely on sex.
It is not as if the discrimination is made on the only ground of sex.
Article 15(1) can be invoked only when there is discrimination on any one of the grounds mentioned in the Article.
But, here it is not merely on the ground of sec, women teachers are sought to be appointed for elementary schools.
The question was as considered by a learned single Judge of this Court in JR Clement Ragis v. State of Tamilnadu, 1993 writ LR 94.
The learned Judge has considered the matter in detail and come to the conclusion that the Government Order is valid and it does not offend the provisions of Article 15(1) of the Constitution of India.
5.
In that case, counter-affidavit was filed by the State Govt.
In para 10 of the counter-affidavit, it was pointed out that men candidates were given opportunity as given in past years and there was no reduction in their share of getting employment and that non-teachers employment opportunity would not be affected as there were 5,000 High and Higher Secondary Schools and 5,624 Middle Schools, where men teachers can be appointed.
It was pointed out in the counter affidavit that the Government Order was based on national public policy inorder to help children and women.
It was also stated in the counter-affidavit that :-  ".... in rural areas there is a substantial increase in the number of drop-outs especially the girls.
If women teachers are appointed in primary schools it will create a greater confidence in rural areas and will motivate the parents to send girls to the schools.........
Naturally, women are having the tenderness with the children.
The women teachers are exerting their teaching experience with the nature of motherhood to which children are a sor did and this enrich their learning capacity.
The women teachers are more kind and affectionate towards children.
Teacher absentism is more in men than women.
After taking into consideration of the children's psychology and various aspects including the fact that employment opportunity of men candidate should not be disturbed in any way.
Government at a policy matter issued such an order."
6.
Thus, it is clear that the reason for passing the Government Order does not rest merely on the sex, but on other considerations also.
It is a sound policy of the State Government, which is based upon the psychology of the children.
Certainly, children will get more interest in studies, if they are taught by women teachers, rather than male teachers.
Moreover, for teaching children of tender age, it will be better that children at the elementary schools are handled by women teachers rather than male teachers.
No exception can be taken to the wisdom of the Government in issuing the impugned Government Order.
7.
There is no writ in the contention that there is total reservation or there is reservation exceeding 50 per cent.
Both the contentions have been considered by the learned Judge and we are in entire agreement with the reasoning of the learned Judge, and make it part of our judgment.
8.
Learned counsel submitted that an appeal is pending against the order of the learned Judge before a Bench of this court and it is also posted for hearing.
He wants an adjournment on that ground and has also sought for a direction to post these Appeals along with the said appeal.
We are not inclined to grant any such prayer, as this Bench is specifically constituted for hearing these matters.
It was only at the instance of learned counsel for the appellants the Honourable the Chief Justice has constitued this Bench and directed these matters to be posted before this Bench for disposal today.
Thus, we are not inclined to grant the prayer for adjournment.
9.
In the result, the writ appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.