RP Sethi, J - The Director, Social Welfare, Punjab Chandigarh vide Annexure P-1 had intimated the Aanganwadi Workers having the requisite experience to appear in the written test to be held on 1611994 as per the rules specified therein.
The petitioners in Civil Writ Petition Nos 8533, 10430, 10431, 15673, 10123, 10661, 13919, 13796 and 11148 of 1994 alongwith private respondents who had the requisite experience as Aanganwadi Workers applied for the post and appeared in the written test held on 1611994 at Chandigarh.
Interviews of 77 candidates were held in June, 1994.
The private respondents are stated to have been selected and appointed as Supervisors on the basis of the written test and the interview held which is alleged to have been manipulated on account of extraneous considerations.
The process of selection and appointment is alleged to have been vitiated by the illegalities committed by the official respondents by not following the prescribed procedure under the Rules.
It is submitted that after the written test, the respondents had no authority to hold the interview and thereafter change the merit into demerit.
Some of the petitioners who were not called for the interview claim to have obtained more marks than the marks obtained by those who were called for the interview and subsequently selected.
It is submitted that all the 77 candidates were interviewed within one and half hours which proves that the interview was a farce.
Some of the candidates are alleged to have been awarded 30-1/2 marks in the interview.
It is further submitted that marks of some of the selected candidates were also inflated.
Many cuttings and manipulations are alleged to have been made in preparing the award list ignoring the claims of the candidates like the petitioners.
Some of the candidates who have actually appeared in the written test conducted on 1611994 have not been included in the award list prepared by the Department.
The selection is alleged to be contrary to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution requiring interference by the Court.
It is also submitted that as the selection has been made for more vacancies than the advertised posts the same were liable to be quashed.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 3 it is submitted that the Government had fixed 50 per cent quota of Aanganwadi Workers in direct recruitment to the posts of Supervisors subjects to the condition that minimum 25 per cent posts of Supervisors were to be filled from amongst Aanganwadi Workers and for the said purpose applications of eligible Aanganwadi Workers were invited through the concerned Child Development Project Officers vide Annexure R-1.
A total number of 1667 candidates applied who were found eligible for appearance in the test.
They were all issued Roll Numbers for appearing in the written test which was fixed to be held on 1611994.
Upon order by this Court seven more candidates were also issued Roll Numbers and allowed to appear in the written test.
Out of 21 posts of Supervisors, 10 posts were allotted to graduate candidates and 11 posts for matriculate candidates.
Keeping in view the result of the written test, the candidates who were on merit and were in top positions and by adopting the method of calling three times candidates for each category, a total number of 78 candidates were called for interview.
It is contended that the appointments to the post of Supervisor have been made as per proceedings of the Departmental Selection Committee after conducting interview of the eligible candidates.
The averment of the petitioners of being Aanganwadi Workers and their appearance in the written test is not disputed.
The result of the successful candidates who had secured top positions in the test is stated to have been placed on the Notice Board in front of the office of respondent No. 2 and such successful candidates were directed to appear for interview on 2061994.
The criteria approved by the Departmental Selection Committee was adopted by the Government for making selection to the posts of Supervisor.
Respondent No. 3 was not a Member of the Departmental Selection Committee.
Similarly, Additional Director, Joint Director and the Deputy Director were also not Members of the said Committee.
The Selection Committee comprised of the following :-  1.
Shri GS Brar, IAS, Director, Social Welfare, Punjab.
Chairman 2.
Smt. Agya Rajinder Singh, IAS, Addl.
Secretary, Government of Punjab, Department of Social Welfare.
Member 3.
Sh. Baldev Singh Azad, Joint Secretary to Govt., Punjab, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department (Enquiries).
Member 4.
Sh. Davinder Singh, Deputy Director, Sainik Welfare Deptt., Punjab, Chandigarh.
Member 5.
Sh. Rattan Singh Dewan, Superintendent PP 3 Branch, Punjab Civil Sectt., Chandigarh.
Member 6.
Sh. Bachittar Singh, Administrative Officer, Social Welfare Department, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Member 3.
In the replication filed on behalf of some of the petitioners, it is submitted that the appointments have not been made according to the stand taken by the respondents in their reply/affidavit.
It is submitted that in the first 21 appointments, only 3 graduates have been appointed whereas at least 10 were required to be appointed from this category.
The appointments of Scheduled Castes and Backward Class candidates is also alleged to have not been made according to their quota.
The candidates are alleged to have been called for interview without following any order of merit.
The petitioners have specifically referred to the candidate having Roll No. 1575 who had secured 42 marks only was called for interview whereas some of the petitioners who had secured as high as 61, 60 and 50 marks were not called for interview.
It is further contended that the candidates who had obtained much less marks than the petitioners have been selected and appointed by the respondents ignoring the rights of the petitioners.
It is submitted that even according to Annexure P-3 which is stated to have been prepared on the basis of the certified copy of the award list supplied to the petitioners, 27 candidates who obtained less marks than 60 marks were called for the interview.
A pointed reference is made to the case of petitioner No. 7 of Civil Writ Petition No. 8533 of 1994 who as per the Award List is claimed to have obtained 61-1/2 marks and not 41-1/2 marks as mentioned in the written statement.
The whole of the selection process is alleged to be against the provisions of law.
4.
In another reply filed by Shri Bhupinder Singh, IAS, Director, Social Welfare, Punjab, it is submitted that 78 candidates who had secured highest marks in the written test were called for the interview and the candidates who had secured 60 marks i.e. which were on general merit and candidates who secured highest marks in posts of reserve categories were included in the list of successful candidates.
Candidate Rajinder Kaur with Roll No. 1515 is stated to have secured 42 marks out of 100 was called for interview as belonging to Scheduled Caste and Graduate category.
It is reiterated that no candidate has been selected by the Departmental Selection Committee who had obtained less than 60 marks.
5.
Vide Court order dated 10.5.1995, the respondents were directed to furnish information regarding the authority under which the interviews were held, the marks obtained by the petitioners and the private-respondents in the written test as also the marks awarded to them in the interview held.
The record of the interview was also directed to be produced in the Court.
The requisite information was required to be furnished on the affidavit of some responsible officer.
6.
Complying the Court directions, the additional information was furnished again by Shri Bhupinder Singh, IAS, Director, Social Welfare Department, Punjab, Chandigarh on affidavit.
It was stated that the Punjab Government vide Circular letter No. 12/30/86-1 GE/5139 dated 1541986 had issued instructions for constitution of the Departmental Selection Committees for making recruitment to all categories of Class III and Class IV posts and as per the provisions of those instructions the Committee was competent to conduct the written test/type test/Stenography test or any other kind of test and/or interview as might be, inter alia, required for the purpose.
The details of the marks of the selected candidates as prepared by the Departmental Selection Committee has also been detailed in the affidavit alongwith the marks-wise position pertaining to the petitioners.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8.
The main argument of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has been that the whole of the selection was liable to be quashed because it was allegedly manipulated after holding of the interview by the Departmental Selection Committee.
Elaborating the arguments, the learned counsel have stated that since holding of interview was not mentioned in the notice (Annexure P-1), the respondents had no right or authority to hold the interview.
It is alternatively submitted that the interview held was a farce and conducted in a biased manner to make selection according to the whims of the official respondents.
The selection and appointments have been termed to be manipulated and not based upon the merits of the candidates.
9.
It is true that in the notice (Annexure P-1) inviting applications, no mention was made regarding the holding of interview for the purpose of making selection and appointment to the posts of Supervisors.
However, it is not disputed that the selection was to be made by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The Departmental Selection Committee entrusted with the work of making selection was bound by the decision of the Punjab Government issued vide circular dated 1541986 (Annexure R/1).
Vide aforesaid circular, a procedure for the functioning of the Departmental Selection Committee was regulated which inter alia provided, "the Committee will be competent to conduct written test/type test/stenography test or any other kind of test and/or interview as might be, inter alia, required for this purpose."
None of the candidates objected to the holding of the interview at any time.
Rather the grievance of the petitioners was that they were wrongly not permitted to appear in the interview.
It is specifically stated in the petition that despite their having done well in the written test, they were illegally not called for the interview.
Therefore, it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioners to urge at this stage that as the selection was made after the interview, the same was liable to be quashed on that ground alone.
10.
It was next contended that as only 21 posts were required to be filled, the selection of 26 candidates was against the settled provisions of law requiring interference by this Court.
The learned counsel for the respondents have submitted that as the number of vacancies were not specified in Annexure P-1, the respondents were at liberty to make the selection on the basis of the merit list already prepared.
It is further submitted that five of the respondents who were in the waiting list were selected on the basis of their merit.
The submission of the learned counsel for the respondents is contrary to their pleadings.
11.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it has been specifically stated :-  "There were 21 posts of Supervisors lying vacant for filling up from amongst the Aanganwadi Workers and for the purpose applications of the eligible Aanganwadi Workers were invited through the concerned Child Development Project Officers vide respondent No. 2 letter No. A-4(SW) - 93/600-61 dated 15.1.1993 (Annexure R-1).
Accordingly, 1667 candidates whose applications were received through the concerned Child Development Project Officers and were found eligible possessing requisite qualifications and experience etc. were issued Roll Numbers to appear in the written test fixed for 1611994 for the posts of Supervisors."
In the same reply, it is again stated, "as mentioned above, there were 21 posts of Supervisors vacant to be filled from amongst the Aanganwadi Workers, out of which 10 posts were allotted to graduate candidates and 11 posts for matriculate candidates".
The reference of `some' posts of Supervisors in Annexure P-1 would not in any way strengthen the case of the respondents in the light of unambiguous pleadings as referred to hereinabove.
The selection and consequential appointment of respondent-Supervisors in excess of 21 posts being illegal and unconstitutional is required to be set aside.
Such appointments have obviously adversely affected the interests of the petitioners and others who had acquired a right to compete once the aforesaid posts were re-advertised for being filled up on the basis of a fresh test.
12.
From the additional affidavit of Sh. Bhupinder Singh, IAS, it transpires that out of the waiting list prepared the following respondents in C.W.P.
No. 10430 of 1994 namely :  1.
Pushap Raj, Roll No. 446 (Respondent No. 25)  2.
Neelam Kumari, Roll No. 1173 (Respondent No. 26)  3.
Amarjeet Kaur, Roll No. 757 (Respondent No. 27)  4.
Usha Rani, Roll No. 1410 (Respondent No. 28), and  5.
Baljit Kaur, Roll No. 297 (Respondent No. 29)  were appointed to the additional five posts which were admittedly in excess of 21 posts initially intended to be filled up.
It is worthwhile to mention that the candidates with Roll Number 409 and 91 who had admittedly obtained more marks and were higher in merit than the candidates having Roll Nos. 297, 1410 and 757 were ignored without any basis.
13.
The selection/appointment of aforesaid five respondents namely Pushap Raj, Neelam Kumari, Amarjeet Kaur, Usha Rani and Baljit Kaur being illegal and unconstitutional is set aside and posts held by them are declared vacant which may be filled up on the basis of new selection to be made in accordance with the provisions of law.
14.
From Annexure P-8 it transpires that the Government decided to enhance the direct recruitment quota from 25 per cent to 50 per cent subject to the condition that minimum 25 per cent posts of Supervisors were to be filled up from amongst the Graduate Aanganwadi Workers possessing the requisite experience.
It is also stated in the reply that, "the Government has fixed the 50 per cant quota of Aanganwadi Workers in direct recruitment to the posts of Supervisors subject to the condition that minimum 25 per cent posts of Supervisors shall be filled from amongst the graduate Aanganwadi Workers possessing requisite experience etc. as per letter issued by respondent No.
1."
It is further stated in the reply that, "there were 21 posts of Supervisors lying vacant to be filled up from amongst the Aanganwadi Workers out of which 10 posts were allocated to graduate candidates and 11 for matriculate candidates."
A perusal of the selection list and the additional affidavit of Bhupinder Singh, IAS, would disclose that only three candidates with Roll Nos. 12, 1499 and 1524 namely Tripta Devi, Satnam Kaur and Raj Kumari were selected/appointed out of the graduate candidates.
It follows, therefore, that seven seats meant for graduates were wrongly converted to be filled up from amongst matriculate Aanganwadi Workers.
The selection/appointment of the aforesaid three respondents namely Tripta Devi, Satnam Kaur and Raj Kumari (in C.W.P.
No. 10430/1994) being in order and according to the instructions issued cannot be challenged.
The writ petitions in so far as these respondents are concerned shall stand dismissed.
15.
On the basis of the additional affidavit, three seats from the general category, 3 from scheduled caste category and one from ex-serviceman category are required to be filled up from amongst the graduates.
16.
Out of the 11 seats meant for matriculates, 4 were required to be filled up from the general category, three from the scheduled castes category, two from ex-servicement category, one from backward class category and one from the sports person category.
The aforesaid affidavit, however, shows that 9 candidates were selected from the general category, 6 from scheduled caste category, one from backward class category and two from ex-servicemen category.
It is, therefore, established that amongst the matriculates, four extra seats were filled up from the general category and three from the scheduled castes category.
No seat was filled up from amongst the quota meant for sports person.
17.
Nirmaljit Kaur, respondent (Roll No. 135) is shown to have secured 76-1/2 marks; Harjit Kaur, respondent (Roll No. 438) is shown to have secured 76 marks; Meena, respondent (Roll No. 1464) is shown to have secured 75-1/2 marks and Nachhattar Kaur, respondent (Roll No. 238) is shown to have secured 75 marks in the general category.
However, respondents namely Rupinder Kaur (Roll No. 912), Jasvir Kaur (Roll No. 1606), Dalbir Kaur (Roll No. 113) and Harsharan Kaur (Roll No. 137) who have been selected from amongst the matriculates in general category are not shown to have been selected in accordance with the rules.
The selection of respondents namely Rupinder Kaur, Jasvir Kaur, Dalbir Kaur and Harsharan Kaur is set aside.
18.
Similarly, the respondents namely Joginder Kaur (Roll No. 814), Rajinderpal Kaur (Roll No. 1037) and Kamlesh (Roll No. 1573) have secured 73, 71-1/2 and 71 marks respectively from amongst the Scheduled Caste matriculates and were apparently rightly appointed to the post.
However, the selection/appointment of respondents namely Manjit Kaur (Roll No. 1004), Rajwinder Kaur (Roll No. 1335) and Balwant Kaur (Roll No. 1353) being contrary to the rules and the guidelines issued by the respondents is liable to be set aside/quashed.
19.
Respondent Veena Kumari (Roll No. 1646) has been selected from the backward class category and she has secured 74 marks.
Respondents Amarjeet Kaur (Roll No. 977) and Satwant Kaur (Roll No. 1978) are shown to have secured 72 and 71 marks respectively in the ex-servicemen category.
Their appointments/selection being within the limit cannot be quashed or set aside.
20.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have challenged the selection/appointment of all the respondents also on the ground that as the marks in the interview were changed, altered and modified, the whole of the selection process is liable to be quashed.
We are not inclined to hold a roving enquiry into the allegations made by the petitioners which have been emphatically rebutted by the respondents.
Quashing whole of the selection at this stage may not be justified even though there is some force in the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The persons whose selection/appointment has been upheld have otherwise obtained more marks in the written test as compared to the marks obtained by the petitioners with the exception of some of the petitioners such as Harbans Kaur, petitioner in CWP 10430/1994, Charanjit Kaur, petitioner in CWP 15673 of 1994; Manjit Kaur, petitioner in CWP 10431 of 1994 and Nirmal Devi petitioner in CWP 10123 of 1994 and others.
We are also of the view that the writ petitioners whose reference has been made herein were definitely awarded lesser marks in the interview which change has resulted in their non-selection.
Appropriate directions can be issued to protect the interests of such of the candidates who are alleged to have been ignored from selection/appointment on the basis of the interview without creating a precedent or conceding the legal position in favour of the petitioners.
21.
Under the circumstances the appointment of the respondents namely Rupinder Kaur, Jasvir Kaur, Dalbir Kaur and Harsharan Kaur of general category matriculates and Manjit Kaur, Rajwinder Kaur and Balwinder Kaur of Scheduled Castes category matriculates as Supervisors is set aside and the posts held by them are declared vacant.
All the seats declared vacant shall be filled up from amongst the Graduate Aanganwadi Workers within one month on the basis of their merit obtained by them in the written examination held on 1611994.
The appointment of respondent Nos. 25 to 29 in C.W.P.
No. 10430 of 1994 namely Pushap Raj, Neelam Kumari, Amarjeet Kaur, Usha Rani and Baljit Kaur respectively is also set aside and the posts held by them are declared vacant to be filled up on the basis of a fresh selection and not from amongst the candidates in the waiting list.
The non-holding of interview for selection out of the graduate Aanganwadi Workers has been directed under the peculiar circumstances of the case to avoid further delay and to instil confidence amongst those who had appeared in the written test which shall not in any way be considered or deemed to be a precedent or a restriction upon the right of the official respondents to hold interview in future.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.