GS Singhvi, J - Father of the petitioner-Hakim Singh was employed as a lineman in the service of the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short, the Board) and he was working in that capacity in Karnal Division on the date of his death i.e. 2481974.
At that time, the age of the petitioner was only four years.
After his attaining majority in the year 1988, the petitioner's mother made an application for employment on compassionate grounds in accordance with the policy framed by the Government of Haryana, which has been adopted by the Board.
The application was submitted in the prescribed form along with the necessary documents.
Thereafter he made representations to the authorities of the Board to give appointment on compassionate grounds but till the date of filing of the writ petition, no order was issued by the competent authority appointing the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
This is the reason for petitioner's filing this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India wherein he has prayed for issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to appoint him on a suitable post in accordance with the policy decision contained in circular letter dated 22121970 (Annexure P-1).
2.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents on the ground that father of the petitioner had expired on 2481974 but no request for employment on compassionate grounds was received from his widow till she died in the year 1989.
The first request was made by her on 311989 for employment of her son (petitioner) and an application filed after 15 years of the death of the employee could not have been entertained by the Board.
The respondents have pleaded that an application filed more than three years after the death of an employee does not deserve to be entertained and, therefore, the petitioner cannot get relief in the form of writ of mandamus.
Reliance has been placed by the respondents on the order dated January 18, 1995 passed in C.W.P.
No. 13902 of 1994 (Sohan Lal v. HSEB).
3.
The only point which needs adjudication is whether a dependent of a deceased employee who was not entitled to be appointed in service at the time of death of the person upon whom he depended could be denied consideration on the ground that he/she made an application after acquiring necessary eligibility.
This issue came up for consideration before a learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 2463 of 1991 ( Santosh Kumar v. HSEB and another), 1993(1) SCT 158 (P&H) decided on 2271992 and after considering the rival contentions the learned Judge held that various instructions issued by the Government have to be construed harmoniously and in a manner that they are not rendered unconstitutional.
The learned Judge held that if the dependent of a deceased employee submitted application within three years of his attaining majority/eligibility, the appointment cannot be denied to him.
4.
In C.W.P.
No. 3585 of 1993 (Balkar Singh v. State of Haryana and others) decided on 481994, a Division Bench of this Court held that a minor cannot apply for appointment on compassionate grounds and he is, therefore, not eligible to apply for government job and he can apply only on attaining majority.
The Division Bench further held that in such a case, the dependent cannot be deprived of employment on compassionate grounds.
5.
In C.W.P.
No. 4350 of 1994 decided on 441995, the matter has again been considered by a Division Bench of this Court, in which one of us was a member.
After making reference to the orders passed in the two cases referred to above, the Division Bench observed as under:-  "In addition to what has been held by this Court in the two cases referred to above, we wish to add that though the object of giving employment to a dependent of the deceased employee is achieved if one of the family members of the deceased employee is given employment immediately after his death, but at the same time it has to be taken into consideration that appointment can be given to one member of the family of the deceased employee in accordance with the provisions of the relevant rules or executive instructions governing recruitment.
Neither in the service of the Haryana Government nor in the service of the respondent-Board a person below the age of 18 years can be given employment.
Therefore, it a deceased employee is survived by minors, it is impossible to give effect to the condition incorporated in the circulars of the Board dated 2691985 and 1101986, which requires submission of the application within three years of the death of the employee.
A condition which is impossible to be performed is ordinarily liable to be treated as arbitrary and unconstitutional but if such condition can be given a reasonable meaning so as to avoid the charge of unconstitutionality that interpretation has to be preferred.
Therefore, the instructions contained in the circulars dated 2691985 and 1101986 will have to be interpreted to mean that in case of a minor child the period of three years would be applicable from the date he becomes major.
This is the only possible way of giving effect to the policy of giving employment to the dependent of a deceased employee where his dependents happen to be minor children."
6.
The Division Bench also considered the argument of the learned Counsel appearing for the Board that the widow of the deceased should have made an application for employment and relief should be denied to her child who makes application for employment on compassionate grounds after attaining majority.
While rejecting this argument, the Divisiion Bench observed:  "We find little justification to accept the same because the policy decisions issued by the Government of Haryana and the respondent- Board do not contain any provision that where the deceased employee is survived by his wife and minor children, his wife should necessarily seek employment as a dependent of the deceased.
While interpreting such a provision the Courts cannot be too oblivious of centuries old practices and customs prevalent in our society in which widows are treated with contempt and they are not even allowed to move out of their homes for years together .
The concept of modern women who go out for employment and earn independently by their intelligence, industry and hard work has not been accepted by majority of the population of this country.
By and far this is confined to the big cities.
In the rural areas women by the large look after the family or assist the male family members in agricultural operations.
Employment amongst the women of the families of the middle class is not viewed favourably.
In this background, we cannot accept the submission of Sri Sharma that failure of Smt. Om Pati to make an application for her own employment in accordance with the policy instructions issued by the Government should operate as a bar to her request for employment of the petitioner as a dependent of late Shri Ami Lal."
7.
In my opinion, the petitioner's case is fully covered by the aforementioned three judgments and there is no reason why relief should be denied to the petitioner.
8.
The order of the Division Bench to which reference has been made by the learned counsel for the respondent-Board does not lay down a proposition contrary to the one which has been laid down in three other judgments.
What the Division Bench has found in Sohan Lal's case (supra) is that though the dependent of the deceased attained majority in the year 1988, no steps were taken by him from 1988 onward and he waited for five years before coming to the Court.
In the background of these facts, the Court declined to issue a writ of mandamus.
Here, the petitioner had not only submitted application through his mother in the year 1989 but vigorously pursued his case before the departmental authorities.
He made representations Annexures P-6 to P-11 before filling the writ petition in the High Court.
Therefore, I do not find any ground to decline relief to the petitioner.
9.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds within three months and pass necessary orders.
His case shall not be rejected on the ground of non-submission of application by his mother after the death of father of the petitioner, Shri Jinda Ram and he shall be treated eligible for appointment on compassionate grounds .
10.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.