RA Sharma, J - Learned single Judge while allowing the writ petition of the petitioner-respondent directed for regularisation of his service as Chemist.
It was further directed that in case there is no post of Chemist available with the appellant, State Government shall create a new post within three months and thereafter the appellant will regularise the services of the petitioner-respondent within the time specified therein.
Arrears of salary of the post of Chemist from the date of his appointment to the date of regularisation was also directed to be paid to him within three months.
Being aggrieved by the judgment of the learned single Judge, the appellant has filed this appeal.
2.
No direction for regularisation of service of an employee should be made unless the posts and the funds are available and there is requirement for retaining the employee according to the necessity of the work.
Various other factors, such as, nature of the work and the conduct of the employee concerned are also liable to be considered.
The exercise of regularisation of service can more appropriately be made by the employer.
In this connection reference may be made to the case of Zakir Hussain v. Engineer-in-Chief (1993(1) UPLBEC 15), wherein the Division Bench of this Court, following the decisions of the Supreme Court, has laid down as under :-  "Merely because an employee has worked for two or three years he cannot claim regularisation of service as a matter of right.
For regularisation, as mentioned before, there must be both posts and funds and the need for retention of the employees according to the requirement of work.
That apart he must be qualified and the work and conduct of such employee must also be satisfactory.
It is also to be considered whether appointment on ad hoc/daily wages basis have been made against the leave or casual vacancies.
In cases of appointment on such vacancies there would hardly be any scope for regularisation.
These and various other factors have to be taken into consideration before deciding the question as to whether service of an employee, appointed on ad hoc/daily wages basis should be regularised.
Regularisation cannot be made as a rule of thumb on the basis of completion of certain years of service of such an employee.
It all depends on various facts, some of which have been mentioned above and it is for the employer to decide as to whether in view of the fact and circumstances of the case, the services of those employees who were appointed on ad hoc/daily wages basis, should be regularised."
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad, UP v. Anil Kumar Misra, 1994 All.
LJ 309 has in this connection laid down as follows:  "We are unable to uphold the order of the High Court.
There were no sanctioned posts in existence to which they could be said to have been appointed.
The assignment was ad hoc one which anticipatedly spent itself out.
It is difficult to envisage for them the status of workmen on the analogy of the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, importing the incidents of completion of 240 days work."
Learned single Judge was, thus, not justified to issue direction to the State Government for creation of a post of Chemist, regularisation of the service of the petitioner/respondent against it and payment of salary of the post of Chemist to him including the arrears from the date of initial appointment to the date of regularisation.
Question of regularisation depends on various factors, some of which have been highlighted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Court in the case of Zakir Hussain v. Engineer-in-Chief (supra).
Proper course in the instant case would be to direct the appellant to decide the question of regularisation and the salary of the petitioner-respondent.
3.
This appeal is accordingly allowed.
The judgment of the learned single Judge is set aside.
Petitioner respondent will be at liberty to make representation for regularisation of his service and payment of salary along with certified copy of this judgment within a period of two months from today and if such representation if filed, it shall be decided by the appellant by a reasoned order within a further period of three months.
Order, which may be passed, shall be communicated to the petitioner-respondent within two weeks thereafter.
Appeal allowed.