RS Mongia, J - The conditions of service of persons appointed to the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch), are governed by the Statutory Rules known as the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, P.W.D.
(Public Health) Rules, 1967 (hereinafter called the Rules).
Rule 6 of the Rules provides as to how recruitment to the Service is to be done.
The said rule is in the following terms :  "Recruitment to Service.
- (1) Recruitment to the Service for cadre and ex-cadre post shall be made in the following manner only from the sources fisted below in the proportions and the order indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies :-  Method of Recruitment : Proportion : Allocation to each source in lot of 40 vacancies comprising five blocks.
I II III IV V 1.
Direct appointment : 26 5 6 5 5 5 2.
Promotion from the members of Punjab PWD Public Health Sectional Officer Service : 8 2 1 2 1 2 3.
Promotion from Draftsmen members of the Draftsmen and Tracers Service : 2 1 - - 1 -  4.
Promotion from members of the Punjab PWD Public Health Sectional Officers Service and the Draftsmen and Tracers' Service : 4 - 1 1 1 1  Possessing qualifications Prescribed in Appendix 'B' Total 40 8 8 9 8 8 (2) In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. (4), the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
(3) In case, a candidate is not available from sources 1 and 3 and a person has to be appointed, in public interest, as a stop-gap arrangement from other than the allotted source, such a person shall be liable to be reverted to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted source is available and the period of service rendered by such person will not be reckoned for the purpose of seniority.
(4) The Government may fill a short-term vacancy, in the exigencies of public service, after recording specific reasons for a period not exceeding six months in each case by local arrangement from among the members of the Punjab P.W.D.
(Public Health) Sectional Officers' Engineering Service, without resorting to the select fist prepared under rule 9.
(5) No person, except to the extent provided under sub rule (4)-(a) who is not substantive member of the P.W.D.
(Public Health) Class II Service, or a member of P.S.E.
(Public Health Branch), Class I Service, in the junior scale on the date of enforcement of these rules; or (b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the service, as provided in rule 7 read with Appendix 'G' shall hold the post of a Sub-Divisional Engineer, even in an officiating capacity, unless he is declared within a period of six months from the date of enforcement of these rules, as suitable for appointment to the Service under the provisions of these Rules."
It will be seen from the Rule that for recruitment to the service, quota for various sources as also the rota for the sources is provided in Rule 6 of the Rules.
In the present case, we are concerned with the first 29 vacancies in the Class II Service and according to Rule 6 ibid, the roster for filling the first 29 vacancies from different sources will be as under :  ROSTER OF MECHANICAL WING (PH DEPARTMENT) Sr. No. Name of Category  1.
Direct) 2.
Direct)  3.
Direct) Source 1.
4.
Direct) 5.
Direct) 6.
Sectional Officer) Source 2.
7.
Sectional Officer) 8.
Draftsman Source 3.
9.
Direct) 10.
Direct) 11.
Direct) 12.
Direct) Source 1.
13.
Direct) 14.
Direct) 15.
Sectional Officer) Source 2.
16.
AMIE Source 4.
17.
Direct) 18.
Direct) 19.
Direct) Source 1.
20.
Direct) 21.
Direct) 22.
Sectional Officer) Source 2.
23.
Sectional Officer) 24.
AMIE Source 4.
25.
Direct) 26.
Direct) 27.
Direct) 28.
Direct) Source 1 29.
Direct) According to Rule 7 of the Rules, which lays down the qualification for appointment by promotion to the service, a person has to be a member of the Punjab P.W.D.
(Public Health), Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service or a Draftsman member of the Public Health Branch Draftsman and Tracers Services and has put in a service of ten years.
2.
All the three petitioners are Sectional Officers and belong to Source No. 2 and they had become eligible for promotion to Class II Service as Sub Divisional Engineers (Class II Service) under Rule 7 of the Rules on 111979, 1.1.1982 and 111979, respectively.
In the present writ petition, petitioners stake their claim for promotion as Sub Divisional Engineers against Points No. 15, 22 and 23 respectively on the roster reproduced above, as these points according to the petitioners, under the Rules, are meant to be filled by promotion of Sectional Officer (Source No. 2).
Further it has been prayed that the selection of Respondents No. 2 to 5, who have been selected for being appointed as Sub Divisional Engineers in Class 11 Service by direct recruitment against the points meant for the Sectional Officers on the roster is bad in law.
The petitioners have also challenged the order of Government, dated 22nd June, 1979 (Annexure P-2) (to which detailed reference will be made in the latter part of the judgment), by which inter alia the points on the roster meant for the Sectional Officer have been shifted for the direct recruits and vice-versa.
3.
Sarvshri SL Mahajan, Rajinder Pal Singh, Mohinder Singh and Avtar Singh, who belonged to the category of Sectional Officers were admittedly senior to the petitioners as Sectional Officers.
Since no candidate through the direct recruitment was available for the first five posts in the roster, excepting one (Shri TC Singla) the Government made stop-gap arrangement under Rule 6(3) ibid and gave stop-gap promotions as Sub Divisional Engineers to the above said four persons in the year 1967, 1968 and 1970.
4.
Rule 21 of the Rules gives powers to the State Government to relax any of the provisions of the rule with respect to any class or category of persons.
Rule 21 is in the following terms :-  "21.
Power of Relaxation :- Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
Exercising powers under the above-said Rule, the Government passed an order on 22nd June, 1979, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
This is the order which has been impugned in the present writ petition, which was filed on 7th June, 1993.
It will be appropriate to reproduce the entire order  "No. 5032-BRI(2)-79 GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB  Department of Public Works Public Health Branch.
Dated, Chandigarh, 22nd June, 1979.
"ORDER :  Whereas after the promulgation of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II Public Works Department, (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1967, on the 31st January, 1967, five posts of Sub Divisional Engineers (Mechanical) had fallen vacant in the Punjab Public Works Department, Public Health Branch and in pursuance of rule 6(1) ibid all these posts on the roster had fallen to the share of direct recruits.
2.
And whereas only one person namely Shri TC Singla was recommended as direct recruit by the Punjab Public Service Commission, who was fixed up at No. 1 of the roster and no candidate had been made available by the Punjab Public Service Commission for making appointment against the remaining four vacant posts of Sub-Divisional Engineers (Mechanical) the following four Sectional Officers (Mechanical) of the Punjab Public Works Department, Public Health Branch had been promoted departmentally under rule 6(3) ibid against these four posts of Sub Divisional Engineers as a measure of stop-gap arrangement after having been duly screened by the Screening Committee under rule 9 ibid and approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission :  1.
Shri SL Mahajan 2.
Sardar Rajinder Pal Singh  3.
Sardar Mohinder Singh 4.
Sardar Avtar Singh 3.
And whereas in view of their continuance for the last about 10 years and especially that these officers have already been screened by the Screening Committee under the said rules and approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission vide No. 38/67/14157 dated 51067 (in respect of serial No. 1 Shri SL Mahajan) and No. PR 208/68/18021 dated 2691968 (in respect of serial Nos. 2 to 4) it has been considered expedient to retain them on regular basis, against direct recruitment quota posts, on the roster.
4.
Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under rule 21 ibid, the Governor of Punjab is pleased to regularize the appointment of the following four officers as Sub-Divisional Engineers (Mechanical) against the four vacancies meant for direct recruits with effect from the dates shown against each :  Sr. No. Name Date of appointment as Sub-Divisional Engineer on ad hoc basis : 1.
Shri S.L Mahajan 51067 2.
Sardar Rajinder Pal Singh 20.11.1968 3.
Sardar Mohinder Singh 22.11.1968 4.
Sardar Avtar Singh 10.3.1970 5.
In lieu of fixation of above-noted promotees against the points on the roster meant for direct recruits, the points occurring on the roster after point No. 5 which were otherwise meant for these promotees shall henceforth go to the quota of direct recruits and they will be fixed against them at the appropriate time.
6.
This order is without prejudice to the decision in C.W.P.
No. 3189/1977 Shri SL Mahajan v. the State of Punjab etc. pending in the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
Rajendra Khanna Secretary to Govt. Punjab Public Works Department Building and Roads, Public Health Br."
By virtue of this Order, Sarvshri SL Mahajan, Rajinder Pal Singh, Mohinder Singh and Avtar Singh were adjusted against the direct recruitment vacancies No. 1, 3, 4 and 5 respectively on the roster and these vacancies which were meant for direct recruits were to be shifted to Points No. 15, 22, 23 and 30, respectively.
After adjusting these persons, the roster to be maintained under Rule 6 of the Rules would run as follows (which has been attached as Annexure R-1 with the written statement) -  Annexure ROSTER OF MECHANICAL WING (PH DEPARTMENT) Sr. No. Name of category Name of the Officer by which the point has been consumed Remarks 1.
Direct S/Shri S L Mahajan 5267) Promotion from JE mentioned at Sr. No. 1, 3 to 5 adjusted against direct recruit vacancy vide Govt. letter dt. 22679 2.
Direct T.C Singla (Direct recruit) 30173) 3.
Direct Rajinder Pal Singh 20.11.68) 4.
Direct Mohinder Singh 22.11.68) 5.
Direct Avtar Singh 10370 6.
SC Sh. BL Verma 51067 7.
SO FC Sethi 22.11.68 8.
D/Man Vacant 9.
Direct Hari Krishan 24.10.79 10.
Direct Sanjay Verma 24.10.79 11.
Direct Satish Kumar Jain 24.10.79 12.
Direct VK Wadera 231079 (Resigned) 13.
Direct Rattan Lal Mahi 23.10.79 14.
Direct Sarvjit Singh 24.10.79 15.
S.O.
Sh. Dev Raj Garg 23.10.79 Direct recruit, in view of direct recruits point No. 1.
16.
AMIE Vir Bhan Mittal 17.
Direct Surinder Singh 24.10.79 18.
Direct Ashwani Kumar Soni 23.10.79 19.
Direct Savinder Singh 24.10.79 (Resigned) 20.
Direct Kulbir Singh 1.2.1982 21.
S.O.
The Post is to be filled by direct recruit as per decision of Punjab Govt. letter dated 22.6.1979.
22.
S.O.
-do- 5.
Just to complete the factual narration, it may be observed that on 24th December, 1979, vide order Annexure P-4/A to the writ petition, Petitioner No. 1, Shri Gurdial Singh Virk, was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer against a vacancy meant for direct recruitment quota for a period of six months or all the candidates from the Punjab Public Service Commission were available, whichever was earlier.
It was made clear that ad hoc employment would not establish any right for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineer.
Similarly, on 28th January, 1988 (Annexure P4/B), petitioner No. 2, Shri Ram Bahadur was promoted on ad hoc basis as a Sub Divisional Engineer against the vacancy meant for direct recruitment quota on the same terms as Petitioner No. 1.
Still later on 28th May, 1992, vide order Annexure 1-4/C, Petitioner No. 3, Shri BD Gupta was promoted on ad hoc basis as a Sub Divisional Engineer against the vacancy meant for direct recruitment quota on the same terms as Petitioner No. 1.
6.
As noticed earlier, petitioners have challenged the order dated 22nd June, 1979 of the Government, reproduced above.
It has been stated in the petition that Sarvshri SL Mahajan, Rajinder Pal Singh, Mohinder Singh and Avtar Singh were not being impleaded as respondents because Sarvashri SL Mahajan and Rajinder Pal Singh had since retired on at the age of superannuation.
Shri Mohinder Singh had since died and Shri Avtar Singh had relinquished his appointment in the Public Health Department.
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondents No. 2 to 5 i.e. the selectees for direct recruitment through the Punjab Public Service Commission for the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers, submitted that the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
The present petition was filed in June, 1993; whereas the petitioners are impugning the order passed 14 years earlier in June, 1979.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners cannot be said to be ignorant of the impugned order, Annexure P-2, dated 22nd June, 1979, inasmuch as Point No. 15 on the roster, which was meant for Sectional Officers, had been filled in by Shri Dev Raj Garg on 23rd October, 1979 by way of direct recruitment.
The petitioners should have worken up at that stage, especially petitioner No. 1 as to why a point meant for Sectional Offices on the roster was being filled in by a direct recruit.
Immediately they would have come to know that this was being done by virtue of the impugned order, dated 22nd June, 1979.
Further, the learned counsel submitted that when orders, Annexures P-4/A to P4/C were passed promoting the petitioners on ad hoc basis on 24121979, 28.1.1988 and 28.5.1992, wherein it was mentioned that they were being promoted on ad hoc basis against the posts meant for direct recruits, the petitioners should have come to know about the impugned order and would have objected to their being appointed on ad hoc basis against the posts meant for direct recruits, which in fact, were meant for their quota.
These posts were being treated as direct recruit Posts because of the impugned order.
Neither when Shri Dev Raj Garg was appointed against Point No. 15 nor when petitioners themselves were promoted on ad hoc basis vide orders, referred to above, they challenged the impugned order dated 22nd June, 1979.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioners, however, submitted that the petitioners had no knowledge of the order and even if it is assumed that the petitioners had the knowledge of the impugned order they could not challenge it at that stage, because it never affected them immediately and now the impugned order had affected them when against the posts meant for their quota, direct recruitment was being in made, the petitioners have challenged the same.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
The petitioners are claiming appointments against Points No. 15, 22 and 23 of the roster.
Against Point No. 15, which was earlier meant for the category of the petitioners, direct recruitment was made on 23rd October, 1979.
All the petitioners, especially Petitioner No. 1, who had otherwise right of consideration for promotion against Point No. 15, did not challenge the filling of the posts at Point No. 15 by direct recruitment, which was done in view of the impugned order, dated 22nd June, 1979.
That was the first stage when the impugned order could be challenged.
Further, when the petitioners were promoted on ad hoc basis vide orders dated 24121979, 28.1.1988 and 28.5.1992, Annexure P-4/A, P-4/8 and P-4/C against the vacancies meant for direct recruits, they could have challenged the same that in fact the points on the roster were meant for their category i.e. source 2 and the question of their being promoted on ad hoc basis against the vacancies meant for direct recruits, did not arise.
None of the petitioners challenged the impugned order, dated 22nd June 1979, on the basis of which points meant for their source (Sectional Officers) had been treated as the points meant for direct recruits.
It will be too late in the day now to quash the impugned order, Annexure P-2, dated 22nd June, 1979.
Moreover the persons who were immediate beneficiaries of the order Annexure P-2, may not be there in the department now, but by quashing the impugned order now, the whole roster which was changed by virtue of the impugned order, Annexure P-2 and further appointments made accordingly will have to be set at naught.
It may affect their pensionary rights.
This is not permissible at this stage.
I am of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed only on the ground of laches.
10.
To be fair to the learned counsel for the petitioners, I may deal with his submissions on merits as well.
To assail the impugned order, Annexure P- 2, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted the following points :  (i) Having allowed stop-gap promotions under Rule 6(3) of the Rules to Sarvshri SL Mahajan, Rajinder Pal Singh, Mohinder Singh and Avtar Singh, there was no question of granting any relaxation under Rule 21 of the Rules in favour of the four persons named above.
(ii) Under Rule 21 of the Rules, it is permissible to relax any of the provisions of the Rules.
In the present case, in fact no rule has been relaxed.
(iii) Appointment by regularisation of ad hoc promotions is not a mode of appointment under the Rules.
In fact, by passing the impugned order, the rule of recruitment has been amended by introducing a new mode of appointment, i.e. regularisation of ad hoc promotion.
(iv) By changing the roster, Rule 6, to the extent it provides a different roster, has been amended.
The power of relaxation does not give the power to amend the rule.
(v) Four persons mentioned in the impugned order, Annexure P-2, did not have the qualifications for appointment as direct recruits.
Consequently, they could not have been appointed against the quota meant for direct recruits.
11.
Elaborating the above points, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that Rule 6(3) of the Rules envisages an exigency when candidates from sources 1 and 3 are not available and a stop-gap arrangement is to be made.
In the presence of this rule, if direct recruit quota candidates were not available, resort could only be made to the provisions of Rule 6(3) and having done that in the present case, the question of relaxation of any rule did not arise, inasmuch as by relaxing the rule, ad hoc promotions of those four persons were regularised.
Further, it was submitted that a bare perusal of the impugned order shows that no rule was relaxed and no public interest was to be served by exercising the power of relaxation and regularising the appointments of those four persons.
Further, the learned counsel submitted that even if those four persons could be appointed against the direct recruitment quota, the State Government was not authorised under Rule 21 to alter the roster provided under Rule 6 of the Rules and by passing the impugned order, the State Government had in fact amended the Rule.
Different sources of recruitment are mentioned in the Rules and appointment by regularising ad hoc promotions is not one of the sources mentioned as a source of recruitment in the Rules.
In support of his contentions, the learned counsel relied upon a Supreme Court judgment reported in State of Orissa v. Sukanti Mohapatra, 1992(3) SCT 178 (SC) : 1993(2) SLR 321, in which Rule 14 regarding relaxation was in the following terms :  "When the Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do it may by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules in respect of any class or category or persons in public interest".
12.
The learned counsel drew my attention to the observations made in para 7 of the above-said judgment, which are reproduced as under :  "From what we have discussed so far it does appear that after the Rules were brought into force with effect from January 1, 1976 the recruitment was made in total disregard of the Rules in 1976 and thereafter even if those who did not possess the minimum educational qualification prescribed for the job under the Rules.
Such recruits have been described as 'irregular'.
Rule 14 empowers the Government to relax any rule or rules in public interest for any class or category of persons for reasons to be stated in writing.
However, it is clear from the two orders reproduced hereinabove that the regularisation was made for individuals specified in the orders who had made representations and not for any class or category of persons.
True it is that the persons named in the orders were irregular appointees but the orders do not say that all irregular appointees will stand regularised under the said orders.
Then, the first order of January 3, 1985 says that regularisation is being permitted on compassionate grounds which would depend on the fact-situation of each appointee.
Even if it is assumed that these irregular recruits constituted a class or category of persons, Rule 14 could be invoked in public interest only.
If compassionate ground is the public interest for regularisation it is difficult to understand how such a factual aspect can form the basis for public interest.
Assuming that their having served for long years is a valid reason for regularisation, that without anything more, will not meet the requirement of the action being in public interest.
Rule 14 requires that the reasons in support of the action being in public interest must be stated in writing but no reason other than 'compassionate grounds' appears in the first order.
And what are those compassionate grounds ?
The order does not provide the answer.
The subsequent order of February 14, 1985, does not even pretend to state that the action is in public interest.
It is totally silent on this point.
It would, therefore, seem that the essential requirement i.e. the condition precedent for the exercise of power under Rule 14, namely, public interest, is not shown to have been satisfied.
Next Rule 14 permits relaxation of 'any of the provisions of the rules' but does not speak of regularisation.
Ex-facie the two orders do not speak of any particular rule or rules having been relaxed but provides for regularising the services of specified individuals whose appointments were outside and inconsistent with the Rules.
The reason for exercise of power in the case of nine appointees covered under the order of January 3, 1985 is stated to be 'compassionate grounds' and in the case of those covered under the second order of February 14, 1985, no ground at all.
Such orders, therefore, cannot have the protection of Rule 14 nor can the appointments be regularised as having been made under the Rules so as to dislodge the seniority of regularly appointed persons."
13.
The learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that it is apparent from the impugned order, dated 22nd June, 1979, that direct recruits were not forthcoming and when that method was resorted to only one person namely, Shri TC Singhal, became available and no other person was available for appointment by direct recruitment.
Four persons mentioned in the impugned order, Annexure P-2, had continued on ad hoc basis for almost 10 years.
They had been screened by the Screening Committee under the Rules and approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Considering all these facts, it was considered expedient under Rule 21 to regularise the appointments of these four persons against the posts meant for direct recruits.
Respondents' counsel submitted that those four persons were otherwise eligible for promotion.
They had the requisite qualifications for appointment by promotion from source No. 2.
Their case had been screened by the Screening Committee under the Rules and the appointments were approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The only thing that they were lacking was that the points meant for their source were not immediately available on the roster.
14.
Learned counsel went on to submit that it was under the above circumstances that the Sectional Officers' points were inter se shifted with the direct recruits' points by relaxing the Rule and accordingly the points meant for direct recruits went to the Sectional Officers and vice-versa.
It is not that those persons were not fit for promotion or they lacked any qualification or that their appointments had not been approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Considering all these facts it was in public interest to have given those four persons appointments by interchanging the points meant for Sectional Officers and direct recruits.
According to the learned counsel, though it is not the requirement of Rule 21 of the Rules, that it should be in the public interest to relax a rule, yet the rule was relaxed to serve public interest.
By relaxation, no rule had been amended and the only thing was that those four persons were to be adjusted against the points meant for direct recruits and the points meant for Sectional Officers were shifted for direct recruits.
It was not that a fresh source of recruitment was being introduced.
Source remained the same but only the roster points under Rule 6 were inter se changed between the Sectional Officers and direct recruits.
15.
Further, according to the learned counsel, the authority relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners was not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the Supreme Court case (supra) rules only permitted direct recruitment and no other method was provided for recruitment into service.
The persons in whose favour the relaxation was made were initially appointed to the service de-hors of the Rules and there was no compliance with the rules at all while making the appointments.
In the case before the Supreme Court, no reasons were available as to why relaxation was being granted.
Moreover, in the case before the Supreme Court, the rule of relaxation required that any rule should be relaxed in the public interest; whereas there was no such requirement in the present case.
However, the power of relaxation in the present case had been exercised in the public interest.
The submission was that by relaxation in the present case, only chances of promotion of the petitioners have been postponed and the appointment of these four persons mentioned in the impugned order cannot be termed as illegal or irregular for the reason that all the rules were complied with and those persons were fully qualified.
All efforts were made to fill in the posts by direct recruitment and having failed to get suitable candidates (excepting one) and further that those four persons having worked for 10 years on the promoted posts, there was nothing wrong in exercising the power of relaxation.
The learned counsel relied upon the observations made in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, 1990(2) SLR 769, which are as under :  "Mr. Tarkunde is right that the rules fixing the quota of the appointees from two sources are meant to be followed.
But if it becomes impractical to act upon it is no use insisting that the authorities must continue to give effect to it.
There is no sense in asking the performance of something which has become impossible.
Of course, the Government, before departing from the rule, must make every effort to respect it, and only when it ceases to be feasible to enforce it, that it has to be ignored, Mr. Tarkunde is right when he says that in such a situation the rule should be appropriately amended, so that the scope for unnecessary controversy is eliminated.
But, merely for the reason that this step is not taken promptly, the quota rule, the performance of which has been rendered impossible, cannot be treated to continue as operative and binding.
The unavoidable situation brings about its natural demise, and is no meaning in pretending that it is still vibrant with life.
In such a situation if appointments from one source are made in excess of the quota, but in a regular manner and after following the prescribed procedure, there is no reason to push down the appointees, below the recruits from the other source who are inducted in the Service subsequently.
The later appointees may have been young students still prosecuting their studies when the appointments from the other source take place and it is claimed on behalf of the respondents that this is the position with respect to many of the direct recruits in the present case and it will be highly inequitable and arbitrary to treat them as senior.
Further, in cases where the rules themselves permit the Government to relax the provisions fixing the ratio, the position of the appointees is still better; and a mere deviation therefrom would raise a presumption in favour of the exercise of the power of relaxation.
There would be still a third consideration relevant in this context; namely, what is the conclusion to be drawn from deliberate continuous refusal to follow an executive instruction fixing the quota.
The inference would be that the executive instruction has ceased to remain operative.
In all these cases, the matter would, however, be subject to the scrutiny of the Court on the ground of mala fide exercise of power.
All the three circumstances mentioned above which are capable of neutralising the rigours by the quota rule are present in the case before us, and the principle of seniority being dependent on continuous officiation cannot be held to have been defeated by reason of the ratio fixed by the 1960 Rules.
The decisions relied upon by Mr. Singhvi deal with similar situation and are consistent with our opinion."
16.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on this point, I am of the view that there is no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
After having made all efforts to fill in the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers by direct recruitment and having failed in the same (only one person came by way of direct recruitment at Point No. 15 in the year 1973) and further consideration of the fact that those four persons had worked for 10 years on ad hoc basis, the Government was well within its right to make them regular by interchanging the points on the roster.
This only meant that the promotion of some of the Sectional Officers would be slightly delayed but in the public interest it was thought proper that four persons who had worked for such a long period on the promoted rank (for almost 10 years), were promoted on regular basis.
They did not lack any qualification and all procedures had been gone into before regularly promoting them.
As observed above, it was only that a particular point on the roster meant for their source, i.e. source No. 2, was not available for those four persons.
To over-come that situation, relaxation of power was resorted to.
The exercise of the power of relaxation under the circumstances was not arbitrary but was in fact in public interest, though strictly speaking it is not one of the requirements of Rule 21 that relaxation should be in public interest.
By interchanging the points on the roster between the direct recruits and the Sectional Officers, no rule of recruitment as such was being amended and it was only that those four persons were being appointed by promotion as if the points for direct recruits were meant for them.
The authority cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners is wholly inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
The distinguishing features have already been noticed above, while noticing the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents.
The provision under Rule 6 regarding the roster point for a particular source was relaxed by the impugned order Annexure P-2.
Moreover, though the four persons mentioned in Annexure P-2 are no more in service yet in their absence their regular appointments cannot be quashed as that may affect their pension etc. Further the advertisement in the present case, in which the respondents have been selected was issued on 1st August, 1992.
The writ petition was filed in June, 1993, after the recommendations were made by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
It will be too much now to quash the order passed in 1979, which will affect the rights of the private respondents who have been selected for appointment by direct recruitment.
17.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.