AP Chowdhri & Jawahar Lal Gupta, JJ.
- The petitioner who retired as a teacher on October 31, 1991, is aggrieved by the order dated August 11, 1993, by which her request for encashment of leave and the payment of interest on account of delay on reimbursement of retiral benefits, has been rejected.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a teacher in a Government School.
On February 12, 1985, she was placed under suspension on account of a criminal case regarding the death of her daughter-in-law having been registered against her.
The petitioner was charged along with another for an offence under Sections 302/34.
The trial court acquitted them.
The State of Punjab filed Criminal Appeal No. 464/DBA of 1986.
It was dismissed on August 26, 1991.
As a result, the petitioner was reinstated in service vide order dated October 28, 1991.
She retired after attaining the age of 58 years on October 31, 1991.
3.
The petitioner avers that after her acquittal, she was entitled to the payment of full pay and allowances for the period of suspension.
Thereafter, on her retirement, various retiral benefits had accrued to her.
As the respondents did not make the payment, she filed Civil Writ Petition No7029 of 1992 on May 2, 1992.
The Motion Bench directed the issue of a Show Cause Notice to the respondents.
The respondents appeared.
It was stated on their behalf that the petitioner had been paid an amount of Rs.1,34,202.45.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, claimed that she was entitled to the grant of interest and costs.
The Motion Bench disposed of the writ petition with the observation that the petitioner may file a representation and directed the respondents to decide it within a period of two months by passing a speaking order and after hearing her.
The writ petition was, accordingly, disposed of on October 12, 1992.
The petitioner filed a review petition No. 314 of 1992.
A claim for payment of amount due on account of encashment of leave was made.
The Bench disposed of the review petition with a direction that the petitioner may file representation before the concerned authorities "claiming leave encashment and if the authorities are convinced by the petitioner that she is entitled to leave encashment, the same would be granted in accordance with law and relevant rules".
She was also permitted to make a claim regarding payment of interest and costs.
After the disposal of this petition on January 19, 1993, the petitioner submitted a representation on February 10, 1993 to the District Education Officer, Rohtak.
This representation having been rejected vide order dated August 11, 1993, she has approached this court again through the present writ petition.
4.
Mr. DR Satija, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that in accordance with the provisions of Rules 8.116 and 8117 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, the petitioner is entitled to the encashment of the leave due to her.
He has further contended that vide letter dated March 8, 1990, the Government had conveyed the decision that "the employees of vacation departments shall be entitled to eight days' earned leave for every completed year spent on duty".
He has also contended that the claim for payment of interest and costs has been wrongly denied to the petitioner.
5.
It is the admitted position that in the Education Department, the teachers are entitled to vacation.
It is also the admitted position that prior to the issue of the letter dated March 8, 1990, the employees in the vacation departments were entitled to only the grant of half pay leave and not earned leave except when they were prevented from availing of the vacation.
It is only with effect from January 1, 1990 that the State Government has decided to grant the concession of eight days' earned leave to the persons working in vacation departments.
Consequently, it is apparent that till December 31, 1989, the petitioner was only entitled to the grant of half pay leave.
6.
The first question that arises is - Can the petitioner claim encashment of half pay leave which may be due to her at the time of her retirement.
This question was considered by a Divisional Bench of this Court in Gurdev Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(1) S.C.T.
276 (C.W.P.
No. 5087 of 1993 and 22 other petitions).
After consideration of the rules, it was held that only the full pay earned leave could be encashed.
The decision of the Divisional Bench was challenge before the Supreme Court in S.L.P.
(Civil) No.1612 of 1994 along with other petitions.
These were rejected vide order dated March 1, 1994 with the following observations :  "We agree with the finding of the High Court that it is only the full pay unutilised earned leave, that can be encashed and no other leave including half pay leave is encashable.
Hence the Special Leave Petitions are dismissed".
In view of the above it is held that the petitioner was not entitled to encash the half pay leave.
7.
It was then contended that the petitioner was entitled to eight days' earned leave for every completed year spent on duty.
Reliance in support of this contention has been placed on the decision dated March 8, 1990 issued by the Government of Punjab.
A perusal of this decision shows that the Government had categorically provided that "the benefit will accrue to the staff from the calendar year 1990 ie from the 1st January, 1990".
According to this decision, the eight days' earned leave is admissible to the employees of the vacation departments "for every completed year spent on duty".
In this context, it is relevant to recapitulate that the petitioner had remained under suspension from February 12, 1985 to October 27, 1991 and that within less than a week after his reinstatement, she had actually retired on October 31, 1991.
It is also the admitted position that the petitioner has already been paid full salary for the entire period of suspension.
She had, thus, virtually a paid holiday.
Still further in the impugned order, it has been clearly observed that "as per rules, eight days' earned leave has already been given to Smt. Chander Kanta".
This observation has not been controverted in the writ petition.
In this situation, the petitioner's claim for encashment of leave by her during the year 1990 and 1991, does not arise.
8.
Lastly, it was contended that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of interest on the amount of more than Rs. 2 lacs which was paid to her after considerable delay.
9.
We are unable to accept this contention.
A perusal of the actual order passed by respondent No. 3 (the translation of which filed by the petitioner is not wholly accurate) shows that the criminal case against the petitioner had been decided by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on July 24, 1992.
The arrears found to be due to the petitioner were paid by the Department to her on October 10, 1992.
In such a situation, we are unable to hold that there was any negligence on the part of the respondents in paying the amount of arrears due to the petitioner or that they caused any wilful delay.
Moreover, one cannot lose sight of the fact that substantial amount of money has been paid to her even though she had not done any work.
We are not inclined to grant her the relief of payment of interest in the circumstances of this case.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.