MS Liberhan, J - The petitioner joined the police service on 261982.
He applied for two days' causal leave but reported back on duty after a lapse of 83 days.
Disciplinary departmental proceedings for absence from duty without leave were initiated.
On 861987, the petitioner was put under suspension.
The statement of allegations of alleged misconduct as well as the statement of witnesses was served on the petitioner in accordance with Rule 1624(1)(i) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
In defence, the petitioner put up the version that as he was sick, consequently, he was unable to join duty earlier.
2.
The Inquiry Officer found the defence of the petitioner to be false and further found that the petitioner has absented from duty without leave.
Respondent No. 4 the Punishing Authority on the report of the Inquiry Officer and reply to the show cause notice refuted the case put up by the petitioner and ordered the dismissal of the petitioner from service on 1121987 holding that the defaulter has acted in an indisciplined manner and is incorrigible as he absented even during enquiry also.
After going through various pleas, the legal advice, the total absence of 83 days coupled with the fact that the petitioner was habitual absentee from duty on one pretext or the other, respondent No. 2 rejected the appeal of the petitioner vide order dated 20.4.1988 after affirming the findings of the Inquiry Officer and after taking note of the earlier recorded six times punishment for absence from duty.
The mercy petition met the same fate.
The dismissal of the petitioner was assailed through this writ petition on the grounds inter alia that; (i) the impugned order was passed for extraneous consideration i.e. the Appellate Authority took into consideration the legal advice which was neither put to the petitioner nor any explanation was taken from him.
Further the earlier absence from duty, awarding of six times punishment for absence from duty and absence from duty during the inquiry was taken into consideration while ordering the dismissal of the petitioner without the same being put to the petitioner and without taking his explanation (ii) the order of dismissal is violative of principles of natural justice as well as Rule 1624(1) (vii).
The delinquent-petitioner was not provided a reasonable opportunity to defend himself to present his case.
No witnesses were examined after the framing of charge-sheet.
The order of the Appellate Authority is not a speaking order and was passed without granting an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner; (iii) the impugned order was passed without examining the defence witnesses.
It was incumbent on the Inquiry Officer to summon and examine the witnesses after a list of wintesses was submitted to him.
Non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Rule 1624 and holding that it was the responsibility of the delinquent to produce his defence is in violation of Rule 1624 (v); (iv) Rule 1629 provides the Appellate Authority in the case of the petitioner to be a D.I.G.
The Appellate Authority could not be appointment by the executive at contrary to the rules.
Herein, the order of dismissal was passed by the Director of State Crime Records Bureau, Madhuban, who was authorised to hear the appeal by the executive order as there was no D.I.G.
upto April, 1988.
Thus, the order of the Appellate Authority is without jurisdiction; (v) the impugned order is violative of Rule 162 as the Punishing Authority did not take into consideration the length of service etc; and (vi) absence from duty i.e. over stay of sanctioned leave does not amount to gross misconduct for which the petitioner could have been dismissed from service.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in order to support his contentions relied upon C.W.P.
No. 16889 of 1992 (Ajit Singh v. State of Haryana), 1993(1) SCT 87 (P&H) decided by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 2.6.93, Ex. HC Munshi Ram v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(2) RSJ 345, State of Haryana through Collector, Hissar v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) PLR 595 : 1991(2) SCT 718 (P&H), State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174, Darshan Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(2) SCT 714 (P&H) : 1991(4) SLR 102 and State of Haryana through Collector Hissar and another v. Lachman Singh, 1992(2) RSJ 398 : 1992(2) SCT 545 (P&H).
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents refuted the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It was argued that no extraneous matters were taken into consideration.
The procedure envisaged by Rule 1624 of the Rules was followed in its letter and spirit and there was no violation of principles of natural justice.
Opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses was given to the petitioner but he failed to avail the same.
Opportunity of leading defence evidence was also granted to the petitioner in which he failed to produce any evidence.
The Appellate Authority i.e. respondent No. 2 was admittedly holding the rank of D.I.G.
though described as Director of State Crime Records Bureau, Madhuban.
Rule 162 was complied with.
Absence from duty without leave in a disciplined force of Police is the gravest act of misconduct for which the petitioner has been rightly dismissed from service.
In order to support his contention, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon the State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex. Constable, 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC), The State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SLR 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H), Joginder Singh v. Punjab State, 1989 (3) SLR 626, Karnail Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 770 : 1993(4) RSJ 448(P&H)(DB) and State of Haryana v. Tek Singh, 1992(4) SLR 213 : 1992(2) SCT 418 (P&H).
5.
I have gone through the writ petition, written statement etc. as well the record produced.
6.
It is discernible from reading of the impugned orders that while awarding the punishment of dismissal the authority did take into consideration that the petitioner was a habitual absentee from duty and was earlier punished six times according to the record.
It is clear beyond argument that the Punishing Authority did take into consideration the past record of the petitioner.
There is nothing on the record nor it was pointed out during the course of arguments by the counsel for the either party that the petitioner was ever made aware of the fact that while awarding the punishment of dismissal, his previous record would be taken into consideration.
No explanation or no opportunity to explain his previous conduct resulting into the alleged six times punishment for absence from duty was granted.
It is violation of principles of natural justice.
It is envisages by Rule 1624(vii) that in the eventuality of the Punishing Authority, while awarding the punishment, proposes to take into consideration the previous record of the delinquent police officer, he shall provide a reasonable opportunity to the defaulter to defend himself.
The rule in its mandatory form is in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
Herein, as observed above as well as obvious from the record, the petitioner was never made aware of the consideration of the previous record while awarding the punishment.
The said action of the Punishing Authority is violative of the mandatory provisions of the Rule.
No opportunity was granted to the petitioner to present or explain his previous conduct.
Further, I may hasten to add that no prosecution witness was tendered for cross-examination after the framing of the charge-sheet.
Nothing has been pointed out either in record or in the pleadings of the parties as to what was the legal advice obtained by the appellate authority and the same was never put to the petitioner.
The petitioner was never granted any opportunity to counter the legal advice available to the respondents.
Thus, I am of the considered view that the impugned orders have been passed by taking into consideration some extraneous matter and in violation of the mandatory provisions of Rule 1624 (vii) and the order of dismissal cannot be sustained.
I am supported in my above views and observations by a decision in CWP No. 16689 of 1992 decided on 261993 (Ajit Singh v. State of Haryana), 1993(1) SCT 87 (P&H) wherein it was observed as under :-  ".....
The Disciplinary Authority has to take into account the past record of the delinquent official for imposing a particular penalty on him it has to give him an opportunity to explain the same..."  A detailed departmental procedure for departmental inquiry has been provided by Rule 1624.
It would be pertinent to take notice of Rule 1624 (1)(v), which runs as under :-  "1624(1)(v).
The accused officer shall be required to state the defence witnesses whom he wishes to call and may be given time, in no case exceeding forty-eight hours, to prepare a list of such witnesses, together with a summary of the facts as to which they will testify.
The enquiring officer shall be empowered to refuse to hear any witnesses whose evidence he considers will be irrelevant or unnecessary in regard to the specific charge framed.
He shall record the statements of those defence witnesses whom he decided to admit in the presence of the accused, who shall be allowed to address questions to them, the answers to which shall be recorded; provided that the enquiring officer may cause to be recorded by any other police officer superior in rank to the accused the statement of any such witness whose presence cannot be secured without undue delay or inconvenience, and may bring such statement on to the record.
The accused may file documentary evidence and may for this purpose be allowed access to such files and papers, except such as form part of the record of the confidential office of the Superintendent of Police, as the enquiring officer deems fit.
The supply of copies of documents to the accused shall be subject to the ordinary rules regarding copying fees."
A plain reading of the rule keeping in view the intention of the rule making authority and the principles of natural justice would show that an opportunity to lead defence evidence has been granted to the delinquent.
The delinquent is duty bound to give a list of witnesses with summary of facts they would testify.
It was, thereafter that the inquiry officer was powered to refuse to hear any witness whose evidence he considers to be irrelevant or unnecessary in regard to the specific charges.
It was, thereafter that the Inquiry Officer was bound to record the statements of defence witnesses in the presence of the delinquent who was allowed to address questions to them.
Inquiry Officer has been further authorised to get the statement recorded by other officer of the witness whose presence could not be secured.
There is no gainsaying that the official witnesses or other witnesses which the delinquent was unable to produce the Inquiry Officer can decline to examine them solely on the ground that the burden of producing the witnesses would be on the delinquent.
Each case has to be considered in its own facts and circumstances.
There cannot be a watertight compartment wherein as a litmus test it can be held that the delinquent is responsible for producing his defence witnesses.
Fairness in procedure is the watch word of the principles of natural justice.
Delinquent has no coercive machinery available at his disposal to produce the witnesses while the Inquiry Officer does have.
In view of all these circumstances particularly while no part is attributed to the delinquent for with holding the defence evidence, it can be reasonably inferred that a reasonable opportunity was denied to the delinquent to lead his defence evidence.
Thus, the order of dismissal denying the opportunity to lead defence evidence cannot be sustained being violative of Rule 1624(1)(v) and the principles of natural justice.
7.
It is not disputed that the appellate authority was a D.I.G.
at the time of deciding the appeal though he was described as Director of State Crime Records Bureau, Madhuban.
In order to remove any ambiguity he was authorised to hear the appeal by way of an order issued by the Competent Authority.
This fact is not being seriously disputed in the course of arguments.
Thus, I find no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of the appellate authority is without jurisdiction.
8.
It would be expedient to note Rule 162, relevant part of which runs as under  "162.
Dismissal - Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
On a plain reading of the rule, it emerges that the dismissal from service shall be awarded after finding that the act of misconduct attributed to the delinquent is of gravest nature or there is a cumulative effect of continuous misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
After recording the findings of the gravest act of misconduct or cumulative misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, the authorities before awarding the severest punishment of dismissal would take into consideration or give due regard to the length of service of the delinquent and his claim for pension.
Concedingly, herein, there is nothing on the record to show that the Punishing Authority or the Appellate Authority addressed themselves with regard to the length of service either specifically or impliedly.
There is nothing on the record to even remotely suggest that the Punishing Authority was alive to the fact of taking into consideration the length of service while awarding the punishment.
I find support in the above observation of mine from The Punjab State and another v. Balwant Singh, Ex-Constable, 1989(4) SLR 105, wherein it was observed after taking into consideration various judgments that the Punishing Authority has to take into consideration the complete unfitness of the delinquent for police service, the length of service, incorrigibility and claim to the pension.
The authorities cannot be oblivious to the provisions of Rule 162 which is in the nature of command to the disciplinary authority while awarding the punishment of dismissal.
Similar view was taken by this Court in State of Haryana through Collector, Hissar and another v. Lachman Singh, 1992(2) RSJ 398 : 1992(2) SCT 545 (P&H).
I need not multiply the plethora of judgments but since the judgments were sited at Bar, it would be sufficient to take notice of Bhim Singh v. Haryana State etc., 1991(2) PLR 190 and State of Haryana through Collector, Hissar v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) PLR 595 : 1991(2) SCT 718 (P&H).
I find no force in the statement of learned counsel for the respondents that since the petitioner was not entitled to any pension as he as served only for 5-1/2 years, the punishing authority did not take into consideration the length of service.
Merely non-entitlement of pension will not deprive the delinquent of his right for consideration of length of service by the Punishing Authority while awarding the severest punishment of dismissal from service.
The judgment cited by the learned counsel for the respondents reported as Karnail Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993 (4) RSJ 448 is neither para meteria with the facts and circumstances of the case in hand nor the question of issuing the show-cause notice or granting an opportunity to the delinquent while taking the past service into consideration while awarding the punishment was addressed to or dealt with.
9.
Thus, I am of the considered view that the impugned order of dismissal from service is liable to be set aside on this ground only.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further submitted that absence from duty is not a gross misconduct.
I find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that the absence from duty in a disciplinary force would be a gross misconduct but I may hasten to add that the mere fact of absence from duty by itself may not amount to gross misconduct.
The absence is to be seen in totality of the circumstances.
It has been observed in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh, Ex. Constable, 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC), wherein it was observed as under :-  "The respondent, while working as gunman of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Ropar, was dismissed from service by order dated February 11, 1980 by the Superintendent of Police, Ropar on the charge that he was found heavily drunk in the evening of September 6, 1979 and was roaming at the bus stand wearing the service revolver.
Traffic constable Gurbachan Singh brought him with difficulty in a Jeep to the police station and the revolver was deposited in the Malkhana and sent the respondent to the Civil Hospital for medical examination.
The doctor declared him as heavily drunk.
He also had a quarrel with the doctor on duty and abused him.
An enquiry into his conduct was conducted after following the prescribed procedure in this behalf and found him to have contravened Rule 162(1) of the Punjab Police Manual 1934, Vol. II for short 'the Rules'.
The departmental appeals ended against the respondent.
Thereon he laid the suit for a declaration that the order of dismissal as confirmed in the departmental appeals was null and void, unconstitutional, illegal ultra vires and opposed to the principles natural justice.
He also sought for consequential relief of reinstatement into the service with all consequential benefits.
The trial Court decreed the suit.
On appeal it was affirmed.
The Civil Courts found that the order of dismissal was vitiated by not giving reasonable opportunity due to non-supply of the documents and the Inquiry Officer cross-examined the witnesses produced by the respondent.
The disciplinary authority did not keep in view the mandatory provisions of Rule 162(1) of the Rules.
The High Court in Second Appeal No. 1159 of 1986 dated March 10, 1989 while holding that the respondent was supplied with the required documents and that the enquiry was not vitiated by cross-examination done by the Inquiry Officer, however, affirmed the decree on the ground that Rule 162(1) contemplates that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct"; taking drink is a single act and it is not a gravest act and the Superintendent of Police was not alive to the mandates of Rule 162(1) which envisages dismissal only for gravest acts of misconduct and the respondent had put in 17 years of service and would have qualified for pension after putting another 3 to 4 years of service and that was not kept in view."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court while referring to absence from duty being of the gravest act of misconduct observed as under :-  "The second part of the rule connotes the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness of police service and that the length of service of the offender and his claim for pension should be taken into account in an appropriate case.
The contention that both parts be read together appears to us to be illogical.
Second part is referable to a misconduct of minor in character which does not but itself warrant an order of dismissal but due to continued acts of misconduct would have insidious cumulative effect on service morale may be a ground to take lenient view of giving an opportunity to reform.
Despite giving such opportunities if the delinquent officer proved to be incorrigible and found complete unfit to remain in service than to maintain discipline in the service, instead of dismissing the delinquent officer, a lesser punishment of compulsory retirement or demotion to a lower grade or rank or removal from service without affecting his future chances of re-employment, if any, may meet the ends of justice.
Take for instance, the delinquent officer is habitually absent from duty when required.
Despite giving an opportunity to reform himself he continues to remain absent from duty off and on.
He proved himself to be incorrigible and thereby unfit to continue in service.
Therefore, taking into account his long length of service and his claim for pension he may be compulsorily retired from service so as to enable him to earn proportional pension.
The second part of the rule operates in that area.
It may also be made clear that the very order of dismissal from service for gravest misconduct may entail forfeiture of all pensionary benefits.
Therefore, the word 'or' cannot be read as "and".
It must be disjunctive and independent.
The common link that connects both clauses is "the gravest act/acts of misconduct."
Reading of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, I am of the view that absence from duty would be viewed as a gravest act of misconduct in the facts and circumstances of each case, i.e. cumulative effect of habitual absence from duty, duty from which absent, incorrigibility, devotion to duty from which absent, incorrigibility, devotion to duty and reasons for absence are some of the considerations which would be taken into consideration while returning the finding of fact as to whether the absence from duty was in the nature of a gross misconduct envisaged by the Rules.
11.
In view of the observations made above, I am of the considered view that the impugned orders of dismissal Annexure P-1 dated 1121987, Annexure P-3 dated 20.4.1988, Annexure P-5 dated 1781988 and Annexure P-6 dated 8.2.1989 cannot be sustained and are hereby quashed.
The respondents would be at liberty to proceed afresh in accordance with law and the rules i.e. the respondents would be at a liberty to continue with the disciplinary proceedings from the state of service of the summary of allegations etc. and may pass appropriate orders as they may deem fit.
The writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.