VK Bali, J - This order shall dispose of two petitions bearing C.W.P.
No. 4797 of 1993 (Ms. Paramjeet Kaur and others v. Panjab University and others) and C.W.P.
No. 9616 of 1993 (Jagdish Singh and others v. Panjab University and others).
The relief asked for in C.W.P.
4597 of 1993 is to declare replacement/substitutions of original paper setters and external examiners appointed the by the respondent-University for specific term on the recommendations of the Board of Studies in respect of MAII (Physical Education) Examination, 1993 in theory paper No. 4 (Science of Training and Coaching) and theory paper No. 5 (Adapted Physical Education) and Practicals in Athletics and Games being illegal and in gross violation of the Panjab University Act, 1947 and the Regulations made thereunder.
Inasmuch as, during the pendency of this writ petition, the University has cancelled theory paper 4 (Science of Training and Coaching-A for MA Part (Physical of Training and Coaching-A for MA Part (Physical Education) and Practical Lesson on Athletics for BPEd, MA Part I and MA Part II.
Civil Writ Petition 9613 of 1993 has been filed praying therein that the said order of the respondent-University be quashed by issuing a writ of certiorari.
2.
Facts as extracted from Civil Writ Petition 4597 of 1993 reveal that department of Physical Education.
Panjab University offers undergraduate and post-graduate degree/diploma courses, BPEd.
(Bachelor of Physical Education), MA (Physical Education).
Objective of the aforesaid post-graduate courses, it is stated, is that in the subject of Physical Education students are to be qualified to be leaders in the field of Physical Education, Sports and Recreation.
The training involves a great deal of physical and mental work and therefore, only those who have built bodies, sound health, high grades of skills in a variety of physical activities, games and sports and a good academic record shall be suitable for it.
It is pleaded that cherishing the same objective, petitioner No. 3 obtained a degree of Bachelor of Physical Education as a regular student and was awarded a Gold Medal for under going the said degree course.
Petitioners were admitted to two years post-graduate degree course in Physical Education during the academic year 1991-92, after having completed the eligibility conditions as laid in the hand-book of information for the year 1991 published by the respondent- University.
The petitioners appeared in MA Part I examination in the year 1992 and while they successfully passed, petitioner No. 3 was adjudged the topper in the University.
During their tenure as students of MA Part II, they were deputed to assist and participate in conduction the Inter College Relay Race competition which was being organised under the aegis of Panjab University Campus Sports Department, where respondent No. 3 is employed as Deputy Director.
During the said relay races, respondent No. 8, Reet Mohinder Singh, Deputy Director, Campus Sports, Panjab University, Chandigarh, did not feel the presence of the women students, including the petitioner, who were on duty and it is pleaded that he exhibited behaviour which was of unbecoming of an officer of the respondent-University.
He used objectionable language.
He misbehaved with the women students to such an extent that while snaching away watches from those who were on 'Time Keepers duty', including petitioner No. 1, also physically pushed them in the presence of hundreds of spectators.
The students withdrew from the scene under protest and lodged a complaint with respondent No. 5, Lecturer Department of Physical Education, through their class representative.
It is pleaded that respondent No. 5 instead of looking into the complaint of the petitioners rather snubbed and insulted them and supported the stand of respondent No. 8 who happened to be his personal friend.
The matter was, therefore, taken to the faculty members of the Physical Education who decided to constitute a committee of four faculty members to look into their grievances regarding the aforesaid incident which was created by respondent No. 8 at the time of Athletic Meet.
Based on the findings of the committee of the faculty members, respondent No. 5 as Chairman of the department was requested to, convey the grave concern about misbehaviour on behalf of respondent No. 8 and also to the effect that in future the students of the department will be deputed as a team under the charge of D S. Toor, Lecturer.
It is pleaded that when next time, students were deputed under the charge of D S. Toor, respondent No. 8 did not take kindly of it and this attitude of respondent No. 8 was reported to the Vice-Chancellor by the concerned teacher incharge.
This, it is further leaded embittered respondent No. 8 who then nursed a grudge and animosity against the petitioners and, therefore, respondent No. 5 thereafter openly stated that the petitioners will be taught a lesson.
Petitioners thereafter apprehend some harm to them at the instance of respondents No. 5 and 8.
It is pleaded that the apprehension they entertained came true when on 29th March, 1993, which date was fixed for Practical Athletics Examination, no external examiner arrived and all of a sudden, respondent No. 8 appeared on the scene at about 300 pm and announced that he had simply come to help respondent No. 5 to take practical examination.
He also declared that respondent No. 5 being the chairperson of the department was all in all.
Thereafter, a formal drama in the name of taking examination was enacted by asking the petitioners to explain the lesson plan of 45 minutes duration within two minutes.
No viva was conducted and rather petitioners were tauntedly told their performance in the practical examination was subject to the subjective assessment of the examiners.
This drama, it is further pleaded, continued next day on 30th March, 1993 also whereupon at about 350 pm, the petitioners reported and complained the arbitrary way of conducting at the annual examination to the Dean, University Instructions and brought to his notice conduct of respondents No. 5 and 8 while taking the practical examination in an Athletics.
They also complained about the attitude of respondent No. 7 who exhibited his bias towards petitioners No. 2 and 3 while acting as internal examiner for basket ball specialisation.
Respondent No. 7, it is further pleaded, had been exerting pressure on girl students, including petitioner No. 2, to date with him to get benefits in the internal assessment.
It is also pleaded that petitioner No. 2 had refused the proposal of dating with respondent No. 7 and, therefore, he has shown his bias during the examination.
On 2nd April, 1993, petitioners gave a detailed complaint in writing, copy whereof has been placed on record as Annexure P-1 pointing out that respondent No. 8 had, in fact, been acting as External Examiner, when he was not so qualified and that his appointment as External Examiner was in violation of the University rules.
The petitioners continued visiting office of the Dean, University Instruction almost daily who told them that the matter was pending with the Vice-Chancellor.
Elder brother of petition No. 3 feeling concerned, brought the matter to the notice of the Governor or Punjab vide letter dated 9th April, 1993, copy of the said letter has been placed on record as Annexure P-2.
Father of petitioner No. 2 represented to the Governor of Punjab, with a copy of the Vice-Chancellor on 19th April, 1994.
Copy of this has also been placed on record as Annexure P-3.
This matter attracted the attention of the media and consequently news item appeared in The Tribune on 19th April, 1993, highlighting the impropriety and illegality of the appointment of respondent No. 8 as external examiner against the rules by respondent No. 5.
The news item so appeared in the Tribune has been placed on record as Annexure P-4.
On 19th April, 1993, the petitioners complained with regard to appointment of respondent No. 8 as External Examiner vide their representation pointing out that respondent No. 2, being guardian and custodian to protect their interests should look into the matter.
When efforts of the petitioners brought no tangible results and when they were still pursuing the matter it came to their notice on 24th April, 1993 that the senior most teacher of the rank of Professor Ms. J Bhullar, who was the only Professor in the department, vide her report dated 20.4.1993 submitted to the Vice-Chancellor disclosed that Dr. A K Uppal, Professor and Deputy Dean of LB.
National College of Physical Education, Gwalior, was, in fact, the paper settler and examiner of the theory paper as well as External Examiner of the Practical in Athletics, who had been changed by respondent No. 5 of his own and that respondent No. 5 had made a wrong statement certifying the approval of the Board of Studies to some other examiners.
A copy of the aforesaid report has been placed on record as Annexupe P-6.
The petitioners further averred that, in fact, Board of Studies in its meeting held in September 1993 had appointed Dr. A K Uppal as paper setter of theory paper : Science and Training of Coaching Athletics and external examiner for practical examination in Athletics for four years.
Dr. Uppal is the highest qualified person who throughout had distinguished academic and teaching career in physical education and is the only person in India who possesses the Post Doctoral Degree i.e. D Lit.
In this view of the matter, it is pleaded, change brought about unceremoniously of distinguished academician as paper setter and external examiner was in flagrant disregard to the wisdom of the Board of Studies showing scant regard to the University statute.
As a sequel to the issue culminating in the campus in view of Annexure P-6, petitioners it is pleaded also came across a copy of the letter dated 18th March, 1993, addressed to the Vice-Chancellor by Shri K S Sharma, who was the predecessor-in-office of the Chairman of the Department of Physical Education, of respondent No. 5.
A copy of the letter aforesaid has also been annexed as Annexure P-7 to the petition.
This letter it is further pleaded revealed volume of improprieties committed by respondent No. 5 by arbitrarily changing the External Examiner Dr. D S. Bhandari from Kurukshetra University who had been appointed as External Examiner for Gymnastics on the recommendations of the Board of Studies for a term of three years.
The case of the petitioners is that the examiner and paper setter recommended by Board of Studies was changed by respondent No. 5 to give undue benefit to candidates to whom they wanted to favour.
One such person is stated to be respondent No. 6.
It is stated that the said respondent is always doing paper work of the Chairman of the department.
He was earlier working as Clerk in the department of Physical Education.
Respondent No. 5, thus, not only changed the paper setter and external examiner referred to above but also the External Examiner for the Basket Ball specialisation at the instance of respondent No. 7 and appointed his friend so as to manipulate the evaluation in the examination to his liking for benefiting his favourities.
It is further pleaded that respondent No. 6 joined the department of Physical Education as Clerk and by sheer manipulation on his part, he got himself appointed on technical post of Technician Grade II for which essential qualification in B.Sc.
He then further got his promotion as clinician Grade I as he had great longing to do MA in Physical Education but he was not fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
Thereafter, he decided to get admission through back door entry, that is, by first joining BP Ed and later on manipulating admission in MA Physical Education.
He even did not qualify the standard physical theory test, which is said to be pre-requisite for admission to the said course but somehow or the other managed to get admission during the academic year 1991-92 and, thereafter, managed to get his admission transferred from BP Ed to MA Part I Physical Education with the help of bogus certificate showing his participation in the National Games.
Respondent No. 8 who is a non-teaching employee of the University was not qualified to be appointed as External Examiner much less to Act as a replacement as an external examiner by the eminence of Dr. A K Uppal, Professor and Deputy Dean of LB National College of Physical Education, Gwalior, who was earlier appointed as paper setter and external examiner for four years on the recommendations of the Board of Studies.
It is in the wake of circumstances fully narrated above that relief as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment has been asked for.
3.
The main point seeking the relief aforesaid rests on the grounds, inter alia, that it is statutory duty of the respondent-University to conduct fair examination to evaluate the performance of the students examinees and that the authorities are charged with working out modalities and responsibility for preparation to conduct, examination under statutory obligation to maintain integrity and to observe all Codal and moral responsibility in this behalf.
Annexures P-4, P-6 and P-7, it is pleaded and so argued by the learned Counsel are sufficient to manifest that the respondents failed to maintain-absolute integrity in discharging the functions of the Chairman of the Department of Physical Education and rather arbitrarily, illegally and without any competence changed the paper setters and external examiners by his sheer whims and fancies and, therefore, the practical examination or lesson on Training and Coaching in Athletics and Games particularly in Gymnastics and Basket Ball specialisaton carrying 200 marks out of the total of 700 marks are vitiated and cannot be held to be validly conducted.
It is further the case of the petitioners that the appointment of paper setters and examiners is governed by the general rules contained in the University Calendar Volume III, 1985.
The change brought about in the manner as referred to above it is argued, is against the general rules.
Rules 11, 12, 13, 71, 72, 8, 91, 10 and 11 which are relevant for appreciating the points noticed above, read thus :-  11 Each Board of Studies shall suggest paper setters and examiners in the its subject(s).
Such recommendations shall be made by the various Boards by the following dates :  (1) in the case of Paper-Setters, end of July of the year previous to the year of examination; and  (ii) in the case of Head Examiners and Sub-examiners 15th of November of the year proceeding the examination.
If any Board fads to make its recommendation by the above dates, the Revising Committee may proceed to make its own recommendations more or less on the basis of last year's list.
12 In making their recommendations, the Boards shall follow such rules and directions as may prescribed by the Syndicate of the subject.
The Board shall also follow the qualifications down by the Syndicate for appointment of examiners for the various examinations.
13 The recommendations of each Board, before submission of the Syndicate shall be scrutimised and reviewed by the Revising Committee.
xx xx xx  71 If a paper-setter or examiner is shown to be unable to perform the work or to confirm to the direction of the University, the Vice-Chancellor shall have power to cancel the appointed of examiner.
72 If the Vice-Chancellor finds that the work or conduct of an examiner is unsatisfactory, he may remove his name from the register or disqualify him for appointment as examiner for a specified period or take such other action as he may consider fit.
8.
Where the appointment of an examiner is cancelled by the Vice-Chancellor or an examiner, for any cause, is incapable of acting as such or does not accept the appointment, or an appointment becomes necessary as an emergency measure, the Vice-chancellor shall appoint a substitute examiner, provided that, except in case of emergency, he shall consult the Head of the Department of Studies in University or the Convener of the Board of Studies concerned, before making the appointment.
91 Paper-setters, external/internal examiners, head-examiners, sub-examiners and single examiners shall ordinarily be appointed for four years for all examinations except MBBS, M.D, MS and other post-graduate diploma examinations in the Medical Faculty who shall appointed for three years....  xx xx xx xx  10.
No one shall be appointed as Paper-setter.
(i) to (ii) xx xx xx  (iii) If he does not possess teaching experience in the subject for -  (1) 10 years or  (2) 5 year s in the case of a University Professor.
Provided that -  1.
This condition may be relaxed in the case of a subject like xx xx xx  2.
In the case of MA examination, ordinarily no person below the status of a Reader in another University with less than 5 years teaching experience shall be appointed am paper-setter/external examiner.
3 to 4 xx xx xx xx  11.
The following shall not be eligible for appointment as paper-setters, Head Examiners or Examiners :  (i) to (ii) xx xx xx  (ii) A person holding a no-teaching post, unless he  (i) possess the requited qualifications and teaching experience etc. laid down under the rules sod has taught the subject within the last two years of his appointment as examiner  or  (ii) is a part-time teacher teaching the subject concerned and possesses the minimum teaching experience laid down in the rules.
xx xx xx xx xx"  4.
The third and the last contention raised in the matter is obviously bias of respondent Nos. 5 and 8 against the petitioners for various reasons a fully detailed above as also their anxiety to advance the cause of respondent No. 6.
5.
When the matter came up before the motion Bench on 6th of July, 1993.
Mt.
A. K. Chopra, learned Counsel appearing for respondents 1 to 4 stated that the Vice-Chancellor had since decided after necessary enquiry to hold the Practical Examination of "Lesson on Training and Coaching in Athletics" afresh.
Inasmuch as this did not satisfy the petitioner who pointed out at that stage that in addition to the practical paper aforesaid their grievance was also with regard to two theory papers which were to be set and Answer Books examined by External Examiner, but was, in fact, dealt with by a nominee of respondent No. 5, who was not an external examiner, the matter was postponed for arguments to 20.71993.
The writ petition was, however, admitted on 2031993.
6.
The cause of the petitioners has been opposed by respondent Nos. 1 to 5, 7 and 8 who have filed joint written statement and besides taking few Preliminary Objections, it has been pleaded that the allegations made by petitioners were not correct.
In any case, the averments with regard to bias of respondent Nos. 5 and 8 against the petitioner are a disputed question which cannot be gone into by this Court in its writ jurisdiction under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
In the Inter-College Relay Race competition, all the faculty members and students of all three classes of department of Physical Education i.e.
BPEd., MA Part I and II were asked to assist the Directorate in the conduct of said competition.
On the last day of competition, many students were found absent and other students had shown lukewarm attitude towards their duty and they were requested again to perform their duty seriously.
When the students did not respond positively to the repeated requests of the Director Sports, help of some teachers from the affiliated colleges was sought to conduct the competition and the students were asked to leave the place of their duty so that the competition could be conducted smoothly.
This competition was most prestigious competition of Directorate of Sports and any lapse on the part of the students would have caused considerable damage to the seriousness of the competition.
The allegation with regard to use of objectional language and misbehaviour of respondent No. 8 regarding snubbing and insulting attitude of respondent No. 5 and mala fides, it is pleaded, are all wrong, misceived and unwarranted.
It is further pleaded that averments made in para 10 of the writ petition are wrong, misconceived, misleading and are in the nature of character assassination containing baseless, wild and vague allegations.
The paper setters and examiners were recommended by the Board of Studies as per the rules.
In the meeting held on 30th October, 1992, in which Dr. A K Uppal was also recommended as a paper setter.
However, on receipt of his purported unwillingness vide letter dated 14th November, 1992, respondents 4 and 5 were requested by the secrecy branch of the University to recommend a substitute of Dr. Uppal.
Being the Convener of Board of Students, the answering-respondents 4 and 5 recommended the name of Dr. Daljinder Singh Kahlon, Reader, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
Later, as a result of the purported unwillingness of Dr. Uppal, the name of Dr. Daljinder Singh was recommended as External Examiner for practical in Lesson on Athletics for BPEd.
MA Part I and MA Part II examinations.
Dr. Daljinder Singh Kahlon had set the theory Paper IV : Science of Training and Coaching-A (Athletics) but did not report for duty on 29th March, 1993 for taking the concerned practical examination due to which the name of Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh as External Examiner (Practical) in Lesson on Athletics was recommended.
The theory Paper IV : Science of Training and Coaching-A (Athletics) and Practiclas in lessons on Athletics for BP Ed, MA Part I and Part II (Physical Education) have been cancelled and re- examination therein has since been ordered by the Vice-Chancellor.
In so far as Paper IV Science on Training and Coaching (B) (Gymnastics for MA.
Part II in Physical Education is concerned, it is pleaded that Board of Studies in its meeting held on 30th October, 1992, recommended the appointment of Dr. Manjit Singh, Reader, Laxmi Bai National College, Physical Education, Gwalior and not Dr. B S Bhandari.
7.
From the array of facts as stated above and in particular the averments made in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the written statement it is thus apparent that the respondents have already cancelled the theory paper IV : Science of Training and Coaching for MA Part-II (Physical Education) and Practical in Lesson on Athletics for BP Ed, MA.
Part-I and MA Part-II.
It is with regard to these papers that specific averments showing misconduct of the examination have been made in the writ petition.
The claim of the petitioners had thus been satisfied.
There was no occasion for the petitioners to have still pressed for continuing the writ petition.
Mr. Pathania, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners, however, seeks setting aside of papers other than mentioned above, details whereof have been given in sub-para (iv) of para 25 of the petition.
He, however, concedes that there are no specific allegations made in the petition asking for the said relief.
However, he refers to the averments made in the replication that was filed but such allegations are also vague.
The learned Counsel on repeatedly being asked by the Court has not been able to point out any defect in the conduct of examinations other than the ones which have already been cancelled by the respondent-University.
In the circumstances, as mentioned above, thus no further relief can be granted to the petitioners.
In considered view of the Court, the petition had become infructuous the moment the examinations referred to above were cancelled by the respondent-University.
8.
As mentioned above, petitioners in Civil Writ Petition 9616 of 1993 have challenged the cancellation of the examination i.e.
Lesson on Athletics Practical of MA II, MA I and Bachelor of Physical Education and also the theory paper of 'Science and Training of Coaching' of MA Part II.
They pleaded that Board of Studies which is constituted by the Vice-Chancellor is authorised to hold the practical examination.
The Chairman of the department is the Convenor of the Board of Studies.
The Examiner appointed by the Board of Studies remains on the Board for three years.
Dr. A K Uppal who is Professor and Deputy Dean, Laxmi Bai National College of Physical Education, Gwalior, was appointed as paper setter and practical examination's examiner for the lesson in Athletics.
The procedure which was to be followed for setting the paper is that the secrecy department of the University, sends a willingness form to person who is to be appointed as Examiner by the Board of Studies for his willingness to be appointed as Examiner.
When the willingness of the said examiner reaches the concerned branch, then the secrecy branch sends the said examiner the syllabus for setting the paper.
In the present case, Dr. Uppal who was appointed as examiner by the Board of Studies sent his unwillingness which was received by the secrecy department.
Respondent No. 3, the Chairman of the Department of Physical Education, who was also the Convenor of the Board of Studies was informed to recommend the substitute of Dr. Uppal and consequently name of Dr. Daljinder Singh Kahlon, Reader, Guru Nanak Dev University was recommended.
Dr. Kahlon was then informed who gave his willingness to be appointed as Examiner and accordingly he set the paper of theory.
He, however, did not report for conducting the practical examination which was to be held on 29th March, 1993.
He could not be present as he had met with a minor incident and was advised by the doctor to take five days rest.
When he did not turn up, the Convener of the Board of Studies requested Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh to act as Practical Examiner as Dr. Kahlon was not available on that date.
On the request of the Convenor of the Board of Studies, Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh agreed to Act as Practical Examiner and took the examination of MA Part I and II and BP Ed and it was in these emergent circumstances that Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh came to be appointed as External Examiner for the practicals.
The circumstances being compelling, it is pleaded, the Vice-Chancellor could not cancel the practical examination taken by Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh.
It is so pleaded and argued by Mr. P S Patwalia, appearing for the petitioners that the Vice-Chancellor has unilaterally and on his own cancelled the practical examination as well as theory examination taken by the petitioners.
He is vested with no powers whatsoever to cancel the papers.
The University Calendar does not give any such power to him contends the learned Counsel.
It is only the Board of Studies that is vested with such a power but the Vice-Chancellor without any authority has cancelled the same rendering his orders to be illegal which deserve to be set aside.
9.
The relief asked for by the petitioner has been seriously opposed in the written-statement filed by respondents 1 to 4.
It has been pleaded by way of Preliminary Objections that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of misjoinder of parties and causes of action.
Petitioners 10 to 30 have no concern with the examination which has, been cancelled i.e. of MA Part II only.
Joint writ petition, it is pleaded is not tenable.
On merits, it is the case of respondents, that respondents 5 to 7 had sent a complaint to the Dean of University Instruction alleging apprehension that Reet Mohinder Singh may not give the marks which they were entitled to for the reason that Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh has bias against them due to the incidents which took place during the Inter-College Relay Race competition.
The complaints were also received from the guardians of some of the students that the practicals held by Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh be held null and void.
The Board of Post Graduates Studies in Physical Education is nominated by the Syndicate by Regulation IV of Chapter II A(VI) of the Panjab University Calendar Volume 1, 1989.
The Board of Studies recommends the name of paper setter/examiner and the recommendations are placed before the Syndicate for approval.
A letter of refusal of Dr. A K Uppal was received in the secrecy branch showing his unwillingness to Act as External Examiner.
After receipt of the complaint from respondents 5 to 7, the University ordered a Preliminary Enquiry in which the Enquiry Officer had categorically stated that the purported letter of refusal by Dr. A K Uppal was forged one as per findings of Forensic Expert dated 26th of May, 1993.
A telephonic call was also made to Dr. Uppal on 18th May, 1993 to confirm as to whether he had sent the letter of refusal or not to which he replied vide letter dated 2051993 that he did not receive any appointment letter from the respondent-University appointing him as paper setter and, therefore, there was no question of sending refusal.
In view of the aforesaid report, the entire exercise appointing Dr. Daljinder Singh Kahlon as paper External Examiner who were not on the list of paper setters/examiners approved by the Board of Studies in emergent circumstances came under a shadow of doubt due to which the Vice-Chancellor in exercise of the power conferred on him under Regulation 14 of the Panjab University Calendar Volume I 1989, considered it fit to cancel practical examinations in lesson Athletics for BP Ed, MA Part I and MA Part II (Physical Education) to remove the shadow of doubt caused upon the fairness of conduct of examination and accordingly an order to this effect was passed.
Copy of the order has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
It is further pleaded that the decision taken by the Vice-Chancellor was placed before the Syndicate on 28th of August, 1993 and the Syndicate had fully approved the action of the Vice-Chancellor.
Para 14 of Chapter II(A)(ii) of Panjab University Calendar, Volume I, 1989 reads as under :-  "14.
Whenever there is an urgency, the Vice-Chancellor may take such action as he deems necessary and report the matter at the next meeting of the Syndicate for approval."
10.
Respondents 5 to 7 have filed a separate written statement opposing the cause of the petitioners.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, this Court is of the considered opinion that there is no merit in the contentions raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioners and, therefore, this petition must fail.
From the impressive array of facts as have been extracted above, it is crystal cleat that there were several complaints pointing towards the appointment of Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh as External Examiner for conducting the practicals.
The petitioners in Civil Writ Petition 4597 of 1993, their guardian or parents repeatedly brought this to the notice of the concerned authorities.
On 19th April, 1993 the matter appeared in The Tribune with the headlines, "Students Object to "External Examiner".
It is mentioned in the news item that the Panjab University had achieved the unique distinction of appointing a person from "within" the university as an external examiner for one of the practical examinations for the post-graduation in physical education, but the appointment of this external examiner from within the university for Athletics (Practical) of MA (Physical Education) has led to a continuing tussle between the students of the class and the department's head and certain other teachers.
According to sources, it is further mentioned in the news item that students who are nearing completion of their post-graduation in the subject, had even represented to the University's Vice-Chancellor and the Dean of University Instruction but failed to get any response.
In their representation, the students are said to have objected to the appointment of a Director of Sports of the University Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh as external examiner for the athletics practical held on March, 30.
While demanding a reexamination of the practical these students have alleged that the examiner, in connivance with certain teachers from the department would give a "biased evaluation" for the said examination to favour certain candidates.
It is further mentioned that according to sources the more concerning part of the representation was the alleged misbehaviour of some of the teachers with girl students.
It was also mentioned that at least eight of the 14 students in the final year class are girls.
The news item as a whole has been placed on records as Annexure P-4.
The information of the correspondent coming from the news item mentioned above is, of course, not a substantive evidence but things do not rest there.
In a confidential letter dated 20.4.1993 addressed to Shri T N Kapoor, Vice-Chancellor of the Panjab University, Professor, J Bhullar mentioned as follows :-  "The Board of Studies in Physical Education appointed by Dr. AK Uppal, Professor and Deputy Dean, Laxmi Bai National College of Physical Education, Gwalior, as an examiner of MA Part II, Paper V (Advance Coaching in Athletics) carrying 50 marks and Practical of Athletics carrying 100 marks.
Sh. A S Bhatti, Chairman of the Department of Physical Education, changed the examiner on his own for the reasons best known to him.
When this was brought to my notice, I phoned the Chairman asking him under what circumstances such a senior examiner was changed.
He told me that he has refused to Act as an examiner.
He sent another list of examiners certifying that this has the approval of the Board of Studies which is on record in the examination branch concerned.
This is a wrong statement which he has given.
He appointed Sh. Daljinder Singh as the examiner for theory and practicals of the above mentioned examination and changed him also and appointed Sh. Reet Mohinder Singh.
I was in Laxmi Bai College of Physical Education, Gwalior, from 15-17 April, 1993 in connection with some viva examination and there Prof. AK Uppal met me.
I did ask him why he never came for practicals as well as why he has not set theory paper.
He was surprised that no offer was sent to him for practical as well as theory and there was no question of refusal.
Sir, this a serious matter which has led to a lot problems in the department and also spoiled the reputation the department."
Shri KR Sharma, Lecturer, Department of Physical Education, Panjab University, Chandigarh, vide his letter dated 18th March, 1993 brought to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor, the following facts :-  "I wish to inform your goodself that I am internal examiner for practical in the subject Science of Coaching in games (Gymnastics) in MA II Physical Education.
The External Examiner Dr. B S Bhandari from Kurukshetra University has completed only one year.
It was to my great surprise when I received intimation from the Secrecy Branch of Panjab University that the Examiner has been replaced by Dr. Manjit Singh from LBCPE, Gwalior.
I have verified from the local members of Board of Studies and they have confirmed that in the meeting of the Board of Studies, they have not recommended any replacement except those who have completed their three years' term.
I request your goodself to intervene as some other Examiners as in the subject of Science of Coaching (Athletics) MAI., MA II, BPEd.
have been changed arbitrarily may be to help to some particular candidates.
This undesirable change will humper the professional career of some genuine students because recently the students of our department were agitated over some sports functions.
So, I humbly request your goodself to intervene and advise the Secrecy Branch to cancel the appointment of new Examiners appointed on the recommendation of the Chairperson and status quo may be granted.
The Examiners concerned may be intimated telegraphically at the earliest possible as annual practical ex-aminations are going to start with effect from 28.3.1993."
12.
There was sufficient material with the Vice-Chancellor, thus, to probe this matter.
This Court is rather of the view that in the circumstances that have been detailed above, it was the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to have enquired into the matter so that no injustice was done to anyone.
It was categorically so mentioned that the purported letter of Dr. Uppal was a forged one as per the findings of the Forensic Expert.
A telephonic talk made to Dr. Uppal confirmed that he had never refused to be the examiner.
In fact, he had not received any letter of the University appointing him paper setter/examiner.
Thus, there was no question of his sending refusal.
If only the said letter was a genuine one, then steps could be taken to appoint Dr. Daljinder Singh Kahlon as Paper Setter and subsequently Dr. Reet Mohinder Singh as External Examiner who were not on the list of paper setter/External Examiners approved by the Board of Studies.
There was, thus, definitely something cooking up some where that resulted in change of examiners at the last moment.
A clear doubt had, thus, creeped in which pointed towards conduct of the examination in an unfair manner.
A bias in examination in all fairness had to be removed and the University, thus, proceeded correctly is cancelling the papers which had an element of biased conduct.
13.
The only question that remains to be answered is as to whether the Vice-Chancellor had the power to cancel the examination.
The contention of Mt.
P S Patwalia is that under Chapter II-(A)(ii) the competent authority in all matters is the Syndicate.
Under Rule 11. of the Chapter aforesaid, the Syndicate consists of the Vice-Chancellor, ex-officio members and elected members.
Under Rule 8, it is Syndicate which is vested with the power as enumerated in sub-clause (a) to (e).
Sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 and clause (d) thereof reads as under :-  "8.
As provided in Section 20(1) of the Panjab University Act, the executive government of the University shall be vested in the Syndicate.
Without prejudice to the generality of its powers as the executive government of the University, the Syndicate shall, in particular, consider and make such recommendations to Senate as they deem fit in the following matters :-  (a) to (c) xx xx xx xx  (d) scales of fees for entrance into the University and continuance therein, for admission to the examinations of the University, for attendance at any lectures or classes in connection with the University, for the degrees to be conferred by the University and for such other matters as may be specified by the registration."
(a) xx xx xx xx  It is in view of clause (d) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 that it is argued that admission to the examinations of the University, would have in its sweep the conduct of examination and the power being exclusively with the Syndicate, the Vice-Chancellor had absolutely no jurisdiction in the matter and, thus, the orders passed by him cancelling the examinations was wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
This argument is devoid of merit.
Rule 14 clearly confers upon the Vice-Chancellor in emergent situation to take such action as he deems necessary and report the matter at the next meeting of the Syndicate for approval.
This rule has been reproduced above.
It is not disputed that the Vice-Chancellor had, in fact, taken the approval of cancelling the papers from the Syndicate.
Post facto approval in such a situation which was certainly an emergent one, cannot thus be faulted on any count.
The Vice-Chancellor had the power to pass the impugned orders cancelling the papers.
The situation was emergent and inasmuch as the approval of the Syndicate was given.
There is no merit in this petition as well and the same is, thus, dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs in both the petitions.
Petition dismissed.