GC Garg, J - Petitioners appeared in B.Sc.
III Year Examination conducted by Guru Nanak Dev University (for short `the University') held at SMDRS, College, Pathankot in April/May, 1991.
The University declared the result of the examinees but the result of the petitioners was shown as `RL' i.e.
Result Later.
On enquiry, the petitioners learned that there was a complaint against them that they had used unfair means during the course of examination.
The University having regard to the contents of the complaint got the answer books of all the 151 candidates appearing in the said centre, scrutinised by the subject-expert.
The subject-expert in his report found that eight candidates including the petitioners, were prima facie guilty of copying from the incriminating material alleged to have been circulated to the candidates during the course of examination.
The University having regard to the report submitted by the subject-expert, offered an opportunity to the petitioners to defend themselves before the Unfair Means Committee (For short `the Committee').
Report of the subject-expert in the subject of Mathematics Paper-I of Three-Year Degree Course, Part-III Examination was sent along with the notice requiring them to appear before the Committee.
The petitioners obviously pleaded not guilty to the charge levelled against them.
Their consistent stand was that they did not take any help from any material and the answers appearing in the answer sheets were their own attempt.
The Committee examined the answer sheets of the candidates as also the incriminating material and having regard to the demeanour of the candidates, appearing before them, disqualified them from appearing in any examination of the University for a period of two years under Ordinance 10(h)(j) read with Ordinances 11 and 13 of the Guru Nanak Dev University, Calendar Vol. II, 1991.
Hence, this writ petition seeking quashment of order of disqualification, Annexure P-2.
2.
As already noticed, the case of the petitioners is that they were not found copying by the supervisory staff during the course of examination and no incriminating material was recovered from their possession for which they could be held liable for disqualification.
The University took a view that the answer sheets of the examinees tallied with the incriminating material received with the complaint and also came to the conclusion that three candidates out of a total of 8 candidates, though there were 151 candidates appearing in that centre, had copied solution to Question No. III(b) from the incriminating material.
After affording an opportunity of being heard, the petitioners were disqualified under Ordinance 10(h)(j) read with Ordinances 11 and 13 of the Calendar (supra) from appearing in any examination of the University for a period of two years and in each count, the punishment was ordered to run concurrently.
3.
Ordinance 10(h)(j) of the aforesaid Calendar reads as under :  "Part-II Offences and Punishment"  10.
The use of unfair means in, or in relation to, the examination shall include the following acts or omissions on the part of the Candidate, viz :  XX, - XXX, - XX, -  (h))(i) copying or attempting to copy from the objectionable material found in his possession; or  (ii) Copying or attempting to copy from another candidate; or  (iii) assisting another candidate to copy from the objectionable material in his possession or from his answer-book;  (j) receiving help or attempting to receive help for answering the question paper from any source in any manner, inside or outside the examination hall."
Ordinance 11 only provides that a candidate who is found guilty of committing any one or more of the offences under Ordinance 10 (supra) shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the University for the period specified thereunder i.e. in Ordinance 11.
A reading of clause (h) of Ordinance 10 (supra) goes to show that it will apply to a candidate who had in his possession some objectionable material or he was found copying or attempting to copy from another candidate or assisting another candidate to copy from the objectionable material in his possession.
Admittedly, no material was found from the possession of the petitioners during the course of examination.
Thus, the petitioners could under no circumstances be disqualified under clause (h) of Ordinance 10 (supra).
Clause (j) of Ordinance 10 also goes to show that it will apply to a candidate who had received help or attempted to receive help for answering question paper from any source in any manner inside or outside the examination hall.
It is not the case of the University that some incriminating material was recovered from the possession of the petitioners during the course of examination, either by the supervisory staff or any other person.
4.
A Division Bench of this Court in a similar situation in Civil Writ Petition No 2450 of 1992 (Harjinder Singh and another v. Guru Nanak Dev University and another) decided on May 21, 1992, held that as for clause (j) of Ordinance 10 is concerned, there was no material before the Unfair Means Committee that the candidates received any help for answering the question from any source in any manner, inside or outside the examination hall.
It further concluded that merely because the answers to some questions in the answer sheets tallied with some material, may be from a book, paper or note, will not show that the candidates had received help from inside or outside the examination hall.
Under these circumstances it was held that clause (j) of Ordinance 10 (supra) was not attracted in such cases unless there was some material before the Unfair Means Committee to give a finding on the points covered by Ordinance 10(j) and it would be only thereafter that Ordinance 13 will come into play.
The situation in the present case is squarely covered by the aforesaid decision and thus, the petitioners could not be held guilty under Ordinance 10(j) (supra).
5.
Ordinance 13 of the University Calendar provides that if the answer book of a candidate shows or it is otherwise established, that he had received or attempted to receive help from any source and in any manner, or has given help or attempted to give help to another candidate in any manner, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination for a period of not less than two years.
The present is not a case where there may be allegations against the petitioners that they had given any help or attempted to give any help to any other candidate in any manner nor such a finding has been recorded by the Committee.
The question that now remains is, whether the answer books of the petitioners show or it is otherwise established that they had received or attempted to receive any help from any source in any manner.
It is again not a case of the University that it was otherwise established that the petitioners had received or attempted to receive any help from any source in any manner.
Thus the only conclusion from the impugned order that may possibly be drawn is that the Committee was satisfied that the answer books of the petitioners showed that they had received help while answering question No. III(b) from the incriminating material.
However, the Committee again did not record a categorical finding that the answer books of the petitioners showed that they had received help from any source, unless such a finding is categorically recorded, the petitioners could not be disqualified under Ordinance 13 (supra).
6.
The complaint in the present case was that there was a mass scale copying in the Examination Centre.
The subject-expert, however, on examining the answer books reported that eight candidates out of a total of 151 seem to have copied.
The Committee while considering the case of the eight candidates gave benefit of doubt to five of them and disqualified the petitioners and perhaps another candidate.
The only mistake noticed in the case of the petitioners is that they had written (n-1) instead of (m-1) in addition to the mistakes committed by other candidates who have since been exonerated of the charges.
This, in my view, is not enough from which it can be concluded that the petitioners did not resort to copying or their answer sheets established that they had received help.
It is on the face of it a case of no evidence.
The Committee again failed to take notice of the fact that the two petitioners had taken examination in different rooms.
On the basis of a single mistake, as noticed above, it could not be concluded that the answer books of the petitioners showed that they had received help from any source.
To me it looks that the dispute in the present case is squarely covered by the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Harjinder Singh's case (supra), which while sitting single is binding on me.
7.
Once it is concluded that it is a case of no evidence, the judgments relied upon by Mr. PS Patwalia, learned Counsel for the respondents that this Court in exercise of its power under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, cannot appraise evidence, have no application to the facts of the present case.
There is no manner of doubt that this Court cannot set aside an order of disqualification by re-appraising the evidence.
The jurisdiction of this Court is limited and it is only in cases where it comes to a conclusion that either the principles of natural justice have been violated or it is a case of no evidence, can interfere in such matters.
Again it is not a disputed proposition of law that the Courts are reluctant in interfering with the functioning of the Universities especially in such like matters.
But, as already noticed, the present case is a case of no evidence.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
Order Annexure P-2 of petitioners' disqualification is quashed.
The University is consequently directed to declare the result of the petitioners of B.Sc.
III Year Examination held in April/May, 1991, as expeditiously as possible.
No costs.
Petition allowed.