Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 5799, 5983, 5984, 5690, 6128, 6137, 6176, 6207, 6363, 6539 all pertaining to the year 1988 involving identical questions of law and facts.
For the purpose of order, the facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 5799 of 1988.
2.
The petitioners are practising Advocates.
They have filed joint petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to register documents duly presented by the petitioners and not to refuse registration as per the impugned instructions issued by the State of Punjab dated 2861988, Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
3.
The case of the petitioners is that under the Advocates Act, 1961, the Indian Registration Act, 1908 and Rules framed thereunder, there is no provision which debars an Advocate from scribing and presenting documents before the Registrar/Sub Registrar/Joint Sub-Registrar and as such the instructions issued by the Punjab Government on 2861988 directing them not to register any document scribed and presented by the Advocates, cannot debar the Advocates from scribing and presenting documents for registration.
4.
The main argument of the learned Counsel for the State is that the petitioners when practising as Advocates are not competent to scribe documents for the purpose of registration under the Registration Act, 1908.
It is argued that under the Punjab Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961, certain specific qualifications have been laid down for the grant of document writer license to a person.
According to these Rules the candidates have also to qualify special examination prescribed under these rules making them eligible for the grant of license as document writer and the licensed document writers are legally bound to function in a regulated manner in the terms as postulated by the aforesaid rules.
The Advocates having acquired better qualifications in their own field do not make them competent to practice as document writers.
The other star argument of the learned counsel is that earlier C.W.P.
No. 2894 of 1984 Bhupinder Singh Vijan v. Registrar was filed in this Court challenging the order of Registrar, Ludhiana passed under the Punjab Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961.
The said writ petition was dismissed in limine and the SLP against that order was also dismissed in the Supreme Court of India.
In view of the dismissal of the writ petition and the SLP, the counsel argued, this writ petition also deserves to be dismissed.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Under Section 3 of the Registration Act, 1908, the State Government has been given the power to appoint an officer to be the Inspector General of Registration for the territories subject to such Government.
Section 3 reads as follows :-  "3.
(1) The State Government shall appoint an officer to be the Inspector General of Registration for the territories subject to such Government: Provided that the State Government may, instead of making such appointment, direct that all or any of the powers and duties hereinafter conferred and imposed upon the Inspector General shall be exercised and performed by such officer or officers, and within such local limits as the State Government appoints in this behalf.
(2) Any Inspector General may hold simultaneously any other office under the Government.
6.
Under Section 69 of the Registration Act, powers have been given to Inspector General of Registration to make rules relating to deed writers.
Respondent No. 2 in exercise of its powers conferred under section 69-gg of the Act promulgated the rules known as Punjab Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961 which were published later in the Punjab Govt. Gazette dated 25.10.1962 as amended vide notification No. GSR 260/C.A.
16/8/S.69/62 with amendment upto 3181962.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 which is relevant, is reproduced below :-  1(2) Nothing in these rules shall apply to the Legal Practitioners.
These rules carve out another category of persons who can also scribe documents for the purpose of registration.
They are supplemented to the other category which had already been performing that very function.
A legal practioner has been defined under section 2(a)(i) of the Advocates Act, 1961 as under :-  2(1)(a)(i) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  "legal practitioner" means an Advocate of any High Court, a pleader, mukhtar or revenue agent."
7.
Under section 29 of the Advocates Act, Advocates have been termed as the only class recognized to practice law.
Under section 30 of the Act every Advocate whose name is entered in the State Roll shall be entitled to practise throughout the territories to which this Act extends,  (i) in all courts including the Supreme Court, (ii) before any tribunal or person legally authorised to take evidence, and (iii) before any other authority or person before whom such advocate is by or under the law for the time being in force entitled to practise."
8.
A perusal of rule 2 of the Punjab Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961, clearly indicates that nothing in these rules shall apply to the legal practitioners.
This term clearly envisages that legal practitioners are not required to obtain any license or to maintain register prescribed under the rules.
The Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961 are not applicable to the legal practitioners.
9.
In view of the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that it is only the Inspector General of Registration who has the power of superintendence over the Registrars, Sub Registrars and Joint Sub Registrars and has power to issue direction in the matter of registering documents and not any other authority and instructions issued by any authority other than the Inspector General of Registration shall be contrary to the rules.
The instructions cannot override the rules framed by respondent No. 1 Inspector General of Registration.
In case registration of certain document is refused then against that an appeal lies which can be argued only by the legal practitioners as defined under the Advocates Act.
It is admitted case of the respondents that the petitioners are legal practitioners and not practising document writers.
As such they have a right as legal practitioners to draft the pleadings or any other document as they possess knowledge by virtue of having passed paper of law of conveyance.
Even if any embargo/restriction is imposed on the legal practitioners debarring them from scribing documents that will be against Rule 2 of the Punjab Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961 and the Advocate Act, 1961.
10.
Even in the matter the Inspector General of Registration respondent No. 2 clarified in its order dated 26.8.1985 that the Document Writers Licensing Rules, 1961, are not applicable to the legal practitioners and as such they are competent to scribe any document and present it for registration.
11.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that an identical case filed earlier (C.W.P.
No. 2894-1984, Bhupinder Singh Vihan v. Registrar) was dismissed by this Court in limine and that SLP against that was also dismissed by the Supreme Court of India, therefore, these petitions also merit dismissal.
This is of no consequence, as in that case no speaking order, was passed and it was dismissed in limine.
It appears that certain provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961 and the Punjab Documents Writers Licensing Rules, 1961, were not placed before the Bench for consideration before the order of dismissal in that case was passed.
12.
For the reasons aforesaid, all these writ petitions are allowed and the impugned instructions dated 2861988 issued by the State of Punjab are quashed.
A direction is issued to the respondents not to refuse registration of documents scribed and presented by legal practitioners.
Petition allowed.