AL Bahri, J - By this judgment seven Regular Second Appeal Nos. 179, and 2161 to 2166 of 1989 are being disposed of as question involved in all these cases is one and the same.
The main judgment is prepared in R.S.A.
No. 179 of 1989 and facts are taken from this case.
2.
The question relates to fixation of seniority of Upper Division Clerks of Haryana State Electricity Board.
Initially the plaintiffs and others were employed as Lower Division Clerks.
Subsequently they were confirmed as such.
In relaxation of the rules relating to passing of departmental examination, the plaintiffs were promoted as Upper Division Clerks.
For years together they continued working as such.
In the meantime they passed departmental examination also.
Subsequently, some promotions were made to the Selection Grade.
Thee Board framed seniority of Upper Division Clerks initially in the year 1971 treating the date of passing of the departmental examination as the basis.
This seniority was successfully challenged in the Writ Petition No. 2420 of 1972 (Gobind Ram Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others), decided on August 30, 1983, by KS Tiwana, J In spite of the aforesaid decision the Board framed seniority in 1977 relating to the present plaintiffs treating the date of passing of the departmental examination as the basis and thereafter on that basis granted Selection Grade to other Upper Division Clerks who were impleaded as defendants.
The suits were decreed by the trial Court and appeals filed by the Board failed, hence the seven regular second appeals aforesaid.
3.
As many as ten issues were framed in the suit arising out of the pleadings of the parties.
It is not necessary to record the same as the only point argued in the appeals relates to the fixation of seniority of the Upper Division Clerks as to whether the same is in accordance with the rules governing the service.
4.
The Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) Provincial Service Class-III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952, govern the service of the plaintiffs.
These rules are still in force in Haryana.
There are two modes of recruitment to the service.
One is by direct recruitment and the other by promotion on the posts specified in Appendix 'A' attached to these Rules.
As per Rule 7(1) on direct appointment a person is to remain on probation for a period of two years and in the case of those recruited otherwise the period of probation is one year.
This period can be extended upto three years as provided under Rule 7(2).
During this period the recruits were required to pass the departmental Accounts Examination prescribed for Clerks.
Rule 7(3) provides that on completion of the period of probation the Appointing Authority may confirm such person in the post or if the work and conduct was not satisfactory or the person had failed to pass the departmental Accounts Examination, the Appointing Authority, before the expiry of the period of probation, may revert him to his substantive post if appointed by promotion or to dispense with his service if appointed direct.
The provision for holding examination exists in the rules for the departmental Accounts Examination of Ministerial Establishment of the Electricity Branch Rules.
Rule 13 of these Rules provides that the Junior Clerk shall not be appointed to a post carrying scale higher than that of a Junior Clerk until and unless he has passed the examination in papers I to IV.
The maximum number of chances allowed to take the examination in one service was fixed as five.
It was further clarified that those Junior Clerks who had passed such examination under the old Rules still had to pass examination in Paper I and II of the New Rules to qualify themselves for promotion to the grade of Senior Clerks.
A Senior Clerk, if appointed directly, was not to be appointed in a substantive capacity unless he had passed the examination in papers I to IV.
It was after he had passed the entire examination that he was to be entitled to the rate of pay which would have been admissible to him.
This was provided under Rule 13(ii) of these Rules.
Failure to pass the examination as provided under the Rules may involve loss of the appointment.
Rule 14 of these rules provided for exemption from passing of the examination under orders of the Chief Engineer.
The relevant Rule governing the fixation of seniority is Rule 9 of 1952 Rules, mentioned above, which is reproduced as under :-  "9.
The seniority of the members of the service for the time being serving in each class of appointment shown in Appendix 'A' shall be determined as followed :- i) Prior to confirmation (i.e. in the case of persons serving on probation or in an officiating capacity) in the order of the dates of their appointment or if such date be the same in respect of two or more persons, in the order of their ages, the older being placed above the younger.
ii) After confirmation, by their respective dates of confirmation, provided that where two or more members are confirmed w.e.f.
the same date they will retain the order to confirmation.
EXCEPTION : If a member of the service is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior, for reasons other than the inefficiency of the senior person they will take rank inter se according to their relative seniority in the class from which they were promoted and the junior person thus promoted shall not be confirmed from a date earlier than the date of confirmation of his senior except on the score of inefficiency of the latter :  Provided further that if a member is appointed to a higher class than a person "who was junior to him to the lower class for reasons which the appointing authority may certify in writing to be connected with the Public interest the person so appointed shall be given the same seniority in the higher class vis-a-vis such junior as he held in the lower class."
5.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid set of Rules Shri MS Jain, Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the Board, has argued that passing of departmental Accounts Examination was a necessary qualification for being appointed to the higher post on regular basis and the period of service prior to the passing of said examination was not to be considered in the matter of fixing seniority.
It was so stated in the appointment letters of the plaintiffs and others.
Thus according to the learned counsel it is the date of the passing of the departmental Accounts Examination that would govern the matter of the seniority of the Upper Division Clerks.
He has further argued that the interpretation put by KS Tiwana, J to the Rules aforesaid in CWP No. 2420 of 1972 is not correct and that decision needs re-consideration.
I have given due consideration to these arguments and I find no force therein.
6.
Rule 9(1) of the Rules of 1952 postulates framing of two seniority lists; one prior to confirmation and the other after confirmation.
With respect to framing of the seniority list prior to confirmation as provided under Rule 9(1) as reproduced above, it is the date of appointment which is to be basis for fixation of seniority, whereas under Rule 9(ii) ibid it is the date of confirmation which determines the seniority.
Confirmation has to be against a permanent post and it is to be made after the member of the service has passed the necessary departmental Accounts Examination as provided under the Rules mentioned above.
The contention of Shri MS Jain, Sr. Advocate, that passing of the departmental Accounts Examination is also one of the conditions making a person eligible for appointment in the service and hence should be the criteria for fixation of seniority under Rule 9(i) cannot be accepted as a person appointed directly or by promotion is to remain on probation for the periods mentioned in the Rules as stated above and it is during the said period of probation that members of the service should pass departmental Accounts Examination.
On their failure to do so they could either be removed from service in the case of direct appointment or reverted in the case of promotees.
The next contention of Shri Jain again cannot be accepted that though appointed as Upper Division Clerks, the plaintiffs were not being paid the scale of pay of Upper Division Clerks as they were promoted in their own pay scales as mentioned in the appointment letters.
At this stage a clear cut distinction is required to be made i.e. matter of appointment to the post of Upper Division Clerks and secondly allowing higher pay scale in the case of promotion as Upper Division Clerks.
It may be that on passing of the departmental Accounts Examination the appointees would get increments.
Till then they will continue getting their pay scale.
But that is far from saying that they were not appointed as Upper Division Clerks.
Rule 9(i) as reproduced above does not talk of payment of higher pay scale or increments.
Rule 9(i) relates to fixation of seniority prior to confirmation of Upper Division Clerks and what is to be taken into consideration is specifically mentioned therein i.e. in the case of person on probation or in any officiating capacity, the seniority will be in the order of the dates of appointment.
It further provides that if the date of appointment of some persons is the same, older in age will be the senior.
In C.W.P.
No. 2420 of 1972 (Gobind Ram Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others), KS Tiwanan, J ruled that Rule 9 ibid which governs the seniority of the members of the service did not provide any condition for passing the departmental Accounts Examination as a condition precedent for a person to qualify for the promotion to the next post.
If was further held that as per the Service Rules (mentioned above), confirmation is one thing and the promotion is another.
Rules regarding confirmation and promotion are not to be intermingled.
They have to be kept apart and have to be worked in different spheres of their application.
It was further held that language of Rule 9(i) showed the date of appointment to determine the date of seniority.
It was further held that language of Rule 9(i) showed the date of appointment to determine the date of seniority.
It was further held that Gobind Ram Sharma who was promoted to the next cadre by waiving the condition of passing of the departmental examination could not be subjected to again such a condition of passing of the said examination.
I fully agree with the observation and the interpretation put on the Rules aforesaid by KS Tiwana, J  7.
It has been argued by Mr. MS Jain relying upon the decision of the Delhi High Court in VP Babyloni v. Union of India and others, 1971(1) S.L.R.
421 that when promotion was made in an officiating capacity as a local arrangement, the aforesaid period was not to be counted towards seniority.
This contention cannot be accepted.
That was a case under Indian Railway Establishment Code.
It related to transfer from one cadre to another.
As provided in para 11 of Chapter 3 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code on request such transfers could also be made apart from promotion.
Reliance was placed on the condition of the appointment letter that temporary arrangement period was not to confer any right for further promotion.
Almost similar matter was under consideration of the Supreme Court in Narinder Chadha and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 638 : 1986(1) SLR 437 (SC), holding that persons were promoted to posts in violation of the Rules but they continued on such posts for more than 15 years.
It was held that entire period of officiation was to be counted towards seniority.
The dispute was relating to seniority inter se of the promotees and the direct recruits.
In the present case also, as already stated above, the plaintiffs continued working as Upper Division Clerks for years together.
Thus they cannot be denied the benefit of their service as Upper Division Clerks for the purpose of seniority.
8.
Shri MS Jain has further relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in DN Agarwal and another v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1311 : 1990(3) SLR 51 (SC).
That was a case where Deputy Engineers not having qualifying experience were promoted purely on ad hoc basis and their claim for counting of service between initial appointment and the regular appointment, it was held that the same was not to be considered for purposes of seniority.
The ratio of this decision cannot be applied to the case in hand.
As already stated above the appointees to the post of Upper Division Clerks were to remain on probation during the period of probation, they were supposed to pass the departmental Accounts Examination.
Otherwise passing of departmental Accounts Examination.
Otherwise passing of departmental Accounts Examination was not a qualification to be obtained by them before their appointment.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in the appeals, the same are dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.