Anil Kumar, J - The petitioner has impugned the order dated 4th April, 1997 passed by respondent No. 3 terminating the services of the petitioner under proviso to sub rule 1 of rule 5 of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rule, 1965 and holding that the petitioner shall be entitled to a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for the period of notice at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the termination of his services, or, as the case may be, for the period by which such notice falls short of one month.
2.
Brief facts to comprehend the controversies between the parties are that the petitioner had been appointed as Safaiwala since 1982 at Goa Sadan, New Delhi.
The petitioner contended that he is working since 1982 though he was issued an appointment letter only on 1st February, 1984 formally appointing him against the permanent post created by order dated 25th September, 1981.
3.
The petitioner asserted that on account of mis-management and carelessness of the concerned officials including respondent No. 3 at Goa Sadan, the services of the canteen had deteriorated substantially causing serious hardships to the petitioner and other employees entailing complaints being made by the petitioner and other employees against the mis-management.
In one of such complaints in which the petitioner was also a signatory, a request was made to respondent No. 2, Resident Commissioner, to handover the canteen to an appropriate person.
The grievance of the petitioner is that instead of taking corrective measures to improve the services in the canteen, the signatories of the letter dated 1st March, 1992 were threatened with dismissal.
The petitioner also pleaded that he was humiliated by one section of Goa Sadan official on one pretext or the other regularly.
According to the petitioner, the officials of the Goa Sadan were unhappy because of the outspoken nature of the petitioner and his courage to speak against the mis-management and mis- conduct of officials at Goa Sadan, New Delhi.
4.
In order to get rid of petitioner, an allegation of stealing precious articles from the office were made against him, however, the same could not be established as it was false to the knowledge of the conspiring officials.
The petitioner asserted that on account of petitioner raising voice against the irregularities and mis-management, the attitude of the officials at Goa Sadan was discriminatory against him and respondent No. 3, the Resident Commissioner, was trying to find excuses and occasion to throw him out.
The petitioner made a specific allegation against the respondent No. 3 that he has hatred towards persons belonging to lower caste and those who had been doing menial jobs.
The petitioner also alleged that the Respondent No. 3 was in the habit of abusing the petitioner.
The respondent No. 3 was also unhappy with the petitioner as he was not able to do menial jobs at the house of the respondent No. 3 though he was not liable to do the personal work of the respondent No. 3.
5.
According to the petitioner, in furtherance of the attempt of the respondents to throw out the petitioner, they cooked up false allegation against the petitioner that under the influence of liquor while on duty, he had mis-behaved with the staff.
He also contended that a fabricated report of inquiry was procured which was conducted without giving a due opportunity and against the principles of natural justice and by order dated 3rd January, 1996, the petitioner was dismissed from the services under Rule 15(4) of the CCS (CCA) Rules.
6.
An appeal was filed by the petitioner against the order of his dismissal dated 311996 pursuant to alleged fabricated inquiry.
His appeal was also much delayed and which was disposed of only pursuant to a writ petition being CWP No. 257 of 1997 filed by the petitioner in which by order dated 11th February, 1997, the respondent No. 1 was directed to dispose of the appeal of the petitioner within six weeks from the date of the order.
7.
Pursuant to the directions of this Court in CWP No. 257 of 1997 by order dated 11th February, 1997, the appellate authority decided the appeal of the petitioner by order dated 25th March, 1997 and set aside the decision of the disciplinary authority dismissing the petitioner on the ground of misbehaving with the staff of the office under the influence of liquor, on the ground that there had been gross violation of the principles of natural justice and fair play and consequently the penalty of dismissal of the petitioner was set aside and inquiry proceeding held against the petitioner was also held to be vitiated.
The respondents were, however, given liberty to conduct an inquiry de novo by following appropriate procedure and giving the petitioner reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
8.
After order dated 25th March, 1997 of the Appellate authority setting aside the inquiry proceeding and the order of dismissal of the disciplinary authority, the petitioner reported for duty on 1st April, 1997, however, he was taken on duty reluctantly.
The respondent No. 3 was alleged to be unhappy with the reinstatement of the petitioner and he had even told the petitioner as to how he could dare to allege mala fide against him in the appeal which was filed before the Appellate authority.
The petitioner, however, continued the work till 4th April, 1997 and after lunch, according to the petitioner, a Peon, Raghunath, came with the letter dated 4th April, 1997 terminating the services of the petitioner.
When petitioner tried to attend the duty on 5th April, 1997 he was not allowed to attend and according to him his attempt to meet the respondent No. 3 also failed.
9.
The petitioner contended that though the letter dated 4th April, 1997 stipulated about pay and allowance for the notice period, the petitioner was not paid any such amount at that time or till the filing of the writ petition.
10.
The petitioner stated that he submitted a representation dated 19th May, 1997 against the order of termination dated 4th April, 1997, however, no order had been passed on his representation.
According to the petitioner, the order of termination dated 4th April, 1997 is penal and founded on the allegation of misconduct and the petitioner could not be dismissed without an appropriate inquiry being conducted and the charges of mis-conduct being proved during such an inquiry.
The petitioner contended that it is apparent that he has been dismissed on account of alleged charges which were made against him, on the basis of which the disciplinary authority has dismissed him from his services, however, in appeal the order was set aside and the respondent No. 2 and 3 were directed to conduct de novo inquiry.
The petitioners plea is that the order of termination dated 4th April, 1997 is violative of the principles of natural justice as no inquiry was conducted nor any reasonable opportunity was afforded to the petitioner though the order is punitive in nature and founded on the allegation of mis-conduct.
The plea of the petitioner is that under Rule 15(4) of the CCS (CCA) rules, the respondent No. 3 has not been given the power or authority, to pass the order of dismissal without conducting the inquiry for the alleged misconduct.
Petitioner categorically contended that his dismissal is not termination simplicitor but is on account of misconduct alleged by the respondents against him.
11.
The writ petition is contested by respondents and the affidavit of Shri BB Saxena, Resident Commissioner, was filed refuting the allegations made by the petitioner.
It was asserted by the respondents that the petitioner was appointed in Goa Sadan at Delhi on daily wages in 1982 and later on he was appointed on ad-hoc basis as Safaiwala on 1st February, 1984 and he is continuing on ad-hoc basis.
It is contended that from the very beginning, since his appointment, his work and conduct was not satisfactory and several memos/warnings were issued to him about his mis-conduct.
It was asserted that memos/warnings were issued with a view to provide an opportunity to him to improve himself but despite several opportunities there has not been any improvement at all in his work and his conduct.
Respondents stated that on account of another incident of misconduct on 17th February, 1995, he was placed under suspension on 13th March, 1995, however, at that particular time his personal file was not traceable and, therefore, it was assumed that he was a regular employee and an inquiry was conducted under Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965.
During inquiry two of charges were allegedly admitted by the petitioner and therefore, his services were terminated on 3rd January, 1996.
12.
An appeal dated 22nd March, 1996 was filed by the petitioner against his termination order to the Secretary (General Administration), Government of Goa, Appellate Authority.
The respondents also admitted that a writ petition being CWP No. 257 of 1997 was filed by the petitioner as his appeal was not heard and disposed of.
It has been stated by the respondents that his writ petition was dismissed on 29th January, 1997 in default.
On an application being filed by the petitioner being CMP No. 1005 of 1997, the said application was allowed and the writ petition was restored and disposed of with a direction to the Appellate Authority to dispose of the appeal of the petitioner within six weeks from the date of the receipt of the order.
13.
The respondents also admitted that the appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of dismissal dated 3rd January, 1996 was allowed and the petitioner was permitted to rejoin his duties in Goa Sadan with effect from 1st April, 1997.
However, the respondents were given option to initiate disciplinary proceedings de novo against him.
14.
The respondents' contention is that after his reinstatement on 1st April, 1997, the file of the petitioner, Shri Suresh Kumar, petitioner, was found and it transpired that he was not a regular employee and, therefore, his services were terminated by the Competent Authority under sub Rule 1 of Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965.
The rule relied on and quoted in the counter affidavit by the respondents is as under :  "(5) Non-applicability of Rule 5 of termination of service in the case of probationers/persons on probation :- A question has arisen whether this rule should be invoked also in the case of persons appointed on probation, where in the appointment letter a specific condition regarding termination of service without any notice during or at the end of the period of probation (including extended period, if any), has been provided.
The position is that CCS (TS) Rules do not specifically exclude probationers or persons on probation as such.
However, in view of the specific condition regarding termination of service without any notice during or at the end of the period of probation (including extended period, if any) it has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of Law that in cases where such a provision has been specifically made in the letter of appointment, it would be desirable to terminate services of the probationer/person on probation in terms of the letter of appointment and not under rule 5(1) of the CCS(TS) Rules, 1965."
According to the respondents, since the appointment of the petitioner was ad- hoc and he was not regularized and as his appointment letter stipulated that his services could be terminated at any time without any notice, therefore, his services have been terminated by order dated 4th April, 1997.
The order of termination communicated to the petitioner is as under :  "In pursuance of the Proviso to sub-rule (1) of Rules 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965, I, BB Saxena hereby terminate forthwith the services of Shri Suresh Kumar, Safaiwala at Goa Sadan and direct that he shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for the period of notice at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the termination of his service, or, as the case may be, for the period by which such notice falls short of one month."
15.
The respondents in counter affidavit filed on their behalf categorically admitted that the termination of service of the petitioner has been taken by respondent No. 3 purely with an avowed intention of taking disciplinary action following statutory rules relating to CCS (Temporary Services) Rules since the petitioner is a temporary employee purely on ad-hoc basis.
In para 14 (iv) of the counter affidavit, the respondent contended as under :-  "(iv) With reference to the contents of ground (iv), I deny emphatically the allegations made by the writ petitioner.
Whatever action has been taken by the respondent No. 3, has been taken purely with an intention that an avowed object of taking disciplinary action following statutory rules relating to CCS Temporary Service Rules since the writ petitioner is a temporary employee purely on ad hoc basis.
In this context I crave leave of this Hon'ble Court to refer to the contents of the letter of appointment annexed hereto as Annexure R-2.
I state that the respondent No. 3 has proceeded in this case only after adhering to what has been laid down in Rule 5 of the CCS Temporary Service Rules.
The residual part of the said ground is totally based on conjectures and imagination of the writ petitioner what has absolutely no basis.
In the circumstances mentioned herein above, I crave leave of this Hon'ble Court to make my further submissions in this regard, if any, at the hearing of the present writ petition."
16.
The respondents also pleaded that the petitioner has been dismissed by order dated 27th February, 1998 passed by the Government under the CCS (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, however, no copy of the said order dated 27th February, 1998 has been produced either by the respondents or by the petitioner nor the petitioner has sought quashing of alleged order dated 27th February, 1998.
The petitioner has challenged the order dated 4th April, 1997 passed under sub Rule 1 of Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965.
17.
The petitioner refuted the averments made by the respondents in his rejoinder and contended that he was on a substantive and permanent post which was created by order dated 25th September, 1981 and though the petitioner has referred to the said order in its writ petition, however, the respondents have not produced the order No. 187/1/80/CE-PWD-ADM (II) dated 25th September, 1981 by which the post was created on which the petitioner was appointed and, therefore, the petitioner is deemed to be regular employee with the respondents on the said post and in the circumstances the respondents are estopped from contending that the petitioner is not a regular and permanent employee.
It was also contended that the said Rule 5 (1) of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 is also not applicable as it pertains to probationer and the said rule shall not be applicable to the petitioner as he is not a probationer.
It was rather contended that taking recourse to Rule 5(1) of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 to punish the employee, even if he is on ad hoc or temporary basis, is beyond the purview of the jurisdiction of the said rule to punish for alleged misconduct.
The termination of the petitioner has also been challenged on the ground of non-payment of the amounts indicated in the notice as his services were allegedly terminated with the stipulation that the petitioner shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for the period of notice at the same rate as he was drawing immediately before the termination of his services or as the case may be for the period by which such notice fell short of one month and because no amount was tendered to the petitioner nor has been paid.
The petitioner also contended that the order of termination has been passed on the foundation of allegation of misconduct and therefore this is not a termination simplicitor but it is punitive in nature and could not be resorted to by the respondents without a proper inquiry.
18.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail and have perused the petition, counter affidavit and rejoinder and documents filed by them.
The petitioner has relied on 1999(1) SCT 366 : (1999)2 SCC 21, Radhey Shyam Gupta v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd and Another; 1999(1) SCT 861 : (1993)3 SCC 60, Dipti Prakash Banerjee v. Satvendra Nath Bose, National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and Others and 1994 Supp (3) Supreme Court Cases 671, Manorma Verma (Smt) v. State of Bihar and others to contend that the termination of the petitioner is punitive and is not termination simplicitor and cause of termination is the allegations made against him that he had not been functioning properly since the inception of his appointment and he did not improve himself despite several opportunities given to him and as a consequence of the incidence of misconduct which took place on 17th February, 1995.
19.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that it cannot be disputed that the petitioner is not on probation.
The petitioner was appointed on daily wages in 1982 and he was appointed on ad hoc basis in the pay scale against the post created by the order dated 25th February, 1981 with effect from 1st February, 1984.
The learned counsel for the petitioner asserted that even in case of a probationer, if the order of termination is punitive and depends on the allegations which are not the motive but the foundation of termination, the same shall be bad as it will not a discharge simplicitor.
Though the order dated 4th April, 1997 does not stipulate any reason for termination of the petitioner's services and the recourse has been taken to sub Rule 1 of Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, however, from all the documents produced by the parties and their pleadings it is apparent that the order is punitive and has been passed on account of alleged misconduct which allegedly was committed by the petitioner on 17th February, 1995 and as his work was not satisfactory since the inception of his appointment and the petitioner had not improved himself despite various opportunities given to him.
20.
It is no more res integra that stigmatic words or the basis of the punitive order need not be contained in an order of termination itself and the basis may be available in the documents or the material referred to in the order.
In the case of petitioner, the respondents in the counter affidavit filed in the present writ petition have specifically admitted that the basis of termination is founded on his misconduct committed on 17th February, 1995 and because of which he was also placed under suspension on 13th March, 1995 and for various other misconducts for which various memos and warnings were issued to him and as petitioner had failed to improve himself despite opportunities given to him.
21.
This is admitted that a regular inquiry was conducted against the petitioner which was not dropped at any stage earlier, and an order of dismissal dated 3rd January, 1996 was passed under Rule 15(4) of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965.
The petitioner had contended that he was not given any reasonable opportunity and even before the statements of respondents and their witnesses were recorded before the inquiry officer, the statement of the petitioner was recorded and he was also not given reasonable opportunity to cross examine the witnesses of the respondents.
Aggrieved by the order of dismissal the petitioner had filed a statutory appeal.
The statutory appeal filed against the order of dismissal dated 3rd January, 1996 was allowed by the order dated 25th March, 1997.
While allowing the appeal the Appellate Authority, Special Secretary (GA/VIG) had held that the laid down procedure had not been followed while conducting the proceedings as even the statement of the petitioner was not recorded admitting or denying charges framed against him.
The inquiry report indicated that the inquiry was held on 7th January, 1995 and 11th July, 1995 but in another report dated 20th July, 1995, the statements of three witnesses were allegedly recorded by the Resident Commissioner on 20th July, 1995.
There was no cross-examination of the witnesses by the charged official, petitioner.
The documents listed were not supplied to the petitioner.
For all these reasons recorded by the Appellate Authority, the earlier order of dismissal dated 3rd January, 1996 under Rule 15(4) of Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 was set aside and petitioner was reinstated.
Pursuant to setting aside of order of dismissal and reinstatement of the petitioner, he worked from 1st April, 1997 and he was again dismissed by the impugned order dated 4th April, 1997, after four days.
22.
A departmental inquiry can be dropped at any stage before recording of evidence and if an order of termination simplicitor is passed without any scheme being attached thereto, it will be a discharge simplicitor.
An order of termination will be termination simplicitor also if the purpose of inquiry is not to find out the truth of the allegations of misconduct but to decide whether to retain the employee against whom a cloud is raised on his conduct which inquiry only serves as the motive for termination.
But where an inquiry is held and on the basis of evidence, a finding is reached about the misconduct and such findings form the basis or foundation of the order of termination, such order would be punitive and it cannot be termed discharge simplicitor.
In Radhey Shyam Gupta (supra), the Apex Court had considered the yardstick to assess whether the termination of services of a temporary/probationer is termination simplicitor or punitive.
It was held that if the motive behind the inquiry was not to determine the misconduct but merely to decide the question of retention in service, such a termination shall not be punitive and shall be termination simplicitor.
However, where the inquiry is held and on the basis of the evidence, a definite finding is reached about the misconduct and where such findings form basis or foundation of the order of termination, such order would be punitive and will not be sustainable.
In case of petitioner, the charges were framed against the petitioner and a regular inquiry was conducted.
Pursuant to the regular inquiry conducted against the petitioner, it was held that some of the charges against him were admitted by him and proved and he was dismissed from service.
However, the order of termination dated 3rd January, 1996 was set aside in appeal by order dated 25th March, 1997 and the petitioner was reinstated and the respondents were given opportunity to conduct an inquiry de novo.
Instead of de novo inquiry after giving reasonable opportunities to the petitioner, the respondents have invoked sub Rule 1 of Rule 5 Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 and are contending that since the petitioner was on ad hoc basis since 1984, therefore, there was no requirement to conduct an inquiry.
From the counter affidavit filed on behalf of respondents, it is apparent as detailed hereinabove that the foundation of the termination of the petitioner is his misconduct regarding his performance since the inception of his work from 1982 and because of the alleged misconduct committed by him on 19th February, 1995.
Considering the counter affidavit of Shri BB Saxena, Resident Commissioner, stipulating that the action of termination has been taken purely with an avowed object of taking disciplinary action following statutory rules following Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, there is no iota of doubt that the termination of the petitioner is not termination simplicitor and is founded on the alleged misconduct.
23.
The petitioner had filed a representation against the order dated 4th April, 1997.
However, it was disposed of with an advice to the petitioner to seek his remedy in the appropriate forum, as against the order of termination under the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, there was no provision for appeal or revision.
Consequently the petitioner has been dismissed on account of his alleged misconduct without any enquiry and it is alleged that termination is justifiable without any enquiry under Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965.
24.
In Dipti Prakash Banerjee (supra), the Apex Court had held that if the order of termination is founded on the allegations of misconduct, the same shall be bad and a punitive order and the stigmatic words need not be contained in order of termination itself but can also be inferred from the documents referred to in the order or other related material.
The Apex Court had highlighted circumstances where an order of termination of a probationer can be said to be punitive.
The relevant paragraphs 20 to 21 on pages 987 are as under :-  "20.
This Court in that connection referred to the principles laid down by Krishna Iyer, J in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha.
As to "foundation", it was said by Krishna Iyer, J as follows : (SCC p. 617, para 53)  "[A] termination effected because the master is satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, is a dismissal, even if he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order under the standing order or otherwise.
Whether, in such a case, the grounds are recorded in different proceedings from the formal order, does not detract from its nature.
Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate.
Given an alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the termination of service, the conclusion is dismissal, even if full benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-injurious terminology is used."
(emphasis supplied) and as to motive : (SCC pp. 617-18, para 54)  "54.
On the contrary, even if there is suspicion of misconduct, the master may say that he does not wish to bother about it and may not go into his guilt but may feel like not keeping a man he is not happy with.
He may not like to investigate nor take the risk of continuing a dubious servant.
Then it is not dismissal but termination simplicitor, if no injurious record of reasons or punitive cut-back on his full terminal benefits is found.
For, in fact, misconduct is not then the moving factor in the discharge."
(emphasis supplied)  As to motive, one other example is the case of State of Punjab v. Sukh Raj Bahadur where a charge-memo for a regular enquiry was served, reply given and at that stage itself, the proceedings were dropped and a simple termination order was issued.
It was held, the order of simple termination was not founded on any findings as to misconduct.
In that case, this Court referred to AG Benjamin v. Union of India, where a charge-memo was issued, explanation was received, an enquiry officer was also appointed but before the enquiry could be completed, the proceedings were dropped and a simple order of termination was passed.
The reason for dropping the proceedings was that "departmental proceedings will take a much longer time and we are not sure whether after going through all the foundation, we will be able to deal with the accused in the way he deserves".
The termination was upheld.
21.
If findings were arrived at in an enquiry as to misconduct, behind the back of the officer or without a regular departmental enquiry, the simple order of termination is to be treated as "founded" on the allegations and will be bad.
But if the enquiry was not held, no findings were arrived at and the employer was not inclined to conduct an enquiry but, at the same time, he did not want to continue with the employee against whom there were complaints, it would only be a case of motive and the order would not be bad.
Similar is the position if the employer did not want to enquire into the truth of the allegations because of delay in regular departmental proceedings or he was doubtful about securing adequate evidence.
In such a circumstance, the allegations would be a motive and not the foundation and the simple order of termination would be valid.
25.
In the facts and circumstances, there is no doubt that the order of termination of the petitioner is not termination simplicitor and is punitive in nature and is founded on the allegation of misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
Such termination which is founded on the alleged misconduct without conducting an enquiry, therefore, cannot be sustained and the petitioner dismissal cannot be upheld.
Therefore, the order dated 4th April, 1997 cannot be upheld and it is set aside.
On setting aside the order of dismissal the petitioner shall be entitled for reinstatement and therefore, the petitioner is reinstated.
26.
On reinstatement, whether the petitioner will be entitled to back wages and if so how much ?
The petitioner has relied on Manorma Verma (Smt) v. State of Bihar (supra) to contend that the petitioner is entitled for full back wages.
It is also contended that the petitioner has not been employed since his illegal and unlawful termination on 4th April, 1997.
Since the order of termination of the petitioner is set aside, ordinarily the petitioner is entitled for the consequential order of grant of back wages which must follow.
27.
In the present facts and circumstances and considering the various aspects, however, it will be just and appropriate to award 50% of the back wages to the petitioner.
28.
Therefore for the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The order of termination dated 4th April, 1997 is set aside and the petitioner is reinstated with continuity of service and benefits.
The petitioner, however, is awarded 50% of the back wages from the date of his termination.
The petitioner is also awarded a cost of Rs. 10,000/- against the respondents in the facts and circumstances.
Petition allowed.