MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4549-CAT of 2005, 19096-CAT of 2004, 20081-CAT of 2004 and 16258-CAT of 2004 as common question of facts and law have been raised.
All these petitions are directed against order dated 2482004 (P-9), passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench Chandigarh (for brevity, 'the Tribunal').
The petitioners had earlier filed Original Applications before the Tribunal challenging termination of their services on various grounds.
They have been working on the posts of Salesman, Store Keeper or Summary/Ledger Clerk.
Some of them are ex-servicemen as would be clear from the following table, which includes the details of OA No., date of appointment and date of their termination :  Case No. OA No/Name of Applicant Date of appointment Date of termination of service.
CWP No. 16258-CAT of 2004 180/PB/2002 HS Grewal Summary/Ledger Clerk.
Ex- Serviceman 1.4.1988 1462000 CWP No. 19096 of 2004 198/PB/2002 Piara Singh Salesman 7.8.1990 1462000 CWP No. 20081 CAT of 2004 235/PB/2002 KC Yadav Counter Attendant/Store Keeper 1.11.1977 1462000 CWP No. 4549 of 2005 197/PB/2002 Gurbachan Singh Salesman May, 1986 1462000 2.
They were engaged in Golden Arrow Unit Canteen, Ferozepur, in their different capacities such as Salesman etc. as indicated in the above table.
They had filed OAs, which were allowed on 2082002, 11102002, 2082002 and 3092002 respectively.
It is appropriate to mention that the OAs have been filed after the dismissal of civil suits on account of the fact that in the case of Union of India v. Mohd.
Aslam, (2001)1 SCC 720, it was held that the duties of Salesman or other employees in such retail outlets of unit run canteens must be held to be duties rendered by the employees under the Government.
As a consequence of the decision in the case of Mohd.
Aslam (supra), the civil suits were dismissed and thereafter they had filed OAs before the Tribunal.
3.
The principal ground put forward before the Tribunal was that as per the terms and conditions of appointment, they were required to be given notice before termination of their services.
OA No. 198/PB/2002 filed by one Piara Singh (petitioner in CWP No. 19096 of 2004) was allowed on 2082002, holding that the matter was covered by an earlier judgment of the Tribunal in the case of Mohinder Singh v. Union of India (OA No. 914/HR/1997, decided on 16.5.2001).
Accordingly, the termination order dated 1462000, terminating the services of two of the petitioners were quashed and respondents were directed to reinstate them in service with all consequential benefits.
Likewise the other three OAs were also allowed vide order dated 3092002.
4.
However, one Shri Kartar Singh filed OA No. 241/PB/2002 before the Tribunal by setting up the same ground of failure to issue notice or pay in lieu of the notice period.
The respondents took the stand that Kartar Singh had, in fact, been paid in lieu of the notice period and thereafter he withdrew the OA on 552003.
During the course of afore mentioned proceedings, the respondents appears to have discovered that pay in lieu of the notice period was also given to the petitioners.
Accordingly they filed Review Application in the case of HS Grewal (OA No. 180/PB/2002) along with others.
The Review Applications were allowed by a common order dated 2292003 and the earlier order dated 2082002 was recalled.
By a separate similar order other Review Applications were also allowed on 932004 and direction was issued for disposal of OAs afresh.
The Tribunal recorded the finding that each one of the petitioners was paid one/three months (3 months' salary in case an employee has rendered five years' or more than five years service) salary at the time of termination of their services.
The Tribunal has noticed the details in the form of a table which reads thus :-  OA No/Name of Appp.
Amount Rs. Mode of payment cheque No. dt.
Remarks 1.
180 Pb 02 (HS Grewal Summary/Ledger Clerk Rs. 10890/- QNF 181487/1662000 17th June to 16th Sept 2.
197 PB 02 (Gurbachan Singh) Salesman Rs. 9630/- 151493 dt. 1662000 -do- 3.
198 PB 02 (Piara Singh) Salesman 10710/- QNF 151490 dt. 16.6.2000 -do- 4.
235 PB 02 (KC Yadav) Counter Attnd/Store keeper Rs. 9720/- QNF 151492 dt. 16.6.2000 -do- 5.
The argument of the petitioners that they had received the amount of three months as bonus has been rejected by the Tribunal by stating that they were not illiterate and were discharging the duties of the Salesman/Store Keeper and knew fully well the nature of payment made.
The observations of the Tribunal reads thus :  "..... From 14th June, 2000 onwards they are not in service and they expect this court to believe that at the time of termination of their services, they were being paid bonus.
The seeming intention of the applicants is redolent of doubt and suspicion.
Except for the applicants whose services were terminated, no other employee was paid any amount as bonus.
If the amount was intended, infact, to be bonus or otherwise, such payment should have been made to all other employees working in the canteen but it was not done.
The payment was restricted only to those applicants whose services were terminated.
Therefore, to assert, at this belated stage, that applicants did not receive the amount of three months salary in lieu of notice, is nothing but subterfuge.
We have come to an inescapable conclusion that the services of the applicants were terminated after making payment of three months salary in lieu of the notice.
Even if it may be assumed that the applicants were the regular/permanent employees of the Unit Run Canteens, in that event also, their services could be terminated by giving three months notice or pay in lieu thereof."
6.
The other argument based on the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Narsingh Pal v Union of India, 2000(2) SCT 523 : (2000)3 SCC 588, was also rejected which lays down the proposition that mere acceptance of retrenchment compensation does not result into application of doctrine of estoppel so as to create bar to impugn the order of removal on any other sustainable ground because an employee cannot be considered to have surrendered his fundamental right.
Further principle laid down in the said judgment is that if termination of service proceeds from a punitive order then the principles of natural justice require fulfillment of issuing show cause notice and opportunity of hearing.
The afore mentioned judgment was held to be not applicable because there were no such facts before the Tribunal.
7.
Mr. Dheeraj Chawla, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner cannot be considered as a contract employee or ad hoc after having rendered long service, which in some cases varied from 23 to 12 years.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioners must be held to be regular employee by granting them protection of Article 311 of the Constitution.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Mohd.
Aslam (supra) and argued that employees of the unit run canteen for all intents and purposes are government employees.
Therefore, it has been asserted that the provisions of Article 311 would apply and the services of such an employee cannot be terminated by giving notice or salary in lieu of notice period.
According to the learned counsel once the relationship of master and servant between the government and its employee is established and they were permitted to file OA then there is no escape from the conclusion that Article 311 of the Constitution incorporating principles of natural justice would be applicable.
Another argument advanced by the learned counsel is based on para 13 of the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Kumari Shreilekha Vidharthi v. State of UP, 1991(1) SCT 575 : (1991)1 SCC 212.
It has been submitted that termination without disclosing any reasons has to be regarded as arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Mr. Chawla has also placed reliance on another judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of DTC v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, (1991) Suppl 1 SCC 600, which has reiterated the view taken by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corp v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, AIR 1986 SC 1571.
The question considered in both the above mentioned judgments was regarding the constitutional validity of the right of the employer to terminate the services of permanent employee without holding any enquiry by giving notice or pay in lieu of notice.
According to the learned counsel despite the fact that notice was given in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case (supra), their Lordships of Hon'ble the Supreme Court have held that the services of the permanent employee could only be terminated by holding a regular department enquiry.
He has also placed reliance on another judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Dharma Nand v. Union of India, 2005(3) SCT 807 : (2004)10 SCC 609, to substantiate his submission that employees of the canteen working in Defence Ministry are government servants and rules were not applicable.
Learned counsel has maintained that they are governed by Mohd.
Aslam's case (supra).
8.
Mr. Rajiv Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that by no stretch of imagination the petitioners could be regarded as regular employees of the respondents because they have been appointed purely on contract basis.
According to the learned counsel even if they are presumed to be government servant, yet, they would not acquire any right to hold the post irrespective of the service rendered by them in terms of the period.
Learned counsel has maintained that no show cause notice was required to be served on them because in accordance with the terms of their employment their services could be terminated by paying them salary or service a notice.
He has emphasised that the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case (supra) has laid down that service of a regular permanent employee cannot be terminated without holding a regular department enquiry proving the misconduct of such an employee.
No other argument has been raised.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and have perused the paper book with their able assistance.
It is well settled that in the absence of any order of regular appointment an employee cannot be considered to hold the post substantively.
It is evident that the petitioners have rendered 12 years, 10 years, 23 years and 4 years service respectively in their capacity as Summary/Ledger Clerk/Salesman/Counter Attendant and Store Keeper before their services were terminated.
It has also been undisputed that their service conditions were governed by the terms and conditions of their letter of appointment.
Their appointment is of temporary employee of the canteen although renewable from year to year.
According to the conditions of service, the services of the petitioners could be dispensed with by giving three months notice or one month notice or pay in lieu of notice period.
The terms and conditions of employees figure in clause 17 which reads thus :  "17.
Terms and conditions of employment will be as follows : (a) The tenure of employment will be for two years including the probation period of three months.
Thereafter, it will be subject to yearly extension based on performance of the individual and approval by the Chairman.
(b) The employee will be paid pay and allowances as laid down at Appendix B (c) No other allowance like house rent, DA, medical reimbursement etc. will be admissible to the employee.
(d) No residential accommodation will be provided to any employee.
(e) Every employee will be entitled for earned leave and holidays as per policy laid down at Appendix B (f) The services of the Canteen employees with more than 5 years of service can be terminated by either side giving three months notice and one month notice in respect of those with service less than 5 years.
(g) In case of an employee being involved in fraud, indiscipline, gross negligence or inefficiency, the services will be terminated without any notice under the orders of the Chairman.
(h) Employees will serve till the age of 58 years or years of service, whichever is earlier.
(j) No employee will be entitled to any gratuity, provident fund, pension etc. on completion of his employment with the canteen.
(k) A refundable security deposit as per scales given below will be deposited by all employees in two monthly instalments at the time of employment - (i) Accountant, Cashier, Bulk Store Keeper- One month's pay.
(ii) Other staff.
(iii) Safaiwalas.
(l) The above amount will be put in fixed deposit and principal amount will be paid to the individual on completion of his service.
The interest, thereof, will be paid to the individuals on yearly basis.
(m) The service of the employee can be terminated at any time by the management without assigning any reasons.
(n) In case of any grievance/ dispute, decision of the Chairman shall be final.
(o) All employees will be conversant with this SOP and render an yearly certificate to this effect to the Canteen."
10.
A perusal of the afore-mentioned clause would show that the petitioners are not entitled to any gratuity, leave encashment, provident fund or pension.
They were initially engaged for a period of two years which has been extendable from time to time depending on their performance.
All these conditions are known to the petitioners and they could have walked out of the contract of employment as and when they desired.
In clause 17(f) there is an element of mutuality envisaging that employee with more than five years service could leave the employment and the same way the employer could terminate his services by giving three months notice or salary in lieu thereof.
This condition is applicable to both.
Likewise, an employee who has rendered less than five years service could leave the job by giving one month salary or notice in lieu of the salary.
The question of ad hoc/temporary employee has been considered by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka v. Uma Devi, 2006(2) SCT 462 : (2006)4 SCC 1.
The Constitution Bench has held that all decisions of the Supreme Court running contrary to the principles laid down in that judgment would be denuded of their status as precedents.
The basic reason underlying the view expressed in Uma Devi's case (supra) is that a temporary or ad hoc employee could acquire the right of regularization on a post if his appointment has been made after following due procedure of recruitment even though directory procedure of making appointment has not been followed.
In other words, strict adherence to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is imperative.
In order to fill up regular posts the procedure which could fulfill the minimum requirements of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is that the post should be advertised, applications invited, then right of all eligible persons available at the relevant time are required to be considered and then appointments are made.
It is after following the afore-mentioned steps that the person working on temporary posts for a sufficiently long time could be considered for regularisation.
The afore mentioned view is evident from the perusal of para 43 of the judgment which reads thus :  "43.
Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule of equality in public employment is a basic feature of our Constitution and since the rule of law is the core of our Constitution, a Court would certainly be disabled from passing an order upholding a violation of Article 14 or in ordering the overlooking of the need to comply with the requirements of Article 14 read with Article 16 of the Constitution Therefore, consistent with the scheme for public employment, this Court while laying down the law, has necessarily to hold that unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant rules and after a proper competition among qualified persons, the same would not confer any right on the appointee.......".
In respect of contractual employment, the Constitution Bench went on to observe further as follows :  "43........If it is a contractual appointment, the appointment comes to an end at the end of the contract, if it were an engagement or appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the same would come to an end when it is discontinued.
Similarly, a temporary employee could not claim to be made permanent on the expiry of his term of appointment.
It has also to be clarified that merely because a temporary employee or a casual wage worker is continued for a time beyond the term of his appointment, he would not be entitled to be absorbed in regular service or made permanent, merely on the strength of such continuance, if the original appointment was not made by following a due process of selection as envisaged by the relevant rules.
It is not open to the court to prevent regular recruitment at the instance of temporary employees whose period of employment has come to an end or of ad hoc employees who by the very nature of their appointment, do not acquire any right."
In para 47 the Supreme Court further explained this aspect, which reads thus :  "47.
When a person enters a temporary employment or gets engagement as a contractual or casual worker and the engagement is not based on a proper selection as recognized by the relevant rules or procedure, he is aware of the consequences of the appointment being temporary, casual or contractual in nature.
Such a person cannot invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for being confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post could be made only by following a proper procedure for selection and in concerned cases, in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
Therefore, the theory of legitimate expectation cannot be successfully advanced by temporary, contractual or casual employees.
It cannot also be held that the State has held out any promise while engaging these persons either to continue them where they are or to make them permanent.
The State cannot constitutionally make such a promise.
It is also obvious that the theory cannot be invoked to seek a positive relief of being made permanent in the post."
11.
It is not the case of the petitioners that they had applied for a post and after consideration of competing claim they were appointed.
In any case their appointment is contractual and they would not acquire any substantive right to hold the post.
12.
We are further of the view that the limited benefit envisaged by the judgment in Uma Devi's case (supra) for consideration of the petitioners who have completed more than 10 years of service can also not be granted because such a benefit could be granted to irregularly appointed employees who have worked for 10 years or more on duly sanctioned post.
Those employees who have been appointed in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, cannot get these benefits.
Their cases could not be considered for regular appointment.
In the present case, the afore-mentioned view is reflected in para 53, which reads thus :  "53.
One aspect needs to be clarified.
There may be cases where irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as explained in SV Narayanappa (supra) [State of Mysore v. SV Narayanappa, AIR 1967 SC 1071], RN Nanjundappa (supra) [RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmiah, (1972)1 SCC 409], and B N Nagarajan (supra) [BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka, (1979)4 SCC 507], and referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more but without the intervention of orders of courts or of tribunals.
The question of regularization of the services of such employees may have to be considered on merits in the light of the principles settled by this Court in the cases above referred to and in the light of this judgment.
In that context, the Union of India, the State Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to regularize as a one time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are being now employed.
The process must be set in motion within six months from this date.
We also clarify that regularization, if any already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the constitutional requirement and regularizing or making permanent, those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme."
13.
When the principles laid down by their Lordships in Uma Devi's case (supra) are applied to the facts of the present case, it is undoubtedly clear that these writ petitions do not have any merit and are liable to be dismissed because initial appointment of the petitioners is on contractual basis which has not been made by following the procedure consistent with the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has no where been shown that the respondents have considered the claim of other eligible persons for appointment to the public service and after receiving their applications comparative merit of the petitioners was considered as per the procedure established by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Those who have worked for 10 years on ad hoc or temporary basis could be considered for absorption on permanent posts if they cross the initial hurdle of satisfying the basic requirement of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as noticed above.
Therefore, the writ petitions are liable to be dismissed.
14.
The judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case (supra) and Narsingh Pal's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners do not advance the case of the petitioners because in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case (supra) a `hire and fire' rule was declared ultra vires because it permitted the employer an arbitrary action of getting rid of permanent employee of a public corporation by giving him three months notice.
In the present case, none of the petitioners is a permanent employee.
It follows that judgment in Brojo Nath Ganguly's case (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.
Likewise in Narsingh Pal's case (supra) the principle of estoppel was held inapplicable in a case where the workman had accepted retrenchment compensation.
It has been held that employee can still challenge his retrenchment.
The other principle that if the order is punitive then the principles of natural justice of meeting the allegations, has to be followed.
There is no room for applying the afore-mentioned judgment to the facts of the present case as the order of termination is simplicitor and ex facie there is nothing in the order which could be treated as punitive.
Therefore, we have no hesitation to reject the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
15.
For the reasons recorded above, these writ petitions fail and the same are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.