KC Puri, J - Through this Regular Second Appeal, the appellants have challenged the judgment and decree dated 1932001 passed by the then Additional District Judge, Jalandhar whereby the appeal filed by the respondent was accepted.
2.
The brief facts leading to this appeal are that the plaintiff filed a civil suit for a declaration that the order dated 17.2.1990 passed by the Commandant, PAP, Jalandhar vide which his six years approved service was forfeited with permanent effect and order dated 27.7.1990 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar vide which he dismissed him from service as also orders dated 531992 and 681992 passed by the Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar vide which he dismissed the revision and mercy petition of the plaintiff were illegal, contrary to the facts, arbitrary, against the principles of natural justice and without application of judicial mind as also against the mandatory provisions of Punjab Police Rules.
It is further pleaded by him that he was appointed as PAP Constable No. 13/349 on permanent basis and in the month of August, 1989, he was deployed in the Darbar Sahib Complex Amritsar, on duty.
As per Daily Diary Report No. 22 dated 3181989, made by ASI Mohinder Singh, he was found sitting and sleeping with arms and ammunition by his side at about 110 AM when the surprise checking was conducted by Assistant Commandant, Jalandhar.
He held the plaintiff/respondent guilty and imposed punishment of forfeiture of six years approved service vide order dated 17.2.1990.
Feeling aggrieved, the plaintiff filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector of Police, respondent No. 4 who also arbitrarily and whimsically and while acting against record, enhanced the punishment to dismissal vide order dated 27.7.1990.
The plaintiff filed revision petition and mercy petition before respondent No. 3 but these were also rejected, vide orders dated 531992 and 681992.
He termed all these orders as illegal, unlawful, unconstitutional, arbitrary, capricious, null and void, against the mandatory provisions of Rules and principles of natural justice on the grounds that the summary of allegations served upon him carried material, which was not subject-matter of inquiry, which prejudiced his case; that the copies of documents including daily diary report No. 22 of 3181989, on which the Inquiry Officer relied, were not supplied to him despite demands; that the Inquiry Officer totally ignored the statements of defence witnesses while returning his finding; that the copy of findings of the Inquiry Report was not supplied to him; that no reasonable opportunity was given to him to file written statement; that the charge against him was vague and incomplete; that the Inquiry Officer acted as a Prosecutor and took into consideration the material illegally placed on record without giving any reference to the same to him; that the reply given by him to the charge sheet was not taken into consideration; that the orders were passed by the authorities without application of judicious mind and without taking into consideration the legal and factual submissions; that the orders were non-speaking and the punishment awarded to him is not compatible with the alleged misconduct.
3.
The suit was contested.
In the written statement, the defendants admitted that the plaintiff was employed as a Constable in PAP vide No. 13/349.
A departmental inquiry regarding his negligence in duty on 3111989 was conducted against him and the findings were given against him.
At the time of checking by ASI Manohar Singh, he was found sleeping on duty on 3181989.
About the misconduct of the plaintiff, a report was made in the daily diary register at serial No. 22 dated 3181989.
The punishment of forfeiture of six years approved service of the plaintiff was passed by defendant No. 5 after carefully considering his reply to the show cause notice as also the facts proved on the record during the departmental inquiry.
The impugned orders are legal in the eyes of law.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, six issues were framed by the learned trial Court.
5.
The learned trial Court decided issue Nos. 1 & 2 against the plaintiff and issue Nos. 3 to 5 in his favour and consequently the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 26.2.1996 passed by the then Civil Judge (Junior Division), Jalandhar.
6.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted by then learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar vide impugned judgment and decree dated 1932001.
7.
Feeling aggrieved by the said judgment and decree, the State of Punjab and other defendants are before this Court in the present Regular Second Appeal.
8.
I have heard arguments addressed by the counsel for the appellants and have gone through the record of the case.
9.
Learned Government Pleader has submitted that following substantial questions of law are involved in this RSA :-  i) Whether in facts and circumstances of the case the Lower Appellate Court justifies in setting aside well reasoned judgment and decree of the learned trial Court ?
ii) Whether the non-supplying of previous copies/orders in summary of allegations Inquiry Officer committed material illegality which vitiates the inquiry itself under Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules ?
iii) Whether impugned order of dismissal of respondent is liable to be set aside in view of violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules ?
10.
Shri Gurdev Singh, the then Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, accepted the appeal of the plaintiff and set aside the judgment and decree passed by Mrs. HK Randhawa, Civil Judge (Junior Division), Jalandhar, vide which the suit of the plaintiff for declaration was dismissed.
Learned first appellate Court in para 17 of the judgment has held that by including the previous order vide which the penalties were imposed upon the plaintiff on previous occasions in the summary of allegations itself and by not supplying copies of those orders to the plaintiff, the enquiry officer committed material illegality which vitiates the enquiry itself.
It has been further held that those orders could have been used as evidence against the plaintiff only after supplying the copies of the same to him.
The other finding of the learned first appellate Court in para 18 relying upon authority Bhim Singh v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) PLR 191 and State of Haryana v. Lachhman Singh, 1999(2) Recent Services Judgments 398, is that the department was required to take into account the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension before the penalty of dismissal is awarded in view of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The department has been authorised vide judgment of the appellate Court dated 1932001 to conduct fresh inquiry in accordance with rules and to pass the order directly in accordance with rules.
However, the plaintiff has not been held entitled to back wages except for a period of three years immediately preceding the institution of the suit.
Learned Government Pleader has submitted that the first appellate Court has misapplied the provisions of Rule 162 and to the fact that the copy of previous punishment should have supplied to the plaintiff for awarding punishment of dismissal.
It is submitted that it was not only the first occasion that the plaintiff was at fault while sleeping on duty along with the service rifle but on previous occasions also he has been punished for his negligence.
So, in these circumstances the punishment of dismissal passed by the departmental cannot be said to be illegal and on higher side.
It is further submitted that it was not mandatory under Rule 1624 to supply copies of previous punishment as held by the learned first appellate Court.
So, the prayer has been made for acceptance of appeal and for setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the first appellate Court and restoring the judgment of the trial Court.
11.
I have carefully considered the submissions made by learned counsel and learned Govt. Pleader for the State and have gone through the record of the case.
12.
The learned first appellate Court has returned a finding that plaintiff has not been supplied the copies of his previous punishments before taking into account the punishment awarded in the inquiry under which the plaintiff has been dismissed from service.
Rule 162 envisages that the punishment awarded to the delinquent official commensurate for the lapse on his part and while awarding punishment his length of service and chances of pension have to be taken into consideration.
It would be against the principles of natural justice in case the copies of previous punishments are not supplied to the delinquent official before awarding punishment to the delinquent official after considering those orders of punishment would violate Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules.
So, I see no ground for interference in the judgment of the first appellate Court.
The above questions of law formulated on the facts and circumstances of the case are as such determined in favour of the plaintiff and against the appellant.
Consequently the appeal is without any merit and the same stands dismissed.
However, the Department is at liberty to proceed with the inquiry in accordance with rules as observed by first appellate Court.
In view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs so far as the present R.S.A.
is concerned.
Appeal dismissed.