Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of CWP Nos. 9651; 9664 and 10276 all of 2002, filed by the Chandigarh Administration as well as the selected candidates, the appointment of whom was set aside by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal') on 632002 on an application filed by Ravinder Singh, respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the applicant).
2.
The brief facts, which led to the passing of the order by the Tribunal are that on 24.9.1999, the Chandigarh Administration accorded sanction to the engagement of 39 apprentices in the Engineering Department during the year 1999-2000 as per the provisions of the Apprentices Act, 1961 (for short `the Act').
Out of the said 39 posts, 2 posts were meant for apprentices in Mechanical Engineering and three in Civil Engineering in the Public Health Wing of Chandigarh Administration.
A requisition was sent by the Chandigarh Administration to the Regional Employment Exchange, Chandigarh for recommending the names of the eligible candidates, who could be appointed as apprentices.
The Employment Exchange recommended the names of the candidates for apprentices.
On the basis of the recommendations of the Employment Exchange, a duly constituted Committee selected such apprentices for training.
The said apprentices completed their successful training in December, 2000 as well.
The applicant filed an Original Application before the Tribunal pleading that he belongs to the Scheduled Castes category and possesses a degree of BE (Civil) from the Punjab Engineering College and that he got apprenticeship training as well but has not been appointed.
3.
The grievance of the applicant is that three posts of Junior Engineer were neither advertised nor any requisition was sought from the Employment Exchange and the apprentices, who had completed training in December, 2000 were considered and appointed vide letter dated 3012001.
It is further alleged that father of Ishwar Saini, a selected candidate, is serving as a Senior Assistant, whereas father of Gurvinder Singh is working as Junior Engineer in the Public Health Wing.
Similarly, father of Amit Gupta, is also working in the Department.
It was, thus, alleged that the candidates have been appointed in a clandestine manner without advertising the vacancies and without giving opportunity to the candidates, who were trained apprentices for a higher post.
4.
The learned Tribunal found that the appointment to the post of Junior Engineer is governed by the Chandigarh Engineering Department (Group-C), Sectional Officers of (Construction, Public Health and Electrical Wing) (Chandigarh Amendment) Rules, 1988, and the educational qualification is diploma in Civil Engineering.
The Tribunal found that even if two posts of apprentices for mechanical diploma holders were sanctioned in the Public Health Wing, it will not amount to creation of regular post of Sectional Officer/Junior Engineer.
It was further found that it could not be shown on record number of any regular posts of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers Mechanical in the Public Health Wing of the Engineering Department, UT, Chandigarh.
Thus, the Tribunal found that the appointment is in violation of the recruitment Rules.
Considering the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Road Transport Corporation v. U.P.
Parivahan Nigam Shishukhs Bereozgar Sangh & Ors., 1995(2) SCT 367 : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 1115, the Court found that neither the said judgment nor the instructions do away with the requirement of competition/selection process with the other candidates as required under the law.
The Tribunal relied upon its judgment in Jaswinder Singh v. Union of India etc., OA No. 570-CH-1993 decided on 2352001, wherein it was held that the candidates who were selected and given training as Apprentices did not mean that there was a guarantee or even a promise for an employment before sending them for training.
The Tribunal did not record any definite finding in respect of the relations of the selected candidates working with the administration, but still inferred that one cannot rule out the possibility of undue favour extended to the selected candidates, who have been appointed without advertising the posts.
5.
While challenging the aforesaid order passed by the Tribunal, reliance was placed upon the letter of Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour and Rehabilitation dated 2331983, wherein 50% posts against the direct recruitment were recommended to be filled up by absorption of apprentices.
After the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Road Transport Corporation's case (supra), another circular was issued on 1531996 by the Govt. of India, incorporating the decision of the Supreme Court in the said circular.
It was pointed out that seven posts of Junior Engineers fell vacant in the Public Health Circle.
Four of such vacancies were filled up by direct recruitment and the remaining three vacancies were considered to be filled up from amongst the trained apprentices.
It is also pointed out that the applicant applied for open advertisement post, but could not succeed.
The petitioner relied upon Rule Annexure P.9 to contend that the post of Junior Engineer exists in all streams i.e.
Mechanical, Engineering and Civil Wing of the Public Health.
The qualification of Diploma in Civil Engineering is mentioned in the qualification for direct recruitment.
The Rules have to be read harmoniously and the mistake in not mentioning any qualification for the other streams cannot have any effect for nullifying the other streams in the Department.
The qualification for the streams of Junior Engineer (Public Health), Junior Engineer (Mechanical), Junior Engineer (Electrical) and Junior Engineer (Horticulture) have been specified by Chandigarh Engineering Department (Group C) Junior Engineers (Construction, Public Health, Electrical, Mechanical and Horticulture Wing) (Chandigarh Amendment) Rules, 2004.
Such Rules have been published in supersession of the earlier notification dated 3151982.
Therefore, the mistake of not specifying the qualification for the purposes of direct recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer stands corrected.
The apprentices, have been absorbed relying upon the earlier orders of the Tribunal, directing the consideration of trained apprentices for absorption as well as the orders of absorbing apprentices on other posts.
6.
The question of right of absorption of the apprentices in the establishment where they have undergone the training, has been examined in detail in Civil Writ Petition No. 12204 of 2007 (Darshan Singh and others v. Bhakra Beas Management Board and another).
Vide separate order announced today, it has been held that though it is not obligatory for the employer to employ the apprentices, but it is permissible for the employer to appoint apprentices in preference to the candidates, in response to public advertisement.
That was a case where the Bhakra Beas Management Board, has assigned five marks to the candidates, having undergone apprenticeship training under the Board, who applied in response to the public advertisement and by subjecting them to trade test and interview.
7.
The fact that the names of the apprentices, who have been absorbed were recommended by the Employment Exchange is not disputed in the written statement filed before this Court.
In the present case, the appointment has been given to the apprentices without any public advertisement.
Once the candidates were taken as apprentices in terms of the recommendations of the Employment Exchange, the argument that the post was filled up by public advertisement loses its significance.
The recommendation of the employment exchange is a valid source of employment.
Once, the candidates have been recommended for apprenticeship by the Employment Exchange, the argument that there was no public notice before making appointment, is not tenable.
8.
The only question, which is required to be examined is whether the Administration was required to give some preference to the apprentices or absorb such apprentices without considering the other eligible candidates for appointment to the said post.
9.
In UP Road Transport Corporation's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the effect of Section 22 of the Act and held that it is not obligatory for the employer to offer employment merely on the basis what has been stated in Section 22 of the Act.
It was further held that what is required to be seen is that the nation gets the benefit of time, money and energy spent on the trainees, which would be so when they were employed in preference to non-trained direct recruits.
This would also meet the legitimate expectations of the trainees.
After holding so, the Court culled out the circumstances, which are required to be taken into consideration in respect of the employment of the trainees.
It was held to the following effect :-  "(1) Other things being equal, a trained apprentice should be given preference over direct recruits.
(2) For this, a trainee would not be required to get his name sponsored by any employment exchange.
The decision of this Court in Union of India v. Hargopal, AIR 1987 SC 1227, would permit this.
(3) If age bar would come in the way of the trainee, the same would be relaxed in accordance with what is stated in this regard, if any, in this concerned service rule.
If the service rule be silent on this aspect, relaxation to the extent of the period for which the apprentice had undergone training would be given.
(4) The concerned training institute would maintain a list of the persons trained year wise.
The persons trained earlier would be treated as senior to the persons trained later.
In between the trained apprentices, preference shall be given to those who are senior."
10.
In the present case, the apprentices were recommended by the Employment Exchange and have been absorbed against the available vacancies.
The Administration has spent time, money and energy on the training of the apprentices, who were recommended by the Employment Exchange.
Therefore, such candidates were required to be given preferential treatment for appointment and by giving such preferential treatment, they have been absorbed.
The reasoning given by the Tribunal that the posts of apprentices were created vide the circular issued by the Administration and not the post of Junior Engineer (Mechanical) in the Public Health Wing, is misconceived.
There is no post of apprentice.
The apprentices are taken for training and are paid stipend.
Rule 10 of the Rules, provides that the posts are that of Junior Engineer alone.
The circular granting permission to engage 39 apprentices permits the Administration to take 39 apprentices in different streams including that in Mechanical and Public Health.
The reasoning given by the Tribunal in respect of the posts of apprentices is absolutely untenable.
11.
Reliance upon Mitrangshu Roy Chowdhary & others v. Union of India and others, 1999(2) SCT 676 (SC) : 1999(2) SLR 772, by the learned Tribunal in its earlier judgment in Jaswinder Singh's case (supra), which has formed basis of the order passed by the Tribunal, is misconceived.
That was the case where the applicants were sponsored by the Employment Exchange for recruitment as apprentices.
They completed their training and were given appointment but subsequently, the appointments were cancelled and they were given group-D posts.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court found that under Rule 159 of the Rules of Recruitment and Training, candidates against 25% of the posts are to be selected from the apprentices, who have completed the course, but such apprentices cannot claim appointment as a matter of right.
12.
We find that though it is not obligatory for the employer to provide a regular job to the trainees, but it is equally incumbent on the employer to give preference to a trained apprentice(s) over direct recruits.
The age of the apprentice can be relaxed and the training institute is required to maintain a list of the persons trained year-wise and the persons trained earlier have to be treated as senior to the persons trained later.
It has also come on record that the apprentices have undergone their successful training and for such training they were paid stipend in terms of Rule 11 of the Apprenticeship Rules, 1992.
The Administration has thus, spent time, money and energy on the trainees to train them in the trades prevalent in the Administration.
Therefore, such training cannot be permitted to go waste.
If the preference is not given to such apprentices, it will not be utilization of the man power trained by the Administration.
If the employer chooses to employ the apprentices by giving preference to the apprentices, who have undergone training from the employer, the same satisfies the requirement of Constitutional scheme of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Once, the Administration has decided to absorb the apprentices, the said absorption would be in terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Road Transport Corporation's case (supra).
For the reasons recorded as also the reasons recorded in CWP No. 12204 of 2007 (Darshan Singh and others v. Bhakra Beas Management Board and another), we are of the opinion that the order passed by the learned Tribunal is not sustainable.
Consequently, the present writ petitions are allowed and the order passed by the learned Tribunal is set aside.
As a consequence thereof, the OA filed by the applicant is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.