TPS Mann, J - By a common judgment, we intend to dispose of the present writ petition as well as CWP Nos. 16036 and 17147 of 2005, 16081 and 16803 of 2006, besides CWP No. 9010 of 2007, as all of them involve identical questions of law and facts.
However, for facility of reference, the facts are taken from the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioners have challenged the validity of the amendment brought about in Haryana Primary Education (Group C) District Cadre Service Rules, 1994, Haryana State Education School Cadre (Group C) Service Rules, 1998 and Haryana State Education Lecturer School Cadre (Group C) Service Rules, 1998, whereby 50% reservation in favour of the rural youths and 33% for the women was provided for filling up the various posts thereunder.
Prayer has also been made for quashing the advertisement No. 6/2006 dated 2072006 issued by respondent No. 3, whereby applications were invited for the posts of Lecturers, Masters, Language Teachers, Art and Crafts Teachers, P.T.I.
and JBT Teachers in different subjects in the Education Department, Haryana.
The said advertisement prescribes that 33% posts shall be reserved for women and 50% reserved for youths, who had acquired matriculation qualification from a school situated in a rural area of Haryana.
The petitioners also challenged the action of the respondents in making microscopic classification amongst the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and allotting different quota amongst same class of Scheduled Castes.
3.
The State of Haryana issued the impugned advertisement through Haryana Staff Selection Commission (for short `the Commission') vide which applications were to be submitted on or before 21.8.2006.
Towards the end of the advertisement, it was stated under Note-1 that recruitment of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes would be made by making two categories, i.e. SC-A and SC-B and the same would be in accordance with the Haryana Government instructions.
Under Note-2, it was prescribed that in all the categories, for which the applications were invited, 33% posts were reserved for women and 50% for youths, who had acquired matriculation qualification from a school situated in a rural area of Haryana.
Also that the reservation would be horizontal.
The candidates, who passed matriculation examination from the schools situated in the urban areas, which urban areas were listed in the advertisement, were not to be considered under the category of rural youths.
The candidates, who wanted to avail of 50% reservation of rural area, were required to furnish an affidavit to the effect that they had passed their matriculation examination from the school situated in the rural area of Haryana.
4.
Before we proceed further, we may record the stand of the respondents that they have already done away with the microscopic classification amongst the Scheduled Castes candidates and instructions have already been issued in this regard.
This stand of the respondents has not been disputed by learned counsel for the petitioners.
Therefore, the challenge in the writ petition is now confined to the amendment of the service rules, besides the impugned advertisement prescribing reservation of 33% posts for women and 50% for rural youths.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that no reservation could be made in respect of any employment or office under the State on the basis of residence of an individual, as is clear from the wording of Article 16(2) of the Constitution of India.
Though Article 16(3) of the Constitution permits the making of any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government, or any local or other authority within a State or Union Territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union Territory prior to such employment or appointment yet the power to do the same rests only with the Parliament and not with the State.
It is also submitted that the classification of rural youth was also not one of the valid classifications.
Neither it satisfied the twin tests prescribed for valid classification, i.e. classification has to be based on a discernible differentia nor it had nexus with the object to be achieved.
Further, that Article 16(4) permits the State to make provision for the reservation in appointments in favour of any backward class of citizens, which in the opinion of the State was not adequately represented in the services under the State, but no data has been made available by the respondents that the rural youth of Haryana was not adequately represented in the services or that it could be identified as such to be a backward class.
The expression `classes of citizens' indicates a homogeneous section of the people who are grouped together because of certain likeness and common traits and who were identifiable with some common attributes.
The homogeneity of the class of citizens is social and educational backwardness.
Neither caste nor religion nor place of birth will be the uniform element of common attributes to make them a class of citizen.
6.
In so far as reservation of 33% posts for women was concerned, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that though the State was competent to bring about such a reservation, yet the same would also end up in crossing the 50% limit imposed upon reservation of appointments and posts.
Therefore, it was prayed that impugned amendments in the service rules as well as the impugned advertisement in so far as it provided reservation of 50% seats for the rural youth and 33% for women, be quashed.
7.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents took up a preliminary objection that the petitioners have not disclosed any cause of action for challenging the validity of the amendments brought about in the reservation rules, as they have not stated as to in which category they had applied and whether they were affected by the entire advertisement or by any particular part of it.
It is also submitted that the argument that reservation would result in crossing the limit of 50% was incorrect as it was specifically stated in the impugned advertisement that the same was to operate horizontally and not vertically.
Further that the provision of 50% of posts for rural youths was made so as to provide better opportunity to them in the Government jobs as inspite of the State Government having taken various steps to provide better education facilities to them, they were not able to compete with those belonging to the urban areas although 70% of the total population of the State was residing in the rural areas.
It was with a view to enhancing employment opportunities for the rural youths, especially in the education sector that 50% of the total posts were reserved for them and the said reservation was to operate horizontally.
The presence of more teachers, having rural background, would instil a sense of belongingness amongst the rural students and consequently help in higher enrolment of students and drop out rate amongst rural students getting reduced.
Moreover, the teachers belonging to the urban areas were reluctant to serve in rural schools and a large number of such posts were lying vacant in the rural areas for a long time.
Similarly, it was submitted that even providing 33% of seats for the women would not result in the reservation crossing the limit of 50% as the same was also to operate horizontally.
In order to substantiate the said plea, learned counsel produced various charts during the arguments which would explain as to how the horizontal reservation would operate.
One of the charts pertaining to filling up of 251 posts of Hindi lecturers is reproduced hereinbelow :-  Lecturer Hindi Total Posts : 251 General posts - 160
251-(26262613) = 160 As per reservation policy of SC Category 20%
20% of 251 = 52 posts  Total SC-A(10%)
(251x10)/100=26 Posts  SC-B(10%)
(251x10)/100 = 26 Posts M-66% of 160
Posts-107  F-33% of 160
Posts-53  M-66% of 26
Posts-18  F-33% of 26
Posts-8  M-66% of 26
Posts-18 F-33% of 26
Posts-8 Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50%,  of of of of of of of of of of of of 107 107 53 53 18 18 8 8 18 18 8 8 53 54 26 27 9 9 4 4 9 9 4 4 212 BC(10%) ESM (5%) BC(10%) ESM (5%) (251x10)% = 26 Posts (251x5)/100) = 13 Posts M-66% of 26 F-33% of 26 M-66% of 13 F-33% of 13 Posts-18 Posts-8 Posts-9 Posts-4 Rural Urban Rural  Urban Rural Urban Rural Urban 50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of 18 18 8 8 9 9 4 4 9 9 4 4 4 5 2 2 39 TOTAL :  212 39 = 251  Therefore, it was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
8.
The preliminary objection taken by the State cannot be sustained as the petitioners, during the pendency of the petition, filed an affidavit wherein they stated that all of them possessed the requisite qualifications for the post/category in which they had applied.
They have also stated that their chances of appointment have been seriously affected on account of reserving of 50% seats for the rural youths.
9.
Before dealing with the respective arguments addressed by learned counsel representing the parties, it would be worthwhile to refer to the various provisions of the Constitution regarding the issue in hand.
10.
Part-III of the Constitution deals with the fundamental rights.
Article 13 prescribes that any law, which was inconsistent with the provisions of the fundamental rights shall be void.
The State is injuncted against making any law, which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Part-III and in case any law is made in contravention thereof, to that an extent it would be void.
Amongst the various fundamental rights granted to the people of India, the basic one is right to equality.
Article 14, which defines such a right ordains the State not to deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
Article 15(1) states that the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
Article 15(4) refers to socially and educationally backward classes of citizens and to that an extent, the State could validly discriminate by making special provisions for their advancement.
The socially and educationally backward class of citizens is different from the citizens living in socially and educationally backward areas.
Article 15(4) does not enable the State to bring people living in socially and educationally backward areas within its umbrage.
Some people in the rural areas may be socially backward, some may be educationally backward and still chances cannot be ruled out of some being both socially and educationally backward.
However, at the same time, it does not mean that all the citizens residing in rural areas are socially and educationally backward.
The State has laid emphasis on the fact that 70% of its population is living in rural areas.
That cannot make the rural people to be homogeneous class by itself.
They may have taken up different occupations in life.
They may be maintaining different standards.
Their lives may be different.
Simply because they belong to rural areas do not make them one class.
If we take them as such, they would practically amount to making reservation for the majority of the residents of the State.
Article 16 of the Constitution deals with equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
The same is reproduced hereinbelow :  "16.
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
-  1.
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
2.
No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
3.
Nothing in this Article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office (under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union Territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union Territory) prior to such employment or appointment.
4.
Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
xxx xxx xxx" As stated above, Article 16(2) proscribes the State from making someone not eligible or discriminating against him in respect of any employment or office under the State on grounds only on religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth residence or any of them.
However, under Article 16(3), the Parliament can make any law prescribing any requirement as the residence within the State or Union Territory prior to any employment or appointment.
11.
In State of Uttar Pradesh and others v. Pradip Tandon and others, AIR 1975 SC 563, the Hon'ble Supreme Court declared the reservation in favour of candidates from rural areas seeking admission to medical colleges in the State of Uttar Pradesh and belonging to rural areas as unconstitutional.
It would be worthwhile to refer hereinbelow the relevant portions from the judgment :-  "12.
Article 15(1) states that the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
The Attorney General submitted that the reservation was not on grounds only of place of birth or caste.
Article 29(2) states that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
It is said by the Attorney General that inasmuch as place of birth is not mentioned in Article 29(2), the reservations in the present case would not offend Article 29(2).
The Attorney General submitted that the reservations in the present case were not on ground of place of birth but on ground of residence, and, therefore, the reservations would not fall within the mischief of either Article 15(1) or Article 29(2).
13.
Article 15(4) was added by the Constitution First Amendment Act, 1951.
The object of the amendment was to bring Articles 15 and 29 in line with Article 16(4).
Article 16(4) states that nothing in that Article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
In the State of Madras v. Smt. Champakam Dorairajan, 1951 SCR 525 : AIR 1951 SC 226, the reservation of seats for non-Brahmins, Backward Hindus, Brahmins, Harijans, Anglo Indians and Indian Christians and Muslims was held to offend Articles 15(1) and 29(2).
This Court pointed out that the omission of a clause like Article 16(4) from Article 29 indicated the intention of the Constitution- makers not to introduce communal consideration in matters of admission to educational institutions.
14.
Article 15(4) speaks of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
The State described the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas as socially and educationally backward areas.
The Constitution does not enable the State to bring socially and educationally backward areas within the protection of Article 15(4).
The Attorney General, however, submitted that the affidavit evidence established the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas to have socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
The backwardness contemplated under Article 15(4) is both social and educational.
Article 15(4) speaks of backwardness of class of citizens.
The accent is on classes of citizens.
Article 15(4) also speaks of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Therefore, socially and educationally backward classes of citizens in Article 15(4) could not be equated with castes.
In MR Balaji v. State of Mysore, 1963 Suppl 1 SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649 and State of Andhra Pradesh v. P Sagar, 1968(3) SCR 595 : AIR 1968 SC 1379, this Court held that classification of backwardness on the basis of castes would violate both Articles 15(1) and 15(4).
15 and 16. xxx xxx xxx 17.
The expression "classes of citizens" indicates a homogeneous section of the people who are grouped together because of certain likeliness and common traits and who are identifiable by some common attributes.
The homogeneity of the class of citizens is social and educational backwardness.
Neither caste nor religion nor place of birth will be the uniform element of common attributes to make them a class of citizens.
18 to 23. xxx xxx xxx 24.
The 1971 Census showed population in India to be 5479 crores.
4389 crores or 801 per cent live in rural areas.
1091 crores or 199 per cent live in cities and towns.
In 1921 the rural population in India was 888 per cent.
In 1971 the rural population was reduced to 801 per cent.
The rural population of Uttar Pradesh in 1971 was roughly seven and a half crores.
The population in Uttrakhand was roughly seven and a half lakhs.
The population of Hill areas in Uttar Pradesh was near about twenty five lakhs.
It is incomprehensible as to how 801 per cent of the people in rural areas or 7 crores in rural parts of Uttar Pradesh can be suggested to be socially backward because of poverty.
Further it is also not possible to predicate poverty as the common trait of rural people.
This Court in JP Parimoo v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, 1973(3) SCR 236 : AIR 1973 SC 930 : 1973 Lab IC 565, said that if poverty is the exclusive test a large population in our country would be socially and educationally backward class of citizens.
Poverty is evident everywhere and perhaps more so in educationally advanced and socially affluent classes.
A division between the population of our country on the ground of property, that the people in the urban areas are not poor and that the people in the rural areas are poor is neither supported by facts nor by a division between the urban people on the one hand and the rural people on the other that the rural people are socially and educationally backward class.
25.
Some people in the rural areas may be educationally backward, some may be socially backward, there may be a few who are both socially and educationally backward, but it cannot be said that all citizens residing in rural areas are socially and educationally backward.
26.
80 per cent of the population in the State of Uttar Pradesh in rural areas cannot be said to be a homogeneous class by itself.
They are not of the same kind.
Their occupation is different.
Their standards are different.
Their lives are different.
Population cannot be a class by itself.
Rural element does not make it a class.
To suggest that the rural areas are socially and educationally backward is to have reservation for the majority of the State.
27 & 28. xxx xxx xxx 29.
The reservation for rural areas cannot be sustained on the ground that the rural areas represent socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
This reservation appears to be made for the majority population of the State.
80 per cent of the population of the State cannot be a homogeneous class.
Poverty in rural areas cannot be the basis of classification to support reservation for rural areas.
Poverty is found in all parts of India.
In the instructions for reservation of seats it is provided that in the application form a candidate for reserved seats from rural areas must submit a certificate of the District Magistrate of the District to which he belonged that he was born in rural area and had a permanent home there, and is residing there or that he was born in India and his parents and guardians are still living there and earn their livelihood there.
The incident of birth in rural areas is made the basic qualification.
No reservation can be made on the basis of place of birth, as this would offend Article 15 30 to 38. xxx xxx xxx 39.
......
The present case of classification of rural areas is not one of under classification.
This is a case of discrimination in favour of the majority of rural population to the prejudice of students drawn from the general category.
This classification is unconstitutional.
40 to 41. xxx xxx xxx 42.
For these reasons was held that the reservation in favour of candidates from rural areas is unconstitutional......." 12.
In State of Maharashtra v. Raj Kumar, AIR 1982 SC 1301, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the provision requiring a candidate coming from rural area and having passed S.S.C.
examination held at villages or places with `C' type Municipality to be entitled for being given weightage, was not in conformity with the provision of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, as the classification so made had no nexus with object sought to be achieved.
It was observed therein as follows :-  "....
In the first place the object of the rule was to take officers who had full knowledge of rural life, its problems, aptitudes, working of the people in villages and the suitability for working as officers in the rural areas so as to be materially useful and in order to make a constructive contribution to the upliftment of rural life.
In order to achieve this purpose a Rule was made that a candidate coming from the rural areas will be a rural candidate and he must have passed S.S.C.
examination which is held from a village or a town having only a `C' type Municipality.
This rule, however, when translated into action does not seem to fulfil or carry out the object sought to be achieved because as the Rule stands any person who may not have lived in a village at all can appear for S.S.C.
examination from a village and yet become eligible for selection in the competitive examination.
Thus, there is no nexus between the classification made (assuming for the purpose of this case that such a classification is unreasonable) and the object which is sought to be achieved as a result of which the rule is clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Another infirmity from which the rules suffer is that any person who has passed the S.S.C.
examination and is supposed to be a rural candidate has to be given particular weightage by the Public Service Commission, who has to award 10% marks in each subject for such a candidates.
The rules also provide that viva-voce Board would put relevant questions to judge the suitability of candidate for working in rural areas and to test whether or not they have sufficient knowledge of rural problems, and this no doubt amounts to a sufficient safeguard to ascertain the ability of the candidate regarding his knowledge about the affairs of the village.
In such a situation there was absolutely no occasion for making an express provision for giving weightage which would virtually convert merit into demerit and demerit into merit and would be per se violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as being an impermissible classification.
The rule of weightage as applied in this case is manifestly unreasonable and wholly arbitrary and cannot be sustained."
13.
Article 14 permits classification which has to be founded on intelligible diferentia.
The differentia must have rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the law under challenge.
Article 16(4)(b) is also an enabling provision which makes classification on the basis of differentia between current vacancies and carry forward vacancies.
14.
Social justice is concerned with the distribution of benefits and burdens.
However, while doing so, conflict between right needs and means has to be taken care of.
From the same arises two concepts of equality, one is formal equality, while the other proportional equality.
The former implies that law treats everyone equal, while latter expects the State to take affirmative action in favour of disadvantaged sections of society within the framework of democratic polity.
Caste was accepted as a determination of backwardness in Indra Sawhney and others v. Union of India and others, 1992 Supp.
(3) SCC 217.
However, a balance has to be struck with the principle of secularism, which is the basic feature of the Constitution by bringing in the concept of creamy layer.
The ceiling limit of 50% is a Constitutional requirement alongside concept of creamy layer and compelling reasons without which the structure of equality of opportunity in Article 16 would collapse.
15.
In Dr. Narayan Sharma and another v. Dr. Pankaj Kr.
Lekhar and others, 1999(4) SCT 879 : 2000(1) SCC 44, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with the question of reservation of seats for doctors, who had worked at least for five years on regular basis in any Health Centre/Institution, which was not situated in the municipal area, culled out the following principles in the matter relating to reservation :-  "(a) A provision for reservation must be within reasonable limits.
(b) There can be a reasonable classification based on intelligible differentia for the purpose of Articles 15(1), 15(4) and 29(2).
(c) There can be reservation for persons belonging to areas which are socially and educationally backward.
(d) A rural area is not a class by itself and cannot be considered to be socially and educational backward merely because it is a rural area.
(e) Admission to postgraduate courses should be strictly based on merit.
(f) The merits of the candidates seeking admission to higher educational courses shall be judged by a uniform standard and for that purpose holding an entrance examination is the best method.
(g) There shall be no dilution of standards in higher educational courses and in particular, postgraduate courses."
The Court finally held sub-rule (4)(i) which provided for reservation of seats for doctors, who had worked at least for five years on regular basis in a Health Centre/Institution, not situated in the municipal area, as unconstitutional and void.
16.
In M Nagaraj and others v. Union of India and others, 2007(4) SCT 664 : 2006(8) Supreme Court Cases 212, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with the situation concerning the "extent of reservation" required the State to show in each case the existence of the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiency before making provision of reservation.
The State was not bound to make reservation, but if it wished to exercise its discretion and make such provision, it had to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance with Article 335.
Even if the State had compelling reasons, it was required to see that its reservation provision did not lead to excessiveness so as to bring the ceiling limit of 50% or obliterate the creamy layer or extend the reservation indefinitely.
The relevant conclusion is as follows :-  "However, in this case, as stated above, the main issue concerns the "extent of reservation".
In this regard the State concerned will have to show in each case the existence of the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiency before making provision for reservation.
As stated above, the impugned provision is an enabling provision.
The State is not bound to make reservation for SCs/STs in matter of promotions.
However, if they wish to exercise their discretion and make such provision, the State has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance with Article 335.
It is made clear that even if the State has compelling reasons, as stated above, the State will have to see that its reservation provision does not lead to excessiveness so as to breach the ceiling limit of 50% or obliterate the creamy layer or extend the reservation indefinitely".
17.
In the case in hand, the State has failed to apprise the Court of any quantifiable data, if any, collected by it so as to show that those youths, who had acquired matriculation qualification from a school situated in a rural area of the State, were socially and educationally backward.
In the absence of such a data being made available, this Court will find it difficult to uphold the reservation made by the State to the extent of 50% of the seats by reserving them for such like youth, whom it addresses as rural youth.
18.
The State has clearly taken a stand in the advertisement that the 33% posts are reserved for women and such a reservation would operate horizontally.
In Indra Sawhney's case (supra), the Supreme Court described the way as to how horizontal reservation will operate and at the same time, the percentage of reservations would not exceed the limit of 50%.
The same is as follows :-  "We are also of the opinion that this rule of 50% applies only to reservations in favour of backward classes made under Article 16(4).
A little clarification is in order at this juncture : all reservations are not of the same nature.
There are two types of reservations, which may, for the sake of convenience, be referred to as `vertical reservations' and `horizontal reservations'.
The reservations in favour of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes (under Article 16(4)) may be called vertical reservations whereas reservations in favour of physically handicapped (under Clause (1) of Article 16) can be referred to as horizontal reservations.
Horizontal reservations cut across the vertical reservations - what is called interlocking reservations.
To be more precise, suppose 3% of the vacancies are reserved in favour of physically handicapped persons; this would be a reservation relatable to clause (1) of Article 16.
The persons selected against this quota will be placed in the appropriate category; if he belongs to SC category he will be placed in that quota by making necessary adjustments; similarly, if he belongs to open competition (OC) category, he will be placed in that category by making necessary adjustments.
Even after providing for these horizontal reservations, the percentage of reservations in favour of backward class of citizens remains - and should remain - the same.
This is how these reservations are worked out in several States and there is no reason not to continue that procedure."
Once such a method of reservation is adopted as claimed by the State and explained in the chart as referred to above, it would not exceed the permissible limit of 50% in respect of the reserved categories as put together.
19.
As a result of the above discussion, we are of the view that the act of the respondent in reserving 50% seats for rural youths cannot stand the test of judicial scrutiny, being against the fundamental rights.
At the same time, 33% posts could be reserved for women.
However, as claimed by the respondents, this reservation of 33% shall operate horizontally.
20.
The writ petition is, therefore, disposed of by striking down provision for reserving 50% seats for youths, who had acquired matriculation qualification from a school situated in a rural area of Haryana.
However, the reservation of 33% posts for women and the said reservation, being horizontal in nature, is upheld.
The respondents are directed to proceed with the selection process by considering those candidates who had applied in the category of rural youth, in the general/open category unless such like candidates are eligible to the benefit of any other reservation.
Further, while reserving 33% of seats for women, the said reservation shall operate horizontally so that the total reservation does not exceed 50%.
Petition disposed of.
s