KC Puri, J - Being aggrieved with the award of Labour Court, dated 13081997, Annexure P-7, charge-sheet dated 08111991, Annexure P-1, inquiry report dated 21051992, Annexure P-3, show cause notice dated 03061992, Annexure P-4, termination order dated 20.08.1992, Annexure P-5 and the appellate order, Annexure P-6, the petitioner seeks quashing of the same in this Civil Writ Petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The averments of the petitioner in the instant Civil Writ Petition are that he was appointed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways by the Divisional Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh vide order dated 24.05.1983.
His services are governed by the Rules called the Punjab Roadways (Operational) State Service Class III Rules, 1977.
On 27091991, he was on duty in bus bearing No. 8307 which was bound from Nangal to Sirsa.
On reaching Ropar, he had severe stomache.
As a result thereof, the bus was parked at Ropar and the passengers were adjusted in some other bus.
He took medicine from Laungia Clinic in Guru Nanak Dev Market.
After taking medicine, he again started with Shri Harnek Singh, driver of the bus.
On reaching Sardoolgarh at about 6 PM, his condition worsened and he laid on the rear seat of the bus.
He issued tickets to the passengers.
However, some passengers may have lost his notice.
3.
His further averments are that the bus was checked by Sarvshri Tarsem Singh and Gurbax Singh, Inspectors of Nangal Depot at Sirsa.
He was in an unconscious position when the Inspectors asked for the way bill and the tickets.
He handed over the tickets and the way bill.
The Inspecting Staff did not take his signatures on the back of the tickets nor did his cash was checked by the Inspecting Staff.
On the report of the inspecting Staff, He was placed under suspension on 01101991.
Charge-sheet was issued to him for not issuing tickets to 21 passengers and for mis-appropriation on the ground that he had collected Rs. 5/- each from 21 passengers but did not issue tickets to them.
After finding his reply to be unsatisfactory, a regular inquiry was conducted against him.
The Inquiry Officer held that the charges were proved against him.
The General Manager agreed with the report of the Inquiry Officer and dismissed him from service vide order dated 20.08.1992.
He filed an appeal before the Divisional Manager who dismissed the same vide order dated 05041994.
4.
The plea of the petitioner further is that he served demand notice and the matter was referred to the Labour Court and the Labour Court answered the reference in the negative.
The petitioner has challenged the award of the Labour Court on the grounds that the same is not in conformity with the settled law; that the Labour Court as well as Appellate Authority have failed to consider that the punishment imposed was highly excessive and disproportionate to the guilt proved; that the past service and the record of the petitioner had not been kept in view; that the inquiry report had been considered by the Punishing Authority at the back of the petitioner without granting him any opportunity; that the mandatory procedure had not been followed; that the department had relied upon the documents which were not cited against the petitioner; that the petitioner was appointed by Divisional Manager who is a higher authority than the General Manager; that the petitioner could not have been charge-sheeted and punished by an authority lower to the authority who appointed him and that he has not been supplied copy of the inquiry report.
5.
No written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in this case.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has re-iterated the stand taken in the petition and has submitted that he was not keeping good health and medical certificate, in this regard, has been placed on the file.
The petitioner has not charged any amount from 21 passengers amount to Rs. 105/- as alleged by the management.
No passenger was examined during the inquiry.
The driver of the bus has also not been examined.
The alleged confession made by the petitioner has been wrongly relied upon.
The cash in the bag of the petitioner was not counted for.
7.
I have carefully considered the submissions advanced by the counsel for the petitioner and have gone through the record of the case.
8.
All the above contentions were raised by the petitioner before the Labour Court and the Labour Court vide its well reasoned award dated 13081997 found the petitioner guilty of mis-appropriation of the funds by charging Rs. 5/- from 21 passengers.
The domestic inquiry also found the petitioner guilty.
The Labour Court also found him guilty.
Moreover, there is confession on the part of the petitioner.
So, in these circumstances, the finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court cannot be interfered with in the writ jurisdiction.
9.
The counsel for the petitioner has submitted that appeal has been decided by the Divisional Manager and only Director could decide the same.
However, the counsel for the petitioner has not pointed out any Regulation in this behalf.
In the present case, besides in the domestic inquiry, the Labour Court has also found the petitioner guilty.
10.
The submission of counsel for the petitioner to the effect that the copy of the inquiry report has not been supplied to the petitioner and on the that count, the petitioner has been prejudiced is without any substance.
No prejudice has been, prima facie shown by the non-supply of the inquiry report.
The counsel or the petitioner cannot have any benefit of the authority reported as Managing Director ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 : 1993(5) SLR 532.
11.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the solitary statement of Chief Inspector particularly when the cash has not been checked could not prove the guilt of the petitioner.
To fortify this argument, counsel for the petitioner has relied upon case reported as State of Haryana v. Mohan Singh, 1985(2) SLR 116.
12.
I have carefully considered the said submission but do not find any force in the same.
The petitioner has confessed his guilt and on that count, he cannot have benefit of authority in Mohan Singh's case.
13.
Otherwise also, the Court cannot come to the rescue of a person who commits embezzlement.
Granting any relief to such an employee would amount to encouragement to an employee to indulge in malpractices.
Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I do not find any force in this writ petition and the same stands dismissed.
Petition dismissed.