Prem Shanker Asopa, J - By this writ petition, the petitioner seeks to challenge the penalty order dated 4-8-1994 whereby three annual grade increments with cumulative effect have been withheld.
2.
The facts, in brief, of the case as per the petitioner, are that while working as LDC in Agriculture marketing Department, the petitioner was served with a charge sheet dated 30-3-1993 levelling two charges in the matter of overwriting/cutting in gate passes resulting in help to evade market fee and not placing the same on record is in violation of departmental circulars.
After issuance of the charge sheet although inspection was not allowed but reply was submitted, thereafter the enquiry officer was appointed and the enquiry officer without taking any evidence and without further showing the record and hearing the petitioner, submitted his report to the respondent No. 3 - Secretary, Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Alwar.
On receipt of enquiry report, the disciplinary authority straightway has passed the order dated 4-8-1994 whereby three annual grade increments with cumulative effect have been withheld.
It is stated in the writ petition that withholding of grade increment with cumulative effect is a major penalty, which cannot be imposed unless the procedure under Rule 4 of Appendix-B Discipline & Conduct Rules of the Rajasthan Agricultural Produce Markets (Market Committee Employees) Service Rules, 1975 (in short "The Rules of 1975") is followed.
In the instant case, the procedure under Rule 6 dealing with other penalties i.e. minor penalties has been followed, therefore, the impugned order is without jurisdiction.
3.
The respondents have filed reply to the writ petition and stated therein that principle of natural justice have been complied with and the enquiry was conducted as per rules wherein charges found proved, therefore, writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
A rejoinder to the writ petition has also been filed wherein the petitioner has submitted that he was denied the opportunity of hearing, which has resulted in denial of principle of natural justice.
Lastly, it was submitted that the impugned order regarding stoppage of three annual grade increments with cumulative effect is clearly in contravention of the judgment of this Court as well as Apex Court.
5.
On January 2, 2007, counsel for the respondent sought time to file some additional affidavit with regard to what steps have been taken in the enquiry from the date of issuance of charge sheet till passing of major penalty order either by enquiry officer or by the disciplinary authority.
Counsel for the respondents has placed additional affidavit, but there is no mention of the fact whether the penalty is minor or major.
However, counsel has given the dates on which what steps have been taken either by enquiry officer or by disciplinary authority.
There is no dispute about the step, but the issue which is required to be decided is whether the penalty of withholding of grade increment with cumulative effect is major or minor and whether the enquiry was required to be conducted as per Rule 4 or 6 of the Appendix-B Discipline & Conduct Rules of the Rajasthan Agricultural Produce Markets (Market Committee Employees) Service Rules, 1975.
6.
Submission of counsel for the petitioner is that as per Rule 1 of Discipline and Appeal Rules, five penalties have been prescribed and penalty No. (ii) is withholding of increments or promotion.
Penalty No. (iii) is reduction to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale.
A bare reading of Rules 1, 3, 4 & 6 would reveal that Rule 3 deals with major misconduct for which a person is liable to be removed or dismissed from service or reduced to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale, if found guilty of the acts of major misconducts specified therein, whereas Rule 6 deals with circumstances of imposing other than penalties specified in item Nos. (i) & (ii) of Rule 1.
Further submission of counsel for the petitioner is that penalty of withholding of annual grade increment with cumulative effect is equivalent to lower stage in time scale as provided under penalty No. (iii) at par with reduction of rank for which the proceeding for removal or dismissal from service etc. given in Rule 4 read with Rule 3 is applicable and Rule 6 is inapplicable.
In support of the aforesaid contention, counsel for the petitioner cited Division Bench judgment of this Court in Krishna Dutta Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1987(1) RLR 346 and another judgment of Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 504.
7.
Counsel for the respondents.
submitted the penalty prescribed under Rule 1 (ii) will cover the case of the petitioner as withholding of increment includes withholding of increment with cumulative effect.
But he has further submitted that even if it is to be taken under sub-clause 1 (iii) then also the principles of natural justice have been complied with and Rule 3 & 4 are inapplicable.
8.
Heard counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the writ petition and further considered rival submissions of the parties.
9.
Before proceeding further, it would be worthwhile to quote Rules 1, 3, 4, 6 & 7 of the Appendix B Discipline & Conduct Rules of the Rajasthan Agricultural Produce Markets (Market Committee Employees) Service Rules, 1975, which are as follows :  1.
The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed upon an employee of the market committee - (i) Censure: (ii) Withholding of increments or promotion; (iii) Reduction to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale; (iv) Removal from the service;  (v) Dismissal from the service.
3.
Removal/Dismissal from service etc. An employee shall be liable to be removed or dismissed from service or reduced to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stake in a time scale if found guilty of the following Acts of major misconduct : (a) Conviction by a criminal Court in an offence of Indian Penal Code of by a Court-martial: or (b) insolvency or habitual indebtedness; (c) obtaining employment by concealment of his antecedents, which would have prevented him employment in the Market Committee had they been made known before his appointment to the authority: or (d) Misbehavior with the departmental officers; or (e) In-subordination or disobedience, whether or not in combination with another of any lawful and reasonable order, of superiors; or (f) Theft, fraud or dishonesty in connection with the employers business or property or the theft of property of another employee within the premises of the establishment; or (g) Taking or giving bribe or any illegal gratification; or (h) Habitual absence without leave; or  (i) Going on an illegal strike or abetting, inciting, instigating or acting in furtherance thereof or resort to hunger strike, or (j) Willful slowing down in a performance of work or abetment or instigation thereof; or (k) Drunkenness, intoxication or indecent behaviour in the premises of the establishment; or (l) Commission of an act subversive of discipline; or (m) Gross neglect of work or habitual negligence: or (n) Willful damage to work in progress or to any property of the establishment; or (o) Gambling within the premises of the establishment; or (p) Refusal to accept a charge sheet, order or other communication served, in accordance with these rules; or (q) Taking out of the establishment any article or material belonging to the establishment without permission; or  (r) Engaging of private work or trade; or  (s) Any act of omission or commission amounting to mis-behaviour in the opinion of the disciplinary authority.
4.
Procedure for Removal/Dismissal from Service etc.. - When an employee is charged with a misbehaviour, the maximum penalty for which is reduction in rank, removal or dismissal from service the penalty shall be imposed only after an enquiry held in the manner hereinafter provided - (i) Definite charges shall be framed and served in writing on the employee concerned, calling upon him to show cause why he should not be reduced in rank or dismissed or removed from service or punished with lesser penalties specified in these rules.
He shall be required to submit within such time as may be specified which shall ordinarily be not less than 15 clear days from the date he receives the charge sheet, a written explanation and also to state whether he desired to be heard in person; (ii) The explanation furnished by the employee on the charge sheet shall be considered by the officer competent under these rules, to pass an order of reduction in rank or removal or dismissal who, unless he takes steps for holding departmental enquiry, shall thereupon pass such orders as he thinks fit;  (iii) If the employee asked to be heard in person or if the officer competent to pass an order of reduction in rank or removal or dismissal considers that the employee should be examined in person, he shall cause a departmental enquiry to be held.
The employee if he so desires may present his case with the assistance of co-workers.
The employee shall be given all reasonable facilities for the conduct of his defence, including the cross examination of witnesses;  (iv) For the purpose of preparation of his defence, the employee shall be permitted to inspect and take extracts from such records, as he may be specify provided that such permission may be refused, for the reasons to be recorded in writing such records are not relevant for the purpose;  (v) At such an enquiry a definite charge shall be framed and explained to the employee in respect of each offence which has not been admitted by him, and the evidence in support of as well as his defence, alongwith any evidence which he may adduce in defence shall be recorded in his presence;  (vi) The report of the enquiry and the findings of each of the charges with reasons, thereof shall be prepared;  (vii) The report of enquiry shall be considered and finding on each charge shall be recorded;  (viii) The employee shall be supplied with the report and the findings and given a notice stating the action proposed to be taken against him and calling upon him to submit within a specified time, such representation as he may wish to make against the proposed action;  (ix) Appropriate orders thereon shall be passed taking into consideration the representation so made, if any and communicated to the employee in writing.
Provided that in awarding punishment, the officer competent to pass an order of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank shall take into account, the gravity of the offence the previous record, if any, of the employee and other extenuating or aggravating circumstances that exist;  (x) If he refused to accept a charge-sheet, order or other communications served in accordance with these orders and provided that he has been asked to accept the charge-sheet etc., in the presence of at least two witnesses, he shall be told verbally the time and place at which the enquiry into his alleged misconduct is to be held and if he refuses or fails to attend at the time of enquiry shall be concluded ex parte.
6.
Procedure for imposing other penalties.
- The penalties specified in item (i) and (ii) of para 1 above may be imposed on any employee in the following circumstances :- (a) Absence without leave without sufficient cause; (b) Unpunctual or irregular attendance;  (c) Neglect of work or negligence in performing duties;  (d) Breach of any rule of business of the establishment or instructions for the running of the establishment;  (e) Committing nuisance on the premises of the establishment.
(2) Before an order imposing a penalty specified in item (i) and (ii) of para 1 above in the circumstances, mentioned in sub-Clause (1) above is passed against an employee, he shall be informed of the definite offences on account of which it is proposed to impose the penalty and called upon to show cause why that or lesser penalty, should not be imposed.
The employee shall also be given 15 days time for furnishing his explanation and shall be allowed reasonable facilities for the preparation of his defence.
7.
With-holding of increments.
- In ordering the with-holding of an increment the competent authority shall state the period for which it is with-held and whether the postponement shall have the effect of postponing future increment.
(Emphasis supplied)  10.
This Court in case Krishna Dutta Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1987(1) RLR 346 has held the withholding of grade increments and reduction to a lower stage in the time scale as provided as one of the penalties under clause (iv) of Rule 14, are equivalent.
The relevant para 10 of the said judgment is as follows :-.
"A perusal of the seven kinds of penalties specified under Rule 14 shows that under clause (ii) only withholding of increment has been mentioned but it nowhere specified that withholding of increments could also be given with cumulative effect.
In case a penalty of withholding of grade increment is imposed for one year or two years then such Government servant is put to a financial loss for a limited period and he becomes entitled to his usual grade increment after such period of one year or two years.
While in case of withholding of grade increment with cumulative effect the Government servant is put to a financial loss for the entire period of his future service and the result is that he is put to one grade increment less for the entire period of his remaining service.
In our view such penalty of withholding of grade increment with cumulative effect and reduction to a lower stage in the time scale as provided as one of the penalties under clause (iv) of Rule 14 are equivalent and have the same effect.
Learned Additional Government Advocate was unable to explain any difference in the aforesaid two kinds of penalties.
If a Government servant is given a penalty of reduction to a lower stage in the same time scale then also such Government servant is put to a loss of one grade increment for the entire period of his service after such punishment.
It remains undisputed that the penalty of reduction to a lower stage in the time scale as specified in clause (iv) of Rule 14 is a major penalty and procedure for enquiry has to be followed as provided under Rule 16 of the Rules.
We are, thus, clearly of the view that in the present case the penalty imposed on the appellant was a major penalty and as the procedure contemplated under Rule 16 has not been followed as such the order imposing penalty is totally without jurisdiction and is liable to be quashed."
(Emphasis supplied)  11.
The Similar view is expressed by the Supreme Court in case of Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991 Supp (1) SCC 504.
The relevant portion of para 4 of the said judgment is as follows :  "The impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5 of the Rules; it is a major penalty and imposition of the impugned penalty without enquiry is per se illegal.
When penalty was imposed withholding two increments i.e. for two years with cumulative effect it would indisputably mean that the two increments earned by the employee were cut off as a measure of penalty for even in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
The clock was put back to a lower stage in the time scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock started working from that stage afresh.
The insidious effect of the impugned order, by necessary implication is that the appellant employee is reduced in his time scale by two places and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that two years increments would not be counted in his time scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
The words are the skin to the language which if peeled off its true colour or its resultant effects would become apparent.
When the problem is approached from this perspective the effect is as envisaged under Rule 5(v).
Rule 5(iv) does not empower the disciplinary authority to impose penal of withholding increments of pay with cumulative effect except after holding inquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
Then the order would be without jurisdiction or authority of law, and it would be per se void."
(Emphasis supplied)  12.
The two charges of over-writing/cutting in the gate passes resulting in help to evade market fee and not placing the same on record is violative of the departmental circulars are covered by major misconducts specified in main Rule 3 (e) & part of (f) of the Rules of 1975, therefore, same are major misconducts, for which one of the penalty specified in Rule 3 is reduction to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in time scale is to be imposed if found guilty of the said charge, but it appears that while prescribing the procedure for removal and dismissal, reduction in rank in Rule 4, the lower stage in time scale has not been specified, but the word "etc." has been mentioned in opening line of Rule 4 whereas the other penalties at Item Nos. (i) & (ii) of Rule No. 1 of the Rules of 1975 have been specified for other misconduct, which appears to be minor misconduct.
Considering the nature of misconducts and comparing it with Rule 3 of the Rules of 1975, the case of the petitioner is not covered by the nature of misconduct specified in Rule 6 of the Rules of 1975.
The penalty of reduction in time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale have to be read with reduction in rank/post as prescribed under Rule 1(iii) for which procedure under Rule 4 of reduction in rank is applicable.
Further in penalty No. 1(iii) of the Rules of 1975 reduction in rank kept at par with lower stage in the time scale and the said penalties find place along with removal or dismissal in Rule 3 for major misconducts and in procedure for removal or dismissal as prescribed under Rule 4 "etc." word is mentioned.
Considering above mentioned interpretation of Rules and the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in Krishna Dutta Sharma (supra) and Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill (supra), I am of the considered view that withholding of grade increment with cumulative effect is a penalty of lower stage in the time scale, which is major penalty and the same can not be equated with penalty Nos. (i) & (ii) of the Rules of 1975, therefore, the procedure which has been followed by the respondents as prescribed under Rule 6 of the Rules of 1975 of calling for the explanation and preparation of defence will not apply, therefore, I held that for penalty No. (iii) of the Rules of 1975, procedure for removal/dismissal from service etc. as prescribed under Rule 4 of the Rules of 1975 will apply.
Admittedly, no such procedure has been followed, therefore, impugned punishment order dated 4-8-1994 is without jurisdiction and the same is liable to be quashed.
13.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The punishment order dated 4-8-1994 is quashed and set aside.
The petitioner be given all consequential benefits within three months.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.