Hima Kohli, J - By this common judgment, both the writ petitions are proposed to be disposed of as both of them arise out of the order dated 30th September, 2003 and award dated 25th November, 2003 passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal in OP No. 169/1994.
2.
While DTC, the petitioner, in WP(C) No. 14336/2005 has challenged the aforesaid award whereby the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the Tribunal') has rejected the application filed by the DTC under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') seeking approval of its action to remove the respondent workman (hereinafter called as 'the workman') from service, relying on the same award, the workman by way of filing WP(C) No. 3926/2004 has sought directions to the DTC to allow the workman to join duty and pay him back wages from the date of his removal from service.
3.
The brief facts relevant for deciding the present writ petitions are that the workman was appointed by the DTC as a Conductor in the year 1984.
On 13th July, 1992, while the workman was performing his duty on bus No. 9064 on the route of Delhi-Faridabad, checking took place by the checking officials of the DTC and it was found that the workman had committed various irregularities, including failure to issue ticket from starting point to a passenger, instigating the passenger, threatening a lady passenger, misbehaving and abusing the checking staff and refusal to unpunch the ticket.
On 3rd August, 1992, the workman was served with a charge-sheet on the basis of the report filed against him.
A domestic enquiry was held, wherein witnesses were produced by the DTC as well as the workman who were duly examined.
Thereafter, arguments were addressed and the Inquiry Officer, after going through the material placed on record, submitted his report to the effect that the workman was guilty of some of the charges.
After considering the report of the Inquiry Officer and the past record of the workman, vide order dated 25th July, 1994, the Disciplinary Authority removed the workman from service and remitted one month's wage.
Immediately thereafter, the DTC filed an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act seeking approval of its action of removing the workman from service.
A reply was filed to the aforesaid application by the workman.
Based of the pleadings of the parties, following preliminary issue was framed :  "Whether the applicant held a legal and valid enquiry against the respondent according to principles of natural justice ?"
4.
To prove the aforesaid issue, DTC produced the witnesses, while the workman entered the witness box himself and made his deposition in support his claim that he was not given assistance of a co-worker during the enquiry proceedings and that the inquiry was not conducted as per the principles of natural justice.
It was also claimed that the passengers were not called to depose in the matter.
5.
After perusing the pleadings and the material placed on record, vide order dated 30th September, 2003 the Tribunal came to the conclusion that there was no legal material available with the DTC to prove the allegation against the workman.
It was also held that the entire evidence of the DTC was recorded on the very first day without granting an opportunity to the workman to have the assistance of any defence assistant and thus the report of the Inquiry Officer was held to be vitiated.
6.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the matter was proceeded with further and on the basis of the pleadings, following issues were framed on 30th September, 2003 itself :  (1) Whether the respondent committed the misconduct as alleged against him ?
(2) Whether the petitioner remitted full one month's wage to respondent at the time of his removal from service ?
(3) Relief.
7.
The Tribunal held that the DTC failed to prove the misconduct against the workman as it neither produced the checking officials nor the reporter who made the report against the workman and not even the passengers and that the only witness who was produced by the DTC did not have any personal knowledge of the allegations against the workman.
On the basis of the findings arrived at in respect of the aforesaid issue, the application filed by the DTC was dismissed.
8.
It was submitted by learned counsel for DTC that the findings of the Tribunal to the effect that the enquiry proceedings were held contrary to the principles of natural justice as no opportunity was given to the delinquent employee to have the benefit of a defence assistant and that the entire evidence of DTC was recorded on the very first date of the enquiry, are erroneous and contrary to the record.
He has drawn the attention of the Court to the records of the enquiry proceedings that form a part of the record of the Tribunal, which was summoned by this Court for perusal.
A perusal of the enquiry proceeding shows that in the proceedings held on 28th September 1992, it was recorded that the delinquent employee was asked as to whether he wanted to conduct that the matter himself or whether he wished to take the assistance of a defence assistant, to which the workman replied that he would like to conduct the matter himself.
9.
In so far as the finding in the impugned award to the effect that the lady passenger was not examined or that there was no material evidence available with the DTC to prove the substantial allegation against the workman, particularly the fact that the lady passenger was not produced is concerned, counsel for the DTC has referred to and relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and another v. Rattan Singh, reported as (1977) 2 SSC 491 : (1977 Lab IC 845).
10.
Although no counter-affidavit was filed to the writ petition, counsel for the workman, in the course of arguments, supported the impugned award.
He submitted that the findings of fact as given by the Tribunal ought not to be interfered with in writ jurisdiction by this Court as this Court does not sit in appeal on the said findings.
11.
I have heard the learned counsels for the parties.
I have also perused the lower Court record as also the impugned order and the impugned award.
12.
The law on the scope of interference in a domestic enquiry and the applicability of strict and sophisticated rules of evidence to the domestic enquiry is well settled.
There are a catena of judgments which state that once a domestic tribunal, based on the evidence, arrives at a particular conclusion, normally it is not open to the appellate tribunals and the Courts to substitute their subjective opinion in the place of one arrived at by the domestic tribunal.
Thus unless there are allegations of mala fides or arbitrariness or unless the findings on the face of the record are quite perverse, if an enquiry is held in consistence with the principles of natural justice and there is sufficient material on record to prove misconduct, then the tribunal does not have the power to substitute its own discretion for that of the disciplinary authority as the departmental authorities are held to be the sole judges of the facts.
It is further held that if there is some legal evidence on which the findings can be based, then adequacy or reliability of that evidence is not a matter can be argued upon or disputed by the Tribunal.
13.
Examining the present case in hand in the context of the aforesaid settled law, this Court finds that the plea of the workman to the effect that the DTC ought to have produced the lady passenger before the Inquiry Officer to substantiate the charges levelled against the workman is without any basis.
Merely because the said lady was not summoned in the witness box or her statement was not recorded, the same is no ground to hold that the domestic enquiry was erroneous or there were no findings on the record to establish the misconduct on the part of the workman.
The DTC had adduced evidence and also relied upon various documents to establish that there was sufficient material on record for the Inquiry Officer to have arrived at the findings that he did.
The observations of the Tribunal to the effect that the Inquiry Officer was also not produced to rebut the allegations levelled by the workman are misconceived as the DTC had produced the witness, namely, AW-1, who deposed that the Inquiry Officer had left the services of the DTC and was not available for stepping into the witness box.
However, the records of the enquiry proceedings as well as the findings of the Inquiry Officer were produced by the said witness that form a part of the lower Court record.
The incident was of the year 1992, the enquiry was held in the year 1992-93, order for removing the workman from service was passed in the year 1994, while contemporaneously, an application was filed by DTC under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act.
The said application came to be decided only in the years 2003, i.e. after about 10 years.
Thus the explanation offered by the DTC that the Inquiry Officer could not be produced as he had left the services of DTC was quite plausible and possible.
There is no reason to disbelieve the said inquiry Report or the findings of the Inquiry Officer based on the material available on the record.
The strict and sophisticated rules of evidence are not applicable in a domestic enquiry.
Hence, the question of rejecting the findings of the Inquiry Officer does not arise.
The opinion of this Court is fortified by the following judgments :  (i) State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, (1977)2 SCC 491.
(ii) DTC v. NL Kakkar, 2004(4) SCT 285 : 110 (2004) DLT 1659.
(iii) Divisional Controller, KSTRC (NWKRTC) v. AT Mane, 2004(4) SCT 438 : (2005)3 SCC 245 : (2004 Lab IC 3744).
14.
In Rattan Singh (1977 Lab IC 845) (supra), the Supreme Court held as under :  "In a domestic enquiry all the strict and sophisticated rules of the Evidence Act may not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible, though departmental authorities and Administrative Tribunals must be careful in evaluating such materials and should not glibly swallow what is strictly speaking not relevant under the Evidence Act.
The essence of judicial approach is objectivity, exclusion of extraneous materials or considerations, and observance of rules of natural justice.
Fair play is the basis and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or surrender of independence of judgment, vitiate the conclusion reached such a finding, even of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held to be good.
The simple point in all these cases is, was there some evidence or was there no evidence - not in the sence of the technical rules governing Court proceedings but in a fair common-sense way as men of understanding and wordly wisdom will accept.
Sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond scrutiny by Court, while absence of any evidence in support of the finding is an error of law apparent on the record and the Court can interfere with the finding.
In the present case, the evidence of the inspector is some evidence which has relevance to the charge and the Courts below had misdirected themselves in insisting on the evidence of the ticketless passengers.
Also, merely because their statements were not recorded, the order for termination cannot be invalid.
In fact, the inspector tried to get their statements but the passengers declined.
Further, it was not for the Court but for the Tribunal to assess the evidence of the co-conductor."
15.
It has also been held in a catena of judgments that loss of confidence is a primary factor and not the amount of money involved, and that sympathy and generosity cannot be a factor for interfering in the quantum of punishment.
In the present case, the Tribunal has erred in rejecting the findings of the domestic enquiry and disallowing the application filed by the DTC for seeking approval of its action of removing the workman from service mainly on the ground that the statement of the lady passenger was not recorded before the Inquiry Officer.
Summoning of the said witness is not a condition precedent as long as there is sufficiency of evidence in proof of the findings by the domestic Tribunal.
16.
In Divisional Controller, KSRTC (NWKRTC) (2004 Lab IC 3744) (supra), it is held as below : (Para 10)  "Para 9 : From the above it is clear that once a domestic tribunal based on evidence comes to a particular conclusion, normally it is not open to the Appellate Tribunals and Court to substitute their subjective opinion in the place of the one arrived at by the domestic tribunal.
In the present case, there is evidence of the inspector who checked the bus which establishes the misconduct of the respondent.
The domestic tribunal accepted that evidence and found the respondent guilty.
But the Court below misdirected themselves in insisting on the evidence of the ticketless passengers to reject the said finding which, in our opinion, as held by this Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, (1977)2 SCC 491 is not a condition precedent.
We may herein note that the judgment of this Court in State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh has since been followed by this Court in Devendra Swamy v. Karnataka SRTC, 2002(4) SCT 609 : (2002)9 SCC 644 : (2002 Lab IC 2475)."
17.
In view of the entire material placed on record in the course of domestic proceedings and in view of the fact that the records of the Inquiry Officer clearly establish that the principles of natural justice were not violated by the DTC as observed in the impugned award, it is held that the impugned order dated 30th September, 2003 as also the impugned award dated 25th November, 2003 passed by the Tribunal in OP No. 169/1994 are set aside and the application filed by the DTC under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act is allowed.
As a result, the writ petition filed by the DTC is allowed while the writ petition filed by the workman is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.