Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J - By filing the present writ application under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the writ petitioners namely, the Union of India represented by the General Manager, Eastern Railway and other concerned Railway Authorities have challenged the order dated March 22, 2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench by which the said Tribunal disposed of two separate applications one being Transfer Application No. 2 of 2003 arising out of C.O.
No. 15850 (W) of 1994 and the other, the Original Application No. 1005 of 1998 by directing the writ petitioners before us to regulate/consider the engagement of the respondents who were working as Railway Parcel Porters/Railway Goods Porters in accordance with the instruction issued by the Supreme Court in the Case of AI Railway Parcel and Goods Porters Union v. Union of India and others reported in 2004 SCC (L&S) 100 within a period of six months from the date of receipt of copy of the order.
2.
The facts giving rise to filing of this application may be summarised thus :  (a) In the year 1994, the respondent Nos. 11 to 35 filed an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before this Court being C.O.
No. 15850 (W) of 1994 thereby praying for mandamus commanding the present writ petitioners to engage those respondents as porters to carry Railway parcel goods and passengers luggage in the station premises at Bharharwa Railway Junction under Malda Division of the Eastern Railway.
By the said writ application, those respondents also prayed for injunction prohibiting the present writ petitioners and their subordinates from engaging any unlicensed persons as porters to carry the railway parcel goods and also the luggage of passengers in the station premises of Bharharwa Railway Station.
(b) Prior to that, the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 before us filed another writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before this Court thereby praying for mandamus directing the present writ petitioner to show cause why the names of those respondents should not be included in the list of casual labourer and why they should not be absorbed in the permanent list of substitutes with further consequential prayer for payment of arrears etc.
In the said writ application, on September 18, 1984, a learned Single Judge of this Court was pleased to pass an order to the effect that the Railway Authorities should be directed to pay the respondent Nos. 1 to 10, the arrears of salary and other dues within a specified period.
Subsequently, the said writ application was transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench and was renumbered as T.A.
No. 22 of 1989 and was finally disposed of by the Tribunal on 10th June, 1993 by directing the present writ petitioners to depute an appropriate DPO or other competent officer for the purpose of screening the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 for the purpose of ascertaining whether they had worked as parcel handling porters at Bharharwa Station for a period of 120 days and more and if so, the order proceeded, they should be properly screened and placed in the appropriate screening list of casual workers and should be given appropriate jobs as parcel handling porters on casual basis so long as such work was available for them and should also be paid in accordance with the Rules of payment of casual workers.
The Tribunal further held that if the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 were entitled to get the temporary status, they should be so given and in the meantime, the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 should accept the payments that would be offered to them for the past service and they should accept such payment without prejudice to their rights and contentions.
The Tribunal further held that after the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 were properly screened and appointed as casual workers, they should be paid as casual workers according to the relevant Railway Circulars.
Until such time, the Tribunal passed an order of status quo as on that day.
The Tribunal specified a time-limit of three months for doing the aforesaid job.
(c) The Railway Authority, however, being aggrieved by the said order dated 10th June, 1993 passed by the Tribunal filed a special leave petition before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India being S.L.P.
No. 4215 of 1994 but the said special leave petition was dismissed.
In spite of the direction of the Tribunal and the dismissal of the special leave application by the Supreme Court, the Railway Authority not having given any status to the respondent Nos. l to 10 as casual parcel porters nor having constituted the screening committee, a contempt application was filed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 being C.P.C. No. 129 of 1993 which is disposed of on 7th March, 2003.
(d) Pursuant to the direction of the Tribunal and the Supreme Court, the Railway Authority, however, formed a screening committee on 27th June, 1994 and the said screening committee submitted a report against the respondent Nos. 1 to 10.
In view of such fact, the respondent Nos. 1 to 10.
In view of such fact, the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 filed a fresh application being GA No. 1005 of 1998 under Section 19 of the Act before the Tribunal.
(e) In the meantime, the C.O.
No. 15850(W) of 1994 filed by the respondent Nos. 11 to 35 was transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, the said application was renumbered as T.A.
No. 2 of 2003, and both the Transferred Application Nos. 2 of 2003 and the OA No. 1005 of 1998 were heard analogously.
(f) By the order impugned in this application, the learned Tribunal has disposed of both the previously mentioned applications by directing the Railway Authorities to regulate/consider the engagements of the respondents in accordance with the instruction issued by the Apex Court in the case of AI Railway Parcel and Goods Porters Union v. Union of India and ors. (supra), and to grant the due benefit accordingly within a period of six months.
As indicated earlier, the Railway Authorities have come up with the present application challenging the said order of the Tribunal.
3.
This application is opposed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 and the respondent Nos. 11 to 13, 15 to 30, 33 and 34 by filing two separate sets of affidavit in opposition but those two sets of respondents have not preferred any separate application under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India challenging the verdict of the Tribunal.
Therefore, it should be presumed that the contesting respondents are in no way aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal.
4.
Mr. RN Das, the learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner, namely, the Railway Authorities has attacked the decision of the Tribunal thereby contending that there was no scope of passing a direction upon the Railway Authority to consider the case of absorption, in view of the latest decision of the Supreme Court in the case ofState of Karnataka v. Uma Devi, reported in (2006)4 SCC 1  5.
Mr. Das contends that so far the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 are concerned their case was considered according to the previous direction of the Tribunal and the screening committee found that they were not entitled to the status claimed by them.
Mr. Das submits that such finding of the screening committee being basically a finding of fact based on appreciation of evidence, the Tribunal could not set aside such finding.
6.
As regards the T.A.
No. 2 of 2003 is concerned, Mr. Das contended that no relief could be claimed by the respondent Nos. 11 to 35, as they are mere licensee of the Union of India for the purpose of carrying the passengers goods on the basis of remuneration fixed by the Railway.
At any rate, Mr. Das contends that there was no justification of sending the matter back to the Authority for reconsideration of the case in the light of the observations given by the Supreme Court in the case of AI Railway Parcel and Goods Porters Union v. Union of India, and others (Supra).
Mr. Das, therefore, prays for setting aside the order passed by the Tribunal and for dismissal of both the original application being OA No. 1005 of 1998 and the transferred application being TA No2 of 2003 filed by the two sets of the respondents.
7.
Mr.
Dawn, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 (the respondent No. 10 died during the pendency of the proceedings before Tribunal but the writ petitioners wrongly made him party before us), on the other hand, has opposed all the aforesaid contentions of Mr. Das and has submitted that against the previous decision of the Tribunal directing the Railway Authority to consider the status of the respondent Nos. 1 to 9, the Union of India, having preferred a special leave application but being unsuccessful, should he bound by such order and there is no scene of contending that the direction by the Tribunal for determination of the status of the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 cannot be made.
Mr.
Dawn submits that the said decision of the Tribunal is binding upon the Tribunal and therefore, at this stage there is no question of reopening the said direction by holding that the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 had no right to claim absorption in accordance with their prayer.
Mr.
Dawn in this connection took us through the various documents showing that the screening committee in its report did not consider those aspects and documents filed by his clients indicated that they were working for a long time.
8.
Mr. Banerjee, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 11 to 13, 15 to 30, 33 and 34 (the respondent Nos. 1 4, 31, 32 and 35 died during the pendency of the proceedings before the Tribunal but the writ petitioners through mistake made them parties in this application) has also opposed the aforesaid contention of Mr. Das and according to him, his clients being licensed porters are also entitled to handle the railway parcel goods as would appear from the terms of licence itself.
Mr. Banerjee contends that the Tribunal ought to have straightway passed a direction upon the Railway Authority to permit his client also to handle the railway goods parcel.
Mr. Banerjee, therefore, virtually prays for modification of the order passed by the Tribunal without preferring any separate application against such order.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after going through the materials on record we find that in the past, on the application of the respondent Nos. 1 to 10, the selfsame Tribunal passed a direction upon the employer to constituite a screening committee for the purpose of considering the status of those respondents on the basis of the number of days they worked.
The Railway Authority preferred a special leave application before the Supreme Court against such order but was unsuccessful.
Therefore, the said order of the Tribunal was binding upon the employer.
The point now sought to be agitated before it was very much available to the employer at that point of time.
Therefore, the submissions of Mr. Das that there could not be any direction upon his clients to consider the case of the respondents for giving the status of casual or temporary worker is now barred by the doctrine of constructive res judicata.
10.
We are unable to accept the contention of Mr. Das that in a view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka v. Uma Devi and others (supra), the decision taken by the Tribunal cannot be supported.
In the case of State of Karnataka v. Uma Devi (supra), the Supreme Court made the following observations :  "Therefore, consistent with the scheme for public employment, this Court while laying down the law, has necessarily to hold that unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant rules and after a proper competition among qualified persons, the same would not confer any right on the appointee.
If it is a contractual appointment, the appointment comes to an end at the end of the contract, if it were an engagement or appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the same would come to an end when it is discontinued.
Similarly, a temporary employee could not claim to be made permanent on the expiry of his term of appointment.
It has also to be clarified that merely because a temporary employee or a casual wage worker is continued for a time beyond the term of his appointment, he would not be entitled to be absorbed in regular service or made permanent, merely on the strength of such continuance, if the original appointment was not made by following a due process of selection as envisaged by the relevant rules."
In the case before us, the Railway Authority itself has framed the scheme for deciding the status of the workers who are working on temporary basis and accordingly, the Supreme Court in the decision referred to by the Tribunal passed direction to follow the scheme.
Therefore, the principles laid down in the case of Uma Devi (supra) cannot have any application to the facts of the present case where the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 are involved.
11.
Therefore, so far as the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 are concerned, the Tribunal rightly passed direction for considering the case on the basis of available materials on record.
We, therefore, find no reason to interfere with the order passed by the learned Tribunal so far as the original application filed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 are concerned.
We find substance in the contention of Mr.
Dawn, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 9 that the various documents annexed to the affidavit filed by his clients falsify the claim of the Railway Authority that there was no material to indicate that they were working for a long time and therefore, it is a fit case where the committee should reconsider the case afresh and should deal with the various documents filed by the respondents Nos. 1 to 9 in the light of the observations of the Apex Court mentioned in the order impugned.
12.
As regards the transfer application filed by the respondent Nos. 11 to 35 are concerned, we find substance in the contention of Mr. Das that there cannot be any direction upon the Railway Authority to consider their case for injunction restraining the Railway Authority from engaging any person for the purpose of removal of the railway parcel goods.
Those respondents were basically given licence for handling the passengers' luggage at a specified rate and if necessary, the Railway Authority can also give them direction for removing the railway parcel goods if the situations so demand.
However, no legal right accrues in their favour for preventing the Railway Authority from engaging any porter for the purpose of removing the railway parcel goods.
In the transfer application filed by the respondent Nos. 11 to 35 there was no prayer for absorbing them permanently in the railway service.
All that they claimed was that they alone should handle the passengers' goods as well as the railway parcel goods in accordance with the terms of their licence and the persons having no valid licence should not be permitted to handle those goods.
Therefore, there was no justification of considering the case of absorption of those persons licensed for carrying the passengers' goods as they were not doing any job of the Railways but were in fact helping the passengers from removing their own goods from the station premises based on licence granted by the Railway Authority.
13.
We, therefore, modify the order passed by the learned Tribunal by rejecting the TA No2 of 2003.
The other part of the order of the Tribunal on the OA No. 1005 of 1998 is hereby affirmed by extending the time to comply with the direction contained therein by three months from today.
In the facts and circumstances, there will be, however no order as to costs.
Kishore Kumar Prasad, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.