Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J - This writ application under Article 227/226 of the Constitution of India is to the instance of an unsuccessful applicant under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and is directed against order dated September 15, 2004 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Kolkata in TA No. 9 of 2003 thereby dismissing the application filed by the writ - petitioner by which he challenged an order of removal of service dated September 19, 1982 issued by the Divisional Railway Manager, Eastern Railway, Howrah.
2.
The facts giving rise to filing of the present writ - application may be summed up thus :  3.
The petitioner was appointed as a gangman in the year 1977 under Howrah Division of the Eastern Railway.
On November 19, 1982, he was communicated with an order of removal from service in exercise of power under Rule 14 (ii) of the Railway Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
In the said order, it was indicated that the Divisional Railway Manager sought to invoke the power under Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules, as in his opinion, it was not reasonably practicable nor feasible to hold an inquiry in the manner prescribed in the rules for removal of an ordinary employee.
4.
The allegation made against the petitioner was that on November 12, 1982, when Sri PK Chakravarti, an Assistant Engineer was on duty, the petitioner with an associate assaulted him and instigated and incited the other innocent employees of his gang and forced them to cause work - stoppage by threatening them with grievous hurt if they did not participate in the cease work.
On receipt of the report from Sri Chakravarti about the incident, the Deputy Regional Manager conducted an administrative enquiry in which he was satisfied that the statement made by Sri PK Chakravarti, the Assistant Engineer, was true and consequently, he issued the impugned order of removal by invoking the power conferred under Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules.
5.
Instead of availing of the opportunity of preferring a departmental appeal against such order as provided in the rules, the writ - petitioner, preferred an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before this Court when a learned Single Judge, of this Court entertained the said writ application and issued Rule being CR No. 12829 (W) of 1982 thereon.
It appears from the record that on March 16, 1983 an order was passed directing the writ petitioner to deposit the requisites for service of notice on the respondents within four weeks with a condition that in default of deposit of such requisite, the said Rule would stand discharged.
It further appears that by an order recorded on June 4, 1984, it was pointed out by the office of this Court that the requisites were not put in and, therefore, in terms of the earlier order passed by this Court, the Rule stood discharged.
6.
In spite of the formal discharge of the Rule, the Registry of this Court by order dated September 19, 2002 sent the entire records to the Central Administrative Tribunal for the appropriate disposal as if the said Rule was pending on the date of constituting the Tribunal and accordingly, the said writ - application was renumbered as TA No. 9 of 2003 before the Tribunal.
7.
The learned Tribunal below, scrutinized the record of the case and found that Sri PK Chakravarti, the concerned Assistant Engineer, made a complaint to the higher authority that on November 12, 1982 at about 1030 hrs.
while he was trollying the Section and was checking the previous day's gang work of the Unit number-4, he found certain irregularities in the adjustment of the gauge and consequently, he inquired and sought for explanation from the concerned mate, viz. one Mahabir.
At the juncture, the said Mahabir became furious and instigated all his gang men to stop work and to leave the place of work and started abusing him.
At the stage, Sri Chakraborty tried to pacify the employees, but the writ-petitioner physically assaulted him.
On such complaint having been made, an administrative enquiry was conducted by the appropriate officer in which it was found that the writ- petitioner and his associates were hostile in nature and they were in such a turbulent mood that it was not possible to hold any normal enquiry as nobody would dare to come forward to give evidence against them for the fear of their own lives.
8.
Before the Tribunal, argument was advanced on behalf of the writ - petitioner that there was no justification of invoking Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules and that on that ground alone, the proceeding should be quashed.
The Tribunal took note of the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Tulsi Ram, reported in (1985) 3 S.C.C.
398 and that of Satyabir Singh v. Union of India, reported in (1986) 1 S.L.J.
1 (SC) and found that in the fact of the present case, the Railway authority rightly invoked the provision contained in Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules.
The Tribunal further found that while invoking that extraordinary provision, Railway Authority followed all the conditions mentioned by the Supreme Court in those two decisions and thus, there was no certification of interfering with the decision passed by the employer.
The Tribunal, therefore, dismissed the application under Section 19 of the Act filed by the writ petitioner.
9.
Being dissatisfied, the writ-petitioner has come up before us.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after going through the materials on record we find that the learned Tribunal below in detail discussed the relevant materials and rightly came to the conclusion that there was no illegality in invoking the provisions contained in Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules.
Although the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner tried to convince us that a concocted allegation was made against his client and that there was no such incident, we are not prepared to accept such contention.
Although there was specific provision of appeal against the order of removal, the writ-petitioner did not avail of such opportunity of effectively disputing the factual aspects of the matter.
Instead of that, he decided to challenge the order by filing a writ - application before this Court on the question of law as to the applicability of the provisions contained in Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules.
We have already pointed out that the Tribunal below on consideration of the judgments passed by the Supreme Court in the decisions referred to above has rightly turned down such contention.
11.
Apart from the aforesaid fact, we find that the writ application was itself dismissed for default before this Court and notwithstanding such fact, the office of this Court erroneously sent the records to the Tribunal as if the writ application was pending on the date of constitution of the Tribunal.
Although subsequently, the writ-petitioner filed an application for restoration before a learned Single Judge of this Court, His Lordship returned the application to the Tribunal and thereafter, no order was passed on the question of restoration.
In our view, it was a mistake on the part of the office of this Court to return the file to the Tribunal on an erroneous belief that the writ application was pending before this Court.
In fact, on the date of constitution of the Tribunal, there was no pending writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before this Court as a result, there was no justification of sending the records of a disposed of case before the Tribunal.
12.
Be that as it may, since the Tribunal has disposed of the matter on merit, we have not considered the question of maintainability of the application before the Tribunal.
13.
We have also gone through the materials on record and are convinced that in the fact of the present case, invocation of Rule 14 (ii) of the Rules cannot be said to be unjustified.
We further find that while invoking the said Rule, the employer has followed all the requirements as pointed out by the Supreme Court in the cases mentioned by the Tribunal.
14.
There is no just ground of believing the allegation of the writ- petitioner that an assistant engineer without any reason will unnecessarily make a false accusation against the writ petitioner of physical assault.
Even the writ-petitioner could not allege any specific incident from which we can conclude that the said assistant engineer bore animosity against the writ- petitioner leading to the filing of the false complaint.
We have already pointed out that the writ-petitioner did not prefer any appeal against the order of removal where he could more effectively raise the disputed question of facts.
15.
We, therefore, find no reason to interfere with a well - reasoned order passed by the learned Tribunal.
This writ - application is, therefore, devoid of any merit and is dismissed accordingly.
16.
In the facts and circumstances, there will be, however, no order as to costs.
Arun Kumar Bhattacharya, J - I agree.
Petition dismissed.