Cyriac Joseph, CJ.
(Oral) - This Writ Appeal is filed against the judgment dated 712005 in Writ Petition No. 40315/1999 which was allowed by the Learned Single Judge.
The appellant is the second respondent in the Writ Petition.
2.
The Writ Petition was filed by the first respondent herein.
The first respondent joined the services of the Karnataka Electricity Board (Present Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited) as a Junior Assistant in its O & M Division, Hubli, in the year 1977.
As per Annexure B Order dated 591975, the Karnataka Electricity Board had accorded sanction to grant four advance increments to the employees on securing additional/higher qualifications as detailed in the Annexure to the said order without prejudice to their normal increments.
As per the Annexure to the said order, a Junior Assistant Typist is entitled to four advance increments if he acquired "a Degree in Commerce or Arts or Science of a recognised University".
Later as per Annexure-C order dated 23.10.1977, the Karnataka Electricity Board directed that a Junior Assistant/Typist will be entitled to only two advance increments on his acquisition of a degree in Commerce or Arts or Science of a recognised University.
The first respondent passed BA Music final examination held in May 1979.
Thereupon, he submitted Annexure-`D' representation dated 10101991 to the Superintending Engineer, C & M Circle, Karnataka Electricity Board, Hubli, bringing to his notice that he had passed BA Music Part-III Examination conducted by the Karnataka University, Dharwad, in the month of May, 1979 and requesting to sanction advance increments to him.
Along with Annexure-D representation, the first respondent enclosed copies of (i) Special Certificate issued by the Karnataka University, Dharwad, (ii) Certificate of Marks and (iii) Degree passing Certificate issued by the Karnataka University, Dharwad.
Annexure-`D' representation was forwarded by the Superintending Engineer to the Chief Engineer, Karnataka Electricity board along with Annexure-E letter dated 26101991.
In Annexure-E letter, it is stated that as per the Order dated 25101977 of the Karnataka Electricity Board, sanction of advance increment is permissible to Junior Assistants who have passed a degree in Commerce or Arts or Science and that the Bachelor of Music is not included among the qualifications, on the acquisition of which, advance increment could be granted.
The Superintending Engineer also requested the Chief Engineer to pursue the matter with the Karnataka Electricity Board for considering whether Bachelor of Music also is Degree equal to Science, Arts and Commerce for granting advance increments.
The Superintending Engineer also observed that the request of the first respondent appeared to be genuine.
However, through Annexure-G letter dated 27121991, the Secretary, Karnataka Electricity Board, informed the Chief Engineer that as per the existing provisions, the first respondent was not entitled for advance increments for acquiring a Degree in Bachelor of Music.
Aggrieved by the denial of the advance increments, the first respondent filed the Writ Petition praying for quashing Annexure-G letter dated 27121991 of the Secretary, Karnataka Electricity Board and also for a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for grant of additional increments as the petitioner had obtained graduation from recognised University.
3.
Respondents 2 and 3 in the Writ Petition filed a Statement of Objections opposing the prayers in the Writ Petition.
In paragraph 3 of the statement of objections, it was stated as follows :  "It is respectfully submitted that the petitioner has not obtained degree in Commerce/Arts/Science, but he has obtained a Bachelor Degree in Music.
The University has issued the Certificate to the petitioner a Bachelor Degree in Music and not a Bachelor Degree in Arts.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot take any advantaged of the said Degree so as to take the benefit under the Circular."
4.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, the Learned Single Judge held that Degree in Music is a Degree in Arts and therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the advance increments.
Accordingly, the Writ Petition was allowed declaring that the Degree in Music which the petitioner has secured is a Degree in Arts and directing the second respondent to consider the application of the petitioner for payment of two additional increments from the date of his acquiring the additional qualification, namely, Degree in Arts (Music) and pay the same within three months from the date of judgment.
5.
Aggrieved by the order or the learned Single Judge, the second respondent in the Writ Petition has flied this Appeal.
6.
We have heard learned Counsel Mr. Sriranga, learned counsel for the appellant and Sri.
KB Adyapak who accepted notice for the first respondent and Mr. SM Chandrashekar, learned Government Advocate who accepted notice for the State of Karnataka.
7.
It is not disputed that as per Annexure-B and C a Junior Assistant/Typist of the Karnataka Electricity Board was entitled to two advance increments if he acquired the higher/additional qualification of a "Degree in Commerce or Arts or Science of a recognised University."
Admittedly, the Karnataka University, Dharwad, is a recognised University.
Hence the only question that arises for consideration is whether the higher/additional qualification acquired by the first respondent is a Degree in Commerce or Arts or Science.
According to the first respondent, the qualification acquired by him is a Degree in Arts.
According to the appellant, the qualification acquired by the first respondent is not a Degree in Arts but only a Degree in Music.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that a Degree in Music cannot be treated as a Degree in Arts.
8.
The first respondent had produced a Certificate dated 2691991 issued by the Karnataka University, Dharwad, as Annexure-A It reads thus :  `Sri/Smt.
Joshi Shrinivas Venkatesh passed the B.
Music Part-III which is a final year of the three years degree course Examination held by the Karnataka University in the month of May, 1979 and was placed in the First Class."
A photo copy of the Certificate dated 2691991 is taken on record and kept in the file.
9.
The first respondent has placed before this Court the original of a Special Certificate dated 2691991 issued by the Karnataka University, Dharwad, which read thus :  "This is to certify that Shri/Smt.
Joshi Shrinivas Venkatesh has passed the B.
Music Part-III Examination the final examination held at the end of the three year Degree course held by the Karnataka University, in the month of May, 1979 with Regd.
(Seat) No. 004 and was placed in First Class."
He/she is eligible for conferment of the B.
Music Degree at the next Convocation of the University."
A photo copy of the said Special Certificate dated 2691991 is taken on record and kept in the file.
10.
Learned counsel for the first respondent has also produced the original of the Marks list dated 2691991 issued by the Karnataka University, Dharwad.
It shows that the first respondent has studied and passed English and Kannada as basic, Sitar (Theory and Practical) as major and Vocal (Practical) as minor.
A photo copy of the said marks list dated 2691991 is take on record and kept in the file.
11.
Learned counsel of the first respondent also made available to this Court the printed syllabus of the Karnataka University, Dharwad, for the Third year of the 3 years BA Degree Course (Revised) BA Part III Examination (with effect from the academic year 1975-76 and onwards).
The said syllabus shows the subject for studying in the third year of the three year BA Degree course (Revised).
Out of 33 Optional subjects, Sl.
No. 23 is Music and SI.
No. 25 is Fine-Arts.
Therefore, it is obvious that a student who undergoes and passes III year BA Degree Course with Music as Optional subject is entitled to BA Degree.
BA Degree means a Degree in Bachelor of Arts.
Consequently, the petitioner who is entitled to the conferment of a Bachelor Degree in Music is entitled to be treated as a person entitled to a Degree in Arts.
Therefore.
the Learned Single Judge was right in holding that the first respondent is entitled to advance increments as per Annexure-C order.
12.
Learned counsel for the appellant invited our attention to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in J Rangaswamy v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and Others, (1990) 1 S.C.C.
288 to contend that this Court cannot consider whether the qualification acquired by the first respondent is the required qualification for grant of advance increments.
We have carefully perused the judgment.
In our view, the said judgment has no application to the facts of this case.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the petitioner contended that for efficient discharge of the duties of the post of Professor in Radiological Physics, the diploma in Radiological Physics (as applied in Medicine) from the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre held by him was more relevant than a doctorate in Nuclear Physics, which the respondent before the Supreme Court desired.
Rejecting the said contention, the Supreme Court held that it is not for the Court to consider the relevancy of qualifications prescribed for various posts.
In this case, this Court is not considering the relevance of a particular qualification for a particular post or the sufficiency or suitability of a qualification for a particular post.
This Court is called upon only to decide whether the qualification acquired by the first respondent is the same qualification which the appellant prescribed in Annexure-C for the purpose of grant of advance increments.
We have only held that the qualification acquired by the first respondent is the same qualification which the appellant prescribed in Annexure-C.
Hence the view taken by us in the earlier paragraph is not contrary to or in violation of what was held by the Supreme Court in the case mentioned above.
13.
Learned Counsel also placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in HP Gupta and Another v. Union of India and Others, (2002) 10 S.C.C.
658 .
We have carefully read the judgment.
We regret to observe that this case has absolutely no relevance to the facts of this case and therefore, we do not find it necessary even to refer to the facts or the dictum in the said case.
For the reasons stated above, we hold that there is no merit in the Appeal and the Appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.