Pratap Kumar Ray, J - Heard learned advocates appearing for the parties.
Assailing the judgment and order dated 14th May, 2002 passed by the learned Trial Judge, in W.P. 21905 (W) of 1997, this appeal has been preferred by the Union of India and others.
By the impugned judgment under appeal the learned Trial Judge held that the punishment of removal from service on the charge of unauthorized absence for 132 days as imposed upon the delinquent employee, a Central Industrial Security Force personnel was disproportionate.
His Lordship further held that as the delinquent was sick so he could not join.
With that finding the punishment was modified by the learned Trial Judge directing the respondent authority to treat such period of unauthorized absence as on extra-ordinary leave without pay and that the petitioner should be allowed to join with effect from 20th May, 2002.
The impugned judgment under appeal reads such :  "The writ petitioner was removed from service on the ground of unauthorized absence for 132 days.
He was proceeded departmentally which had resulted in the order of removal from service.
Appeal preferred by the writ petitioner was also unsuccessful.
There was no other charges brought against the writ petitioner as I find from the records.
In my view, for unauthorized absence for 132 days punishment of removal from service is disproportionate.
From the records it would appear that the writ petitioner was sick and as such, could not join his duty.
There has been deliberation on that score in the enquiry report.
Considering the above aspect, I modify the order of punishment by directing, the respondent authority to treat such unauthorized absence for 132 days as extra-ordinary leave without pay.
The writ petitioner would not be entitled to any wages from the date being May 10, 1995 up till date.
The writ petitioner be allowed to join his duty with effect from 20th May, 2002.
The writ petition is disposed of.
There would be no order as to costs."
2.
The factual matrix of the writ application in short is to this effect.
That a charge sheet was issued on 8th September, 1994 on the allegation as follows :  "STATEMENT OF ALLEGATION CHARGE FRAMED AGAINST NO 822030106 CONSTABLE ASHIS DEBNATH OF CISF UNIT, PTPS, PATRATU (BIHAR)  That the said No. 822030106 Constable Ashis Debnath of C1SF Unit, PTPS, Patratu who was attached with zonal Stores (E/Z) CISF Calcutta is un-authorizedly absenting from duty without any leave or permission of the competent authority w.e.f.
17.5.91 to till date.
This is all act of gross negligence of duty within the meaning of Section 18 of CISF Act 1968.
(H.C. Panwar)  Commandant  8/9/94"  3.
The delinquent took a stand in the departmental proceeding to justify the period of absence on the ground of illness.
After holding enquiry, the Enquiring Officer found the delinquent guilty of the charges, i.e. negligence to duty and disciplinary authority imposed punishment of removal from service.
A statutory appeal was preferred which stood dismissed.
On that factual scenario the writ application was moved assailing the punishment of removal.
Affidavit in opposition was filed by the present appellant with reference to the said writ application by contending inter alia , that the delinquent writ petitioner being an employee of Central Industrial Security Force, a disciplined staff ought to have submitted his proper application for leave and he should not have absented himself on the ground as taken.
The learned Trial Judge considering the argument of the parties passed the above judgment which is quoted above.
4.
Before dealing with the issue on mere perusal of the impugned judgment under appeal, we are of the view that the judgment under appeal is not sustainable.
The reasons assigned by the learned Trial Judge that removal of service for unauthorized absence of 132 days is disproportionate, is not appealing us.
To apply the disproportionate doctrine with reference to the punishment in a departmental proceeding, it is a settled law that the Court will not decide the issue under the doctrine of judicial review by exercising the primary review width as an original authority but will decide the issue as a secondary reviewing authority only to test the decision making process and in the event of satisfaction that there is an arbitrary action which tantamounts to the Wednesbury's Arbitrariness, the writ Court or any Court of law may interfere with such punishment.
Reliance may be placed to the judgment.
5.
Furthermore, it is a settled legal proposition now that though in some cases proportionate doctrine has been elevated to some extent from the angle of Wednesbury's arbitrariness and its adjudication thereof but applicability of the same under the service jurisprudence has been rejected by the Apex Court.
The applicability of the same is to be considered as justified with reference to the breach of freedom of rights that is the constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights and/or other guaranteed rights under the European Treaty as appears from the judgment of the English Court.
Our Apex Court accordingly relying upon the decision of the English Court held in the case of Sandip Subhash Parathi v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2006)7 S.C.C.
501 that doctrine of proportionality emerging from the recent trend of decision in preference to the doctrine of Wednesbury's arbitrariness which earlier was considered as a factor to consider the issue, but there was a turn in the application of the same under the Service Law by holding in different cases that proportionality doctrine has no applicability so far as making any interference with the punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Authority in the departmental proceeding on the charge of misconduct where the central issue is the identification of the conduct on the reflection of the discipline of the organization, unless it is so shocking and unreasonable to improve the conscience.
With that view the Apex Court even on the charge of mere sleeping for few hours on duty when the dismissal order was imposed did not interfere with in the case of Bharat Forge Co Ltd, v. Uttam Manohar Nakate, reported in 2005(2) SCC 489 by holding that punishment was not shockingly disproportionate to interfere with the punishment imposed in a departmental proceeding, on following the earlier view of the Apex Court in the earlier case of Regional Manager.
Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Sohan Lal reported in 2004(8) SCC 218 where even for a mere abuse and assault when the punishment of dismissal was imposed in a departmental proceeding by framing a charge to that effect, the Apex Court declined to interfere with the dismissal order by applying the doctrine of proportionality, in the case of UP SRTC v. Subhas Ch.
Sen reported in 2003(3) SCC 324 by holding that the order of dismissal was not shocking in the angle of the charge as framed by the authority.
Even on the charge of granting a loan to the spouse when the Bank Manager was charge sheeted though in fact the amount was deposited thereafter, and the consequential effect was dismissal from service, the Apex Court declined to apply the proportionality doctrine by holding that it is not so shocking in the case Ganesh Santaram Siru v. State Bank of India, reported in (2005)1 SCC 13.
Even for verbal abuse to the superior officer which caused an order of dismissal by initiating a departmental proceeding was not interfered with applying the said doctrine of proportionality by the Apex Court in the case of Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd v. NB Nafavade, reported in (2005) 2 SLR 765 corresponding to (2005) 3 SCC 134.
6.
It is true that now the present trend under the Administrative Law with reference to the application of proportionality doctrine, shifted its view from the parity of principles of Wednesbury's arbitrariness, as it appears from the judgment passed in the case R v. Secretary of State for Home Department Ex parte Daily reported in 2001(3) All E.R 433 (HL) which has been discussed and considered in the case of Commissioner of Police and Ors. v. Syed Hussain reported in (2006) 3 SCC 173 by the Apex Court, but despite such, the Apex Court did not apply the principles of proportionality of doctrine.
It is a settled legal position that to apply the proportionality doctrine to interfere with the punishment imposed in a departmental proceeding on the charge of misconduct, the punishment must be shocking to conscience in comparison to the charge as proved.
Hence, having regard to the settled legal position aforesaid, we are of the view that since the CISF is an organization wherein the personnels are employed on security duty and they are the members of disciplined force, their absence without any intimation cannot be looked into loosely and unauthorized absence in that angle of a disciplined staff and the culmination of dismissal and/or removal from service on that charge under any stretch of imagination cannot be considered as shocking to the conscience.
As such, having regard to the legal proposition as discussed, we failed to contribute the views expressed by the learned Trial Judge to allow the writ application on the said reasoning.
7.
However, from the factual matrix if this case as it appears before us that the article of charge was framed for unauthorized absence with effect from l7th May, 1991 to till date, i.e. the date of initiation of the proceeding on 3rd September, 1994 but in the report, the Enquiring Officer himself held under the column "facts admitted" as follows :  "FACTS ADMITTED :  After carefully going through the prosecution and defence case the following facts were found to have admitted by both sides.
Before arriving at the position, the deposition of all P Ws, P Ws exhibits written statement of the delinquent find such of defence by the delinquent were taken into consideration.
(1) On 17.5.93 (AN) the charge member had proceeded to Eastern Zonal Stores Calcutta on attachment duty.
(2) Charge Member did not perform duty from 17594 to 25994.
(3) He had reported back for duty at Zonal Stores, Calcutta on 26994.
(4) He fallen sick on 13111994 and rejoined iris duty on 16.1.95 (FN).
(5) He had reported in this unit on 23295 (FN)"  8.
Hence from the admitted position and as per the observation and finding of the Enquiring Officer appears that the dellnquent did not absent himself continuously with effect from 17594 till the date of initiation of the charge sheet i.e. 8th September, 1994.
It appears from the admitted fact accordingly that though the delinquent did not perform the duty from 17th May, 1994 to 25th September, 1994 but explaining the absence due to Illness when he prayed for joining in services he was allowed to join on 26th September, 1994.
"The very fact to allow the joining of the delinquent on 26th September, 1994 would be considered under the legal parlence, condonation of absence period on medical ground with effect from 17th May, 1994 to 25th September, 1994.
Once the authority accepted that the absence was for valid reason on medical ground and allowed the delinquent to join the duty on 26th September, 1994, and when the delinquent continues his work with effect from 26th September, 1994 to 12th November, 1994 and thereafter joined again on 16th January, 1994 we are of the view that the charge in the manner as has been framed is contrary to the admitted facts.
Hence the charge was framed on account of negligence due to unauthorized absence with effect from 17th September, 1994 till the date of issuance of the charge sheet is not legally sustainable in view of the factual matrix as has been considered as admitted facts by the enquiring officer himself.
Furthermore, there was no charge framed after resuming duty on 26th September, 1994.
The delinquent thereafter, absented himself unauthorizedly with effect from 13th November, 1994 till the particular date prior to his rejoining on 16th January, 1995.
Though a departmental proceeding is not identical in nature with reference to a criminal proceeding but when the major punishment and/or any minor punishment is imposed on the charge of misconduct, the allegation to prove ground of misconduct must be stated clearly so that the delinquent may answer the charges properly.
Otherwise it will breach principles of natural justice.
It is a settled legal proposition that post facto determination of any conduct as a misconduct, is violative of the principles of natural justice and results a breach of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Reliance may be made to the case of Rasik Lal Patel v. Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, reported in 1985(2) SCC 35.
In that case the Apex Court held that employee must be made aware beforehand about the pitfalls of his service career as would attract the departmental proceeding on the charge of misconduct and in the event such is not stipulated and/or provided under the Service Regulation or in the standing order, dubbing of a conduct as a misconduct, on post facto determination of the same as misconduct per se violates of principles of natural justice.
9.
Admittedly from the records it appears and the views as expressed by the enquiring officer that delinquent was not absenting himself continuously with effect from 17th May 1994 and unauthorized absence with effect from 17th May, 1994 till 25th September, 1994 was condoned on the basis of medical certificate as submitted and delinquent was allowed to resume duty on 26th September, 1994.
Considering, that issue we are of the view that the charge of unauthorized absence with effect from 17th May, 1994 till the date, i.e. 8th September, 1994 practically had no basis as the delinquent, was allowed to resume the duty after that period which practically condoned the issue.
Further more, from the finding of the enquiring officer it appears that the total period of 132 days was considered as unauthorized absence thought during that period the delinquent worked for some time which was allowed by the appellant.
Furthermore, from the charge as framed it appears that Section 18 of the CISF Act, 1968 has been referred to in the allegation of charge to colour the allegation as an act of gross negligence under that Section being negligence of duty.
Section 18 of the CISF Act reads such :  "18.
Penalties for neglect of duty etc. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 8 every member of the Force who shall be guilty of any violation of duty or willful breach or neglect of any rule of regulation or lawful order made by a supervisory officer, or who shall withdraw from the duties of his office without permission or who being absent on leave fails without reasonable cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration of the leave, or who engages himself without authority in any employment other than his duty as a member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of cowardice, may be taken into Force custody and shall on conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year."
10.
On a bare reading of Section 18 it appears that the said section is a section for imposing penalties for neglect of duty by taking the concerned employee in custody but the same is without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the said Act.
Section 8 of the said Act speaks about dismissal and removal etc. of the member of the force on the ground of negligence in discharge of the duty.
Section 8 of the said reads such :  "8.
Dismissal, removal etc. of member of the force.
Subject to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution and to such rules as the Central Government may take under this Act, any supervisory officer may - (i) dismiss, (remove) or reduce in rank any "enrolled" member of the Force whom he thinks remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for the same, or  (ii) award anyone or more of the following punishments to any "enrolled" member of the Force who discharge his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by any act of his own renders himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely : (a) tine to any amount exceeding seven days pay or reduction in pay scale.
(b) drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;  (c) removal from any officer of distinction or deprivation of any special emolument."
11.
Hence, it appears that even the charge was not framed in terms of section 8 of the said Act but it was a charge framed in terms of Section 18 of the said Act which on the factual matrix is not legally sustainable.
12.
Considering all the aspects of the matter we are of the view that as the framing of the charge itself was contrary to the factual matrix as admitted and contrary to the statutory provision as referred to, the punishment as imposed on the basis of such charge is not legally sustainable and accordingly the same is set aside and quashed.
13.
The impugned order of dismissal in writ application accordingly stand modified with our finding and observation as made above.
On quashing and setting aside the finding and observation of the learned Trial Judge that the charge of absence from duty for 132 days was disproportionate to pass any order of removal.
However, having regard to the factual trends as depicted in the records the appellants may be at liberty, if they so desire to frame the appropriate charge with reference to the absence for the second time after resuming the duty in accordance with law.
The writ application stands allowed accordingly.
14.
Since we have quashed and set aside the punishment as imposed, naturally as a consequential effect the writ petitioner would be entitled to get all service benefits.
viz, salary allowance and service benefits with effect from the date of dismissal till date and he will be allowed to join the service subject to any proceeding for which liberty is granted.
Let the original records as produced before us, be returned to the learned counsel.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied, for, be given to the learned Counsel for the parties.
Tapan Mukherjee, J - I agree.
Appeal allowed.