Ashim Kumar Banerjee, J - One Himangshu Sekhar Mondal was a Naik in Central Industrial Security Force (hereinafer referred to as "CISF").
By an order dated August 12, 1994 he was transferred from Kolkata to Madras Port Trust.
He filed a writ petition being C.O.
No. 15763 of 1995 challenging the order of transfer on the ground that he was ailing and it was not possible for him to join the transferred post.
The writ petition was disposed of by an order dated June 14, 1995 by which the CISF Authorities was directed to consider his representation for grant of medical facilities.
The order was communicated to the CISF Authorities.
They however, maintained a prolonged silence despite the order being communicated to them.
On June 26, 1995 the authority communicated that his representation stood rejected finding the same devoid of merit.
By memo dated May 19, 1995 the same was again considered and rejected.
The authority gave a notice on July 14, 1995 asking him to vacate the family quarter within 7 days from the date of the receipt of the said letter.
The CISF Authorities by communication dated July 15, 1995 rejected his prayer for providing him an escort from Calcutta to Madras.
The writ petitioner consistently represented that it was not possible for him to travel alone from Kolkata to Madras due to his ailment.
He filed another writ petition in September, 1995.
The authority in the meantime started disciplinary proceedings for his refusal to join the transferred post.
The second writ petition was disposed of by an order dated February 14, 1996 directing the authorities to get the writ petitioner admitted in Christian Medical College, Vellore or Appolo Hospital, Madras and to make all necessary steps for his treatment.
The writ petitioner was directed to report to the Commandant, CISF Unit, Calcutta Port Trust within 15 days.
The CISF Authorities were also directed to provide a quarter to the petitioner at Madras.
As soon as such accommodation would be made available to him he would vacate the accommodation at Kolkata.
The CISF Authorities did not take any steps to comply with the said order which gave rise to a contempt application.
Upon receipt of the contempt application the CISF Authorities visited the Kolkata accommodation of the petitioner on November 21, 1996 and cut-off electricity and water supply without considering the fact that he was ailing and was living in the said quarter alongwith his wife and two minor daughters aged about 9 and 2 years respectively.
He filed his third writ petition when this Court by an order dated January 6, 1997 directed restoration of water supply and electricity.
In the meantime the authority passed an order of dismissal on December 7, 1996.
His third writ petition came up for final hearing when the same was disposed of by an order dated September 2, 1998 granting liberty to the petitioner to challenge the order of dismissal.
2.
He filed his fourth writ petition being WP No. 17176(W) of 1998 challenging the order of dismissal.
3.
During the pendency of the fourth writ petition the original writ petitioner died leaving him and surviving his legal heirs and representatives, widow the appellant above named and two daughters.
The appellant thereafter substituted her in place of original writ petitioner.
4.
The writ petition was heard and disposed of by an order dated February 6, 2004 impugned in this appeal appearing at page 126-132 of the Paper Book.
5.
The learned Single Judge was of the view that it was not correct to say that the order of transfer had lost its force and in truth and reality the same was endorsed by the Court and as such the writ petitioner was under obligation to join his transferred post which he refused.
As a result the Authority was right in proceeding against him departmentally which resulted in an order of dismisal.
His Lordship ultimately dismissed the writ petition.
6.
The substituted writ petitioner preferred the instant appeal being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order of His Lordship passed on February 6, 2004.
The appeal was heard by us on the above mentioned dates.
7.
Mr. SN Roy, learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended that the original writ petitioner never refused to join his transferred post.
He was ailing.
He made diverse representations for his medical treatment.
This Court directed the authority to make arrangement for his medical treatment at Madras.
The writ petitioner requested the Authority to arrange for an escort for travel to Madras as it was not physically possible for him to go alone at Madras.
The Court directed the Authority to give an accommodation at Madras and so long such accommodation was not given his present quarter at Kolkata should not be disturbed.
From the sequence of events it would appear that the Authority in utter disregard to the orders of this Court passed in the earlier writ proceedings acted in a manner which they ought not to have.
Their action was mala fide and the order of dismissal was a result of such vengeance which should have been quashed and set aside by the learned Single Judge.
He also contended that since the writ petitioner in the meantime appropriate employment should be given to one of his daughters treating the petitioner having died in harness.
8.
Mrs. Archana Sengupta, learned counsel while opposing the appeal appearing for the CISF contended that since the writ petitioner was dismissed from service prayer for compassionate appointment could not be considered by the authority.
In this regard she submitted a written instruction received from CISF Authorities by her which was kept on record by us.
9.
We have heard the parties at length.
We have considered the rival contentions.
The issue of ailment perhaps was not an excuse for the original petitioner to avoid the order of transfer as it would be evident from the fact that he died an untimely death during the pendency of the further writ petition.
Such death was due to prolonged ailment as we are told.
If we consider the orders passed in the earlier three writ proceedings we would find that the Court from time to time granted relief to the petitioner as prayed for in those writ petitions.
If he had refused to join without any logical reason this Court would not have directed restoration of electricity and water supply disconnected at his Calcutta accommodation provided for by the authority.
In this regard we may refer to charge No. 3 wherein the authority charged him for his failure to vacate accommodation allotted to him at Calcutta.
Such charge sheet was issued to him on September 9, 1996.
His water supply and electricity was disconnected on November 21, 1996 which was restored in terms of the order of this Court passed on January 6, 1997.
When the said order was passed by this Court the respondent authority did not bring it to the notice of the Court that an order of dismissal had already been passed (at least it did not appear from the pleadings).
In this regard we may refer to the affidavit-in-opposition filed on behalf of CISF Authorities.
On perusal of the said affidavit it would appear that the respondent authority did not indicate as to what step they had taken for his medical treatment at Madras in terms of the order passed in the second writ petition.
It was also not communicated to him as to whether he was allotted any official accommodation at Madras.
In the first writ petition the authorities were directed to consider his prayer for medical treatment and the same was refused before the order was communicated.
When this Court directed reconsideration the authority reiterated what was earlier observed by them.
10.
We are also not oblivion of the fact that the original writ petitioner being a member of the disciplined Force was obliged to carry on each and every direction of the Force including the order of transfer.
It is not a case made out on behalf of CISF Authorities in their affidavit that such ailment was put forward as an excuse to avoid the order of transfer.
In this regard we may refer to the letter dated May 19, 1995 appearing at page 103-104 of the Paper Book wherein the authorities rejected the representation of the petitioner after considering the same in terms of the Court order.
No plausible reason was assigned as to why his prayer for escort could not be considered.
It was contended that since he was not physically unfit or handicapped he could not be given any permission for a travelling assistant/escort.
It was not his case that he was physically handicapped.
He was suffering from ailment.
The authority did not come to a conclusion that his ailment was not as such that he could not proceed alone.
This would only reflect the non-application of mind by the authority.
In the said letter he was also asked to vacate the quarter which according to the authority he was occupying unauthorisedly as he stood released from his original posting.
11.
The learned Single Judge did not consider the aspect from this angle.
It was never the contention of the authority that his ailment was a fake one.
The original petitioner being a member of the disciplined Force was obliged to maintain the discipline of the Force and at the same time the authority was also obliged to look after the interest and welfare of the members of the Force.
We are constrained to say that the authorities did not extend such help to the writ petitioner and proceeded to maintain their stand as they took while rejecting his representation before passing of the order in the first writ petition.
12.
Let us now come to the final order of dismissal which was under challenge in the writ petition.
The final order of dismissal dated December 7, 1996 is appearing at page 76-79 of the Paper Book.
On perusal of the final order of dismissal it appears that the issue of ailment was not at all considered in the final order of dismissal.
It is true that the writ petitioner did not attend the enquiry proceeding.
The enquiry proceeding was held ex parte.
The authority even did not care to mention about his representation which he was making consistently to the authorities.
The authority proceeded on the basis that being a member of the disciplined Force he was supposed to join his transferred post.
He was supposed to vacate his official accommodation at his original place of posting.
Hence, such act on the part of the petitioner was unbecoming of a member of the Force and as such he was dismissed from service.
The disciplinary authority also did not mention about the earlier writ proceedings as also the orders passed from time to time by this Court.
13.
We are constrained to observe that the Authority was bent upon to dismiss him from service creating much inconvenience as they could to the original writ petitioner and his family members.
The learned Single Judge, in our view, should have approached the issue from this angle.
14.
The learned Single Judge considered the writ petition at a stage when the writ petitioner died untimely death as a result of prolonged ailment.
Even if we set aside the order of dismissal we would not be in a position to reinstate him in service as he is no more in this world.
The learned Judge in such circumstances should have considered the issues of compassionate appointment to save the family.
15.
In the result the appeal succeeds.
The judgment and order of the learned Single Judge dated February 6, 2004 is set aside.
The order of dismissal dated December 7, 1996 is quashed and set aside.
The respondent authorities are directed to treat the writ petitioner in service as on the date of his death and extend all post death benefits to his family members.
The original writ petitioner would, however, be entitled to 50% back wages upto the said date.
Such post death benefit be extended to the appellants within a period of four (4) weeks from date.
16.
The daughters of the original writ petitioner would be entitled to apply for compassionate appointment subject to eligibility with regard to age and qualification.
In case such applications are made, the authority would sympathetically consider the same for compassionate appointment of at least one of the family members so that the family could be saved from precarious condition.
The writ petitioner was out of service since 1996 till he passed away.
The family must be suffering acute financial stringency.
Considering such aspect we would expect that the authorities would sympathetically consider the prayer of the family for compassionate appointment of at least one of the dependents as early as possible.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy would be given to the parties, if applied for.
Tapan Mukherjee, J - I agree.
Appeal allowed.