This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 22nd July, 1999 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby and whereunder the prayer of the writ petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground has been rejected.
2.
The appellants/petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 herein are the widow and the second son of the deceased head teacher of a Primary School in the Murshidabad District.
The husband of the appellant No. 1 died in harness on 4th March, 1993.
The widow of the said deceased teacher, namely, the appellant No. 1 herein submitted an application on 1st September, 1999 for appointment of her son in place of her deceased husband on compassionate ground.
Such prayer was rejected by the Murshidabad District Primary School Council on the ground that the son of the said appellant No. 1 was not qualified under the rules at the relevant point of time.
Thereafter, the appellant No. 1 again submitted an application after a couple of year on 7th July, 1997 praying for appointment of her second son in place of her deceased husband on compassionate ground since her said son, namely, the appellant No. 2 herein had acquired the requisite qualification in terms of the prescribed Rules by that time.
3.
The Murshidabad District Primary School Council by written communication dated 4th August, 1997 informed the appellant No. 1 that the said prayer for appointment of her second son on compassionate ground cannot be entertained under the Rules as the application has been submitted after the prescribed period of two years from the date of death of her concerned teacher, namely, the deceased husband of the appellant No. 1.
4.
Mr. Milan Bhattacharyya, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellants submits that the respondent Murshidabad District Primary School Council authorities wrongly and illegally rejected the prayer of the appellant No. 1 for appointment of her son in place of her deceased husband on compassionate ground ignoring the fact that her son acquired the requisite qualification.
Mr. Bhattacharyya, urged before this Court that the time limit of two years as mentioned in the Rule 14(a) of the Recruitment and Leave Rules cannot be made applicable in respect of the candidate who did not possess the requisite qualification at the time of death of the concerned teacher.
According to Mr. Bhattacharyya, two years time is applicable only in respect of the candidates possessing requisite qualification at the time of death of the deceased primary school teacher and not in respect of other candidates like the petitioner who did not possess the requisite qualification at the time of death of the deceased teacher.
5.
Mr. Bhattacharyya also cited the following decision in support of his aforesaid arguments -  a) (2000) 9 SCC.
195 paras 5 & 6.  b) 2000(2) CLJ.
108.  c) 2004(2) CLJ (CAL) 52 para 53.
Rule 14(a) of the said Recruitment and Leave Rules in respect of the Primary School Teachers in West Bengal is set out hereunder :  "14.
Appointment on compassionate ground.
The Council may appoint primary teachers with the approval of the Director on compassionate ground in the following cases where in the opinion of the Council, the cases deserved compassionate consideration : (a) when a teacher dies in harness before the date of his superannuation leaving a family which, in the opinion of the Council, shall be in extreme economic hardship.
(1) the unemployed widowed wife, or (2) the unemployed son, or (3) the unemployed unmarried daughter of the deceased primary teacher possessing required educational qualifications as laid down in sub-rules (a) and (b) of rule 6 and found eligible to teach, may make within two years from the date of such death a prayer in writing to the Council for appointment as primary teacher on compassionate ground, provided that only one member of a deceased primary teacher's family may be appointed on compassionate consideration."
6.
Undisputedly, the appellant No. 1 submitted an Application praying for appointment on compassionate ground for her son in place of her deceased husband within the prescribed time period of two years on 1st September, 1994 which was rejected by the Murshidabad District Primary School Council by written communication dated 17th November, 1994 on the ground that the said son of the appellant No. 1 was not possessing required qualification under the Rules.
It is true that the said son acquired the requisite qualification afterwards and the appellant No. 1 subsequently also claimed appointment on compassionate ground for her said son but the authorities of the Murshidabad District Primary School Council refused to consider the aforesaid prayer of the appellant No. 1 on the ground that such claim has been made after the prescribed time period of two years.
The appointment of compassionate ground can be given under Rule 14(a) when a teacher dies in harness before the date of her superannuation leaving a family in extreme economic hardship.
7.
It has also been provided in the Rules that such unemployed wife, or unemployed son, or unemployed unmarried daughter of the deceased Primary School Teacher may make such application within two years from the death of the said Primary School Teacher provided the said wife, unemployed son or unemployed unmarried daughter possess required educational qualification.
In the aforesaid Rule 14(a), it has specifically provided that the application should be submitted by the widowed wife, unemployed son or unemployed unmarried daughter having requisite qualification within the prescribed time limit of two years from the death of the deceased primary school teacher and in the present case, the appellant No. 1 herein submitted an application claiming appointment on compassionate ground for her son within a period of two years but the said unemployed son did not possess the required educational qualification at that relevant time.
8.
Rule 14(a) has specifically provided that the unemployed widowed wife, or unemployed son or the unemployed unmarried daughter having requisite qualification under the Rule may make application for appointment on compassionate ground within the prescribed time limit of two years and, therefore, the appellant No. 1 herein is not entitled to claim appointment on compassionate ground after prescribed time limit of two years from the date of her deceased husband.
9.
The respondent Council duly considered the application filed by the appellant No. 1 herein within the prescribed time limit and rightly rejected the same as her son did not possess the required educational qualification at the relevant time.
In the event, the said son could acquire the requisite qualification within the prescribed time limit of two years then the said appellant No. 1 could renew her prayer within the prescribed time limit of two years but the said appellant No. 1 cannot renew her prayer by submitting the fresh application after prescribed time limit of two years from the death of her deceased husband on the plea that her said son acquired requisite qualification at a subsequent date after the prescribed time limit.
10.
In the case of Syed Khadim Hussain v. State of Bihar and Ors, reported in (2006) 9 SCC page 195, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the claim for appointment on a different perspective.
In the aforesaid case, widow had applied for appointment within the prescribed time but it was rejected for the reasons that the application was not submitted in prescribed proforma.
Subsequently, the son submitted an application for compassionate appointment while he was aged only 13 years and 3 months but the said application was rejected after the period of six years by the concerned authority while the said son crossed 18 years.
The rejection of the application of the said son was considered not justified by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as at the time of said rejection the said son had attained above 18 years of age.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, however, did not consider the issue whether the appointment can be given on compassionate ground in violation of the prescribed Rules.
11.
In the present case, the respondent Murshidabad District Primary School Council following the rules relating to appointment on compassionate ground, namely, Rule 14(a), rejected the prayer of the appellants as the appellant No. 1 initially although filed application within the prescribed time limit, her son then did not possess the required educational qualification and subsequently when her son acquired the requisite qualification the prescribed time period for submitting the application for appointment on compassionate ground had admittedly expired.
The respondent Council cannot give appointment to the appellant No. 2 on compassionate ground in violation of the prescribed rules and the aforesaid decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court therefore, cannot be of any help to the appellants herein in the facts of the present case.
12.
Mr. Bhattacharyya also placed reliance on other two decisions of this Hon'ble Court.
In the case of Khadeja Bibi & Ors v. State of West Bengal & Ors, the learned Single Judge specifically held that the prescribed time limit of two years in the Rule is directory and not mandatory one.
We are unable to accept the aforesaid decision of the learned Single Judge as we find that under Rule 14(a) unemployed widowed wife of unemployed son or unemployed unmarried daughter of the deceased primary teacher having the requisite educational qualification may make application for appointment as primary teacher on compassionate ground within the specific time limit of two years period from the date of death of the concerned primary school teacher.
The aforesaid time limit has been specifically mentioned in Rule 14(a) and the same, in our opinion, cannot be ignored and/or avoided under any circumstances.
13.
In the case of Swapan Lahiri v. The State of West Bengal & Ors, reported in 2004(2) CLJ Cal, page 52 cited by Mr. Bhattacharya learned Counsel of the appellant, all the conditions for appointment on compassionate ground were fulfilled and the same has been recorded in Paragraph 53 of the said judgment.
14.
The relevant extract from the aforesaid decision is quoted hereunder :  "53.
Since, in my opinion, the petitioner herein, was appointed as lower-division-clerk in the said college on the basis of a proper resolution upon consideration of the entire facts and circumstances of the case by the authority of the said College, being the employer of the deceased husband of the petitioner as the petitioner fulfilled all the conditions for appointment on compassionate ground."
15.
In the present case, undisputedly, the appellant did not fulfill the prescribed conditions as mentioned in the Rule 14(a) of the Recruitment and Leave Rules for appointment on compassionate ground and therefore, the aforesaid decision cannot be made applicable in the facts of the present case.
16.
Mrs. Santi Das, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Murshidabad District Primary School Council referred to and relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Sanjay Kumar v. State of Bihar and Ors, reported in AIR 2000 SC 2782 wherein the Hon'ble the Supreme Court has specifically held that vacancy cannot be reserved for the dependant of a deceased employee till the said dependant attains majority after number of years.
17.
The relevant extract from the aforesaid decision is quoted hereunder :  "This Court has held in a number of cases that compassionate appointment is intended to enable the family of the deceased employee to tide over sudden crisis resulting due to death of the bread earner who had left the family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
In fact such a view has been expressed in the very decision cited by the petitioner in Director of Education v. Pushpendra Kumar supra.
It is also significant to notice that on the date when the first application was made by the petitioner on 2688, the petitioner was minor and was not eligible for appointment.
This is conceded by the petitioner.
There cannot be reservation of a vacancy till such time as the petitioner becomes a major after a number of years, unless there is some specific provisions.
The very basis of compassionate appointment is to see that the family gets immediate relief."
The aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court is very much applicable in the facts of the present case.
18.
It is well settled by the various decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that compassionate appointment cannot be granted after lapse of the reasonable period, which has been specified in the prescribed rules.
In the present case, in terms of Rule 14(a), application for appointment should be submitted within two years from the date of death of the concerned teacher by the unemployed widowed wife or unemployed son or unemployed unmarried daughter possessing the required educational qualifications.
19.
The respondents-Murshidabad District Primary School Council authorities, therefore, cannot allow the appellants to submit application claiming appointment on compassionate ground after the prescribed time limit of two years from the date of the deceased Primary School Teacher in view of the fact that the appellant No. 2 acquired the required qualification after the prescribed time period.
20.
For the reasons mentioned hereinabove and considering the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sanjay Kumar (Supra), we are of the opinion that the Murshidabad District Primary School Council authorities have rightly rejected the claim of the appellants for appointment on compassionate ground.
21.
Accordingly, we do not find any illegality and/or irregularity in the impugned decision of the learned Single Judge and, therefore, we affirm the judgment and order of the said learned Single Judge and dismiss this appeal being devoid of any merit.
22.
There is, however, no order as to costs.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties as expeditiously as possible.
Appeal dismissed.