IA Ansari, J - By making the present writ petition, the writ petitioner, who is currently working as an Assistant Engineer, PWD, Mayong Rural Road Sub-Division, has prayed for setting aside and quashing the order, dated 392005, whereby the petitioner is sought to be transferred from the said Road Sub-Division to Silchar Building Circle, PWD, and commanding the State respondents/authorities concerned to let the petitioner continue at the said Road Sub-Division.
2.
In a narrow compass, the case of the petitioner may be described as follows :  While serving as an Assistant Engineer at Tongla Road Sub- Division, the petitioner was on 1032000, posted, on deputation, to Snowyeee Mountains Engineering Corporation at Mangaldoi.
On his return from deputation, the petitioner was posted, on 1112004, at North Lakhimpur Roads Division and the petitioner was transferred therefrom within barely eight months ie on 292004, to Mangaldoi Road Division and within a year, the petitioner, again, vide the impugned order, dated 392005, aforementioned, stands transferred to Silchar.
The petitioner, has thus, been subjected to frequent transfers.
The petitioner's transfer, vide the impugned order, to Silchar was not in the public interest, but to accommodate the private respondent, namely, respondent No. 5, who on his return back to the PWD from deputation, is sought to be accommodated as per his convenience at Mayong.
There is, in fact, no element of public interest involved in the said impugned transfer, the same is arbitrary, illegal and motivated by vested interest.
The petitioner's present transfer is the outcome of political influence inasmuch as one MLA and one Minister had recommended the private respondent's transfer to Mayong.
The impugned order of transfer is vitiated by malice, caprice and colourable exercise of power.
The impugned order of transfer is, thus illegal and contrary to the policy of transfer holding the field.
3.
When the writ petition was moved, on 7.9.2005, the Court, as the record reveals, directed on 7.9.2005, that the parties shall maintain status quo as on date as regard their places of posting and when the matter came up, on 1992005, for orders the Court noticed that the original file relating to the transfer of the petitioner had become untraceable and a new file had been opened in this regard.
The Court, therefore, directed, on 1992005, as the case record reveals, that the State respondents shall explain as to how the proposal of transfer could be mooted in the present file on the basis of the earlier file, which is said to have been missing.
4.
The State respondents have resisted the writ petition by filing their affidavit in opposition, their case being, in brief, thus: The impugned order has been passed in public interest and in administrative exigencies.
It is for the proper authority to decide as to who will be posted where and at what point of time.
The Petitioner's personal inconvenience, can under no circumstances, override public interest and administrative exigencies, for transfer is an incidence of service.
The impugned transfer order has been issued with the approval of the Minister of State, PWD, who is the competent authority.
The petitioner's allegation that his transfer is contrary to the relevant transfer policy is vague.
The petitioner's allegations with regard to political persons having interfered in the making of the impugned transfer orders are vague and deserve to be ignored.
No question of mala fide in transferring the petitioner could be shown by the petitioner.
The proposal for transfer of the petitioner was processed, but as the file was misplaced and could not be located, the proposal was recommended in the present file and the same has been approved by Minister of State, PWD.
In the face of these facts, the transfer order cannot be said to be in colourable exercise of powers and the present writ petition may, therefore, be dismissed.
5.
The private respondent has resisted the writ petition by filing his affidavit in opposition the case of the private respondents being, in brief, that on his return from deputation, he had applied, on 16.5.2005, to the authorities concerned for providing him with posting in his parent department, i.e., PWD and accordingly, he has been posted, vide the impugned order, dated 392005, as Assistant Engineer, PWD, Mayong Rural Sub Division.
The petitioner's transfer was not at the behest of political persons and this respondent has not used political influence for obtaining his transfer to Mayong.
The allegation regarding involvement of one MLA and one Minister in pursuing of the present order of transfer was not within the knowledge of this respondent and when this respondent enquired into the contents of the letter of recommendation, he was surprised to learn that his posting, at Mayong, was recommended in the interest of local public.
It is, thus, a mere co-incidence that this respondent applied for posting in PWD and the MLA and the Minister, on the pressure of the local public, recommended the respondent's name for posting at Mayong.
6.
I have heard Mr. MK Choudhury, learned Senior counsel for the petitioner, and Mr.
I Choudhury, learned Standing Counsel, for the State respondents.
I have also heard Mr. AK Goswami, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 5  7.
Upon hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the pleadings of the parties concerned and the relevant materials on record, what attracts my attention, most prominently, is that despite a clear direction given by this court, on 1992005, the State respondents have not been able to convincingly explain as to why and how the file in which the petitioner's transfer to Mayong was, at first, initiated got misplaced.
In fact, the State respondents are completely silent that any action has been initiated against anyone for misplacement of the original file.
8.
Bearing in mind the above aspect of the matter, when I look at the affidavit filed by the State respondents, what transpires is that the State respondents have emphatically denied the writ petitioner's allegation that the records pertaining to the present transfer would reveal that one MLA and one Minister had recommended the petitioner's transfer to accommodate the private respondent at his choiced place of posting.
Not contended with such a denial, the State respondents/authorities concerned have gone further and sworn an affidavit to the effect that the allegations of use of influence by the political persons to obtain transfer are vague and unsubstantiated.
The cat, however, comes out of the bag, when one closely scrutinizes, as against the averments so made by the State respondents, the affidavit of respondent No. 5.
Reacting to the allegations of use of political influence in the making of the impugned order of transfer of the petitioner and the recommendations made in favour of the respondent No.5 by one MLA and one Minister, the private respondent has this to say.
"That with regard to the allegation regarding involvement of the MLA and one Minister in the present transfer, your deponent begs to state that the said fact was totally out of the knowledge of your deponent.
When the deponent enquired into the contents of the letter of recommendation he was taken by surprise that his posting at Mayong was recommended in the interest of the local public which was accordingly consented by the Hon'ble Chief Minister.
It was a mere co-incidence that your deponent applied for posting in PWD and the MLA/Minister on the pressure of local public recommended his name, the fact which was totally out of your deponent's knowledge."
9.
The above averments made by the private respondent leave no room for doubt that the present impugned order was, indeed, initiated on the recommendations of the one MLA and one Minister.
It, thus, becomes transparent that the State respondents have tried to hoodwink the Court by opening a new file and their denial that no political influence played any role in the background of the passing of the impugned transfer order is completely false.
I was tempted to take penal action against the State respondents for making false averments, yet I restrain myself from doing so and rest the matter with a warning to the State respondents to be careful in future and any such lapse, if noticed, in future, will lead to serious consequences.
10.
What is also impossible to ignore is the fact that the records pertaining to the transfer of the petitioner, produced by the State respondents, give no reason whatsoever as to why the petitioner has been transferred from Mayong and the private respondent has been posted there.
True it is that there is no legal obligation, on the part of the State respondents, to disclose, while transferring a person, as to why the respondents/authorities concerned deemed it necessary to transfer the person concerned in public interest.
However, when an order of transfer is impugned and when the order is under challenge before the writ Court, obligatory it was, on the part of the State respondents, to disclose to the Court the reason(s), which had led to the passing of the order of transfer.
A mere rural use of the expression, such as, "in the interest of public notice," while passing the transfer order, is really of no consequence in a case of the present nature, for records reveal that without assigning any reason or even stating that the proposal for, transfer of the petitioner from Mayong was in public interest, proposal was initiated, file moved and the Minister of State, PWD, approved the proposal.
It was only, while the formal transfer/posting order was issued on 392005, that the words "in the interest of public service" have been imported into the order of transfer.
Use of such words "in the interest of public; service" in the case of a public servant has really no meaning if not even a semblance of public interest could be disclosed by the respondents.
In fact, to a pointed query made by this Court, Mr.
I Choudhury, learned Standing Counsel, could assign no reason as to why the petitioner has been transferred to Silchar from Mayong within a period of one year.
Though the petitioner has not referred to the date of the Circular, which governs the policy of transfer in the State necessary it is to remind the State respondents that in Dayal Das v. State of Assam, reported in 2002(2) GLT 109, this Court, while in seisin of the policy of transfer of officials in terms of the Office Memorandum, dated 19992, of the Government of Assam, Department of Personnel (B), observed that when the public interest demands that an officer be transferred from a place before completion of three years, proper and justifiable grounds may be recorded, in writing for the transfer and the orders are issued only after receiving the approval of the Chief Minister for such a transfer.
In fact, faced with the same kind of situation, as the present one, the Court, in Dayal Das (supra), observed as follows :  "4......
The records produced before this Court show that no reasons whatsoever have been recorded justifying the transfer of the petitioner from Kohora Soil Conservation Division, Kohora or from Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council where he had not completed the period of three years.
The records produced before the Court also do not indicate that the aforesaid transfer of the petitioner before completion of three years service from his place of posting was placed for approval of the Chief Minister.
The guidelines for transfer of officers in the office memorandum dated 19th September, 92 may not have statutory force, but are checks against arbitrary transfers and deviations from the said guidelines may result in an arbitrary transfers.
For these reasons, I am of the view that the transfer of the petitioner by the impugned notification dated 2772001 should not be given effect to till the justification of his transfer with grounds are recorded in writing and these are placed before the Chief Minister for approval."
11.
Following the decision in Dayal Das (supra), the Department of Personnel (B), Government of Assam, has issued memorandum No. ABP 116/04/4 dated 422002, reiterating that the guidelines issued vide OM dated 1992002, aforementioned, should be strictly followed.
12.
The writ petitioner was therefore, not wrong when he agitated, in the present writ petition, that he had been transferred without expiry of a period of three years from his present place of posting without taking consent of the Chief Minister and, hence, the transfer order could only be made by recording proper and justificable grounds.
13.
I may also point out that Mr. Choudhury has referred to State of Assam v. Dilip Kumar Das, reported in 2003(2) GLT 151, wherein a Division Bench of this Court observed to the effect that while considering transfer orders, writ Court does not sit over the judgment of the authority concerned and that the Court will be extremely slow in interfering with the discretion exercised by the authorities concerned.
The case of Dilip Kumar Das (supra) was a case in which having stated as to what the settled principle of law, on the subject of transfer is, the Division Bench observed, "the main bone of contention of the respondent/writ petitioner is that his transfer is being effected without there being any administrative exigency and thus it takes the shape of favour, given to a particular individual without there being any rhyme or reason.
To get over our doubts about the exercise of the powers of transfer of the petitioner we directed the counsel for the appellants to produce the record wherein the decision for transfer has been taken."
14.
From the observations made in Dilip Kumar Das (supra), it is more than abundantly clear that the Division Bench, to get over its doubt, did look into the records and satisfied itself that the transfer was in the interest of public interest.
In the case at hand, I have already indicated above, that there is not even an iota of material on record to show as to why the impugned transfer has been made.
Far from this, the accepted position is that the impugned transfer has been mooted at the be of political persons, who were unconnected with the Department concerned.
There can, therefore be no escape from the conclusion that the impugned transfer has been made in colourable exercise of powers and it is for this reason that the records are absolutely silent as to why the proposal for transfer of the petitioner from Mayong to Silchar was mooted without assigning any reason whatsoever and as to why the proposal was approved without making any query or without assigning any reason for the approval.
15.
What, thus, crystallizes from the above discussion is that no element of public interest could be shown in passing the impugned order, rather the impugned transfer order suffers from colourable exercise of power, mala fide, arbitrary and irrational.
Such an order shall, if allowed to stand good on record, cause serious miscarriage of justice and the confidence of the general public in the ability of the writ Courts to check arbitrary, irrational and illegal use of powers by the State and its functionaries would be vigorously shaken if this Court does not step in.
It is, therefore, in the larger public interest that this Court interferes with the present transfer order.
16.
In the result and for the foregoing reasons, this writ petition succeeds and the impugned transfer order, dated 392005, aforementioned is hereby set aside and quashed.
The respondents/authorities concerned are, however, left at liberty to pass necessary order(s) as regards the transfer of the respondent No. 5.
17.
Let the records produced by the State respondents be returned.
18.
With the above observations and directions, this writ petition shall stand disposed of.
19.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.