Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the fact that since her name has not been sponsored by the employment exchange, she is unable to participate in the selection process which has been initiated by the institute (represended by the fifth, sixth and seventh respondents) for appointing a member of the non-teaching staff.
2.
There is no dispute that the recruitment process initiated by the institute is governed by the West Bengal Schools (Recruitment of Non-teaching Staff) Rules, 2005 framed under the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005.
Provisions in r. 8(5) of those rules are as follows :  "(5)(a) On receipt of the sanction from the District Inspector of Schools, the school authority shall make a requisition to the employment exchange for sponsoring within forty-five days, names of the candidates.
(b) In case of receipt of a non-availability certificate from the employment exchange, the school authority shall, under intimation to the District Inspector of Schools, make an advertisement with complete postal address of the school and other relevant particulars in a daily newspaper having circulation throughout the State."
The admitted position is that on receipt of sanction from the district inspector of schools the institute authority made the requisition to the employment exchanges for sponsoring names of eligibly candidates for the post in question, and that name of the petitioner was not sponsored by any exchange, though she had registered her name quite a long ago.
3.
Counsel argues that notwithstanding the provisions in r. 8 (5) of the statutory recruitment rules, in view of the two apex court decisions in Excise Superintendent, Malkapatnam v. KBN Visweshwara Rao & Ors., (1996) 6 SCC 216 and Raj.
Kumar & Ors. v. Shakti Raj & Ors., (1997) 9 SCC 527, the institute, in addition to making requisition to the exchanges, was under the obligation to publish employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates.
The rules, and particularly provisions in r. 8(5), are not under challenge.
4.
By referring me to the apex court decision in Union of India & Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors., (1987) 3 SCC 308, counsel argues that proposition laid down in that case that statutory rules confirming source of eligible candidates for a post only to the employment exchanges would not offend arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution, was impliedly overruled by the subsequent apex court decision in Excise Superintendent case.
He is unable to say whether the latter decision was given considering any statutory recruitment rules confining the source of eligible candidates for the post only to the employment exchanges.
5.
He says that the decision in Excise Superintendent was relied on in Raj Kumar & Ors., which was a decision given considering statutory recruitment rules.
He points out that though both the decisions (Union of India & Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors., and Excise Superintendent, Malkapatnam v. KBN Visweshwara Rao & Ors.) were referred to in Jaswant Singh & Ors. v. State of MP & Ors., (2002) 9 SCC 700, nothing was said in that case whether by the decision in Excise Superintendent the decision in N Hargopal was overruled in any manner.
He says that N Hargopal was noticed by the apex court again in.
Bibhudatta Mohanty & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., (2002) 4 SCC 16.
6.
1 wanted him to consider the apex court decision in Arun Tewari & Ors. v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak Sangh & Ors., (1998) 2 SCC 332, and after considering the judgment he still says that decision in Union of India & Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors. was impliedly overruled by the decision in Excise Superintendent.
I am of the view that he is not right.
The decision in Union of India & Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors. was referred to by the apex court in the subsequent decisions, and in Arun Tewari & Ors. v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak Sangh it was clearly observed that in Excise Superintendent case the decision in Union of India Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors. had only been distinguished.
7.
Counsel has drawn my attention to the five judge bench decision of this court in Rabindra Nath Mahata v. State of West Bengal & Ors. 2005 (3) CHN 337, and by reading out para 26 of the report he has commented that since in the present case we are concerned with statutory recruitment rules, that decision may not be of any real assistance in deciding the question,.
I agree with him.
That decision was given in the context of guidelines which had no statutory force.
There it was not held that even if statutory rules confined the source of eligible candidates for a particular post only to the employment exchanges, the employer would be under the obligation to publish the employment notice in addition to making requisition to the employment exchanges.
8.
As to the question that has arisen for decision in the case.
I have, not been shown any authority which says that even when the statutory rules confine the source of eligible candidates only to the employment exchanges, the employer would be under the obligation to publish employment notice inviting applications from all, in addition to making requisition to the employment exchanges in compliance with the statutory rules.
Such a proposition, in my reading and understanding of the two relied on decisions, was not laid down by their Lordships of the apex court in those cases.
9.
In the-present case the statutory rules are very clear that employment notice inviting applications from open market candidates is to be published by the institute only if the employment exchanges give non-availability (of eligible candidate) certificate in response to its requisition for sponsoring names of eligible candidates for the post in question.
It is therefore clear that if the institute is asked to publish the employment notice even before receipt of non-availability certificate from the employment exchanges, then such direction will be clearly contrary to the recruitment rules, and that-the court order will amount to asking the institute to violate the recruitment rules.
10.
I do not see any reason to make such an order simply because counsel for the petitioner argues that if the procedure prescribed is to be followed, then a candidate registering himself with the employment exchange may not get a call even during his entire life time.
He wants me to give a harmonious construction to the provisions of the rule keeping in view the provisions in s. 4(4) of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
According to him the provisions in r. 8 (5) of the rules governing the present recruitment process are in conflict with the provisions in s. 4(4) of the central legislation.
11.
I am unable to agree with him.
Such statutory rules as have fallen for consideration in this case were tested by their Lordships of the apex court in the context of the provisions of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 in the case of Union of India & Ors. v. N Hargopal & Ors., and it was held by their Lordships that statutory recruitment rules confining the source of eligible candidates only to the employment exchanges would not offend arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
12.
For these reasons, I am of the view that the petitioner, since her name has not been sponsored by the employment exchange in terms of the statutory recruitment rules, is not entitled to participate in the selection process.
I am therefore unable to give her any relief in exercise of my writ powers.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
13.
Urgent certified xerox copy and also copy duly authenticated by AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.