Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner has challenged the whole West Bengal Primary School Teachers Recruitment Rules, 2001.
In course of argument counsel submits that the challenge is actually to r. 8 of those rules, not to the whole rules.
2.
Counsel argues that provisions in r. 8 are liable to be struck down on the ground that they are contrary to-the apex court decision in Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and Ors, (1996) 6 SCC 216, and the five judge bench decision of this court in Sri Rabindra Nath Mahato v. State of West Bengal & Ors, 2005 (2) CLJ (Cal) 161.
His argument is that the previous apex court decision in Union of India & Ors v. N Hargopal & Ors, (1987) 3 SCC 308 was overruled by the decision given in the case of Excise Superintendent, Malkapatnam.
His contention is that in the five judge bench decision of this court it was held that even if the statutory recruitment rules confined the source of eligible candidates for a post only to the employment exchanges, the employer would be under the obligation.
to publish employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates from the open market.
3.
On the basis of those authorities he advances his argument that in the instant case the provisions in the rule providing that the district primary school councils established under the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 will be under the obligation to obtain names of eligible candidates only from the employment exchanges being contrary to the apex court decision and the five judge bench decision of this court, are liable to be struck down.
His argument is that the petitioner, being eligible in every respect, is entitled to participate in the selection process, since art. 16 of the constitution guaranteed his fundamental right to be treated equally with other eligible candidates for employment opportunity in the council:  4.
In my view, there is no merit in the contention.
I am unable to see how the apex court decisions cited to me do apply to the present case.
It was not held in those cases that statutory recruitment rules casting obligation on the employer to obtain names of the eligible candidates only from the employment exchanges would be violative of any provisions of the constitution.
In Union of India & Ors v. N Hargopal & Ors it was rather held that such rules casting such obligation would not offend art. 16.
I am unable to agree that decision was overruled in Excise Superintendent case which was decided on its peculiar facts without laying down any such proposition as is argued before me.
In my understanding of the law that exists today, for confining the, source of eligible candidates for a post only to the employment exchanges, it cannot be said that such rules offend any provision of the constitution.
5.
I do not see either how the five judge bench decision of this court can support the case of the petitioner.
That decision was given considering the recruitment procedure issued by the director of school education in exercise of his powers available under the relevant management rules.
It was held that the guidelines were not statutory in nature.
It is to be noted that in para 44 of the five-judge bench decision their Lordships had the occasion to consider the effect of the division bench decision of this court in Malda District Primary School Council & Anr. v. Md Faridur Rahaman & Ors, 2001 (1) CHN 204.
That was a case dealing with the recruitment rules for primary school teachers casting obligation to obtain names of eligible candidates only from the employment exchanges.
The division bench of this court found nothing wrong with the rules.
6.
Counsel has lastly argued that by amending the rules the obligation previously cast on the employment exchanges to sponsor names according to enrolment seniority of the candidates was removed, and that as a result, it is not be possible for the petitioner to know the basis on which the employment officer exercised the power for sponsoring the names.
I do not see any merit whatsoever in the contention.
According to the existing government circular, the employment officers are to sponsor names only according to enrollment seniority.
In any case, that seniority has nothing to do, since the council is to select purely on merit.
7.
For these reasons, I am unable to give any relief to, the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for cost in it.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order and also copy authenticated by AR (C) or A.C.O.
shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.