Hima Kohli, J - By this common judgment, both the writ petitions are proposed to be disposed of as both of them arise out of an award date 4th December, 1998 passed by the Labour Court respondent No. 2 herein in ID No. 568/1994, whereunder it was held that the termination of the workman, respondent No. 1, in WP (C) No. 2771/1999, was illegal and unjustified and accordingly he was directed to be reinstated without any back wages.
While the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) (hereinafter referred to as `the Institute') has challenged that part of the award by which it was held that the termination of the workman was illegal and unjustified, by way of WP (C) No. 2771/1999, the concerned workman has challenged the award to the extent that he was held not to be entitled to any back wages, though he was ordered to be reinstated, by way of WP (C) No. 5569/1992.
2.
Facts relevant to dispose of the petition are as follows.
The workman was working with the Institute as Driver since 1st August, 1984 and continued to work as such till 13th August.
1987.
White it is the case of the Institute that the workman had worked for the said period with usual breaks and was a dally wage worker, the workman states that he had rendered uninterrupted and continuous service and that the job for which he was engaged was of permanent nature.
An order of termination was communicated to the workman orally on 14th August, 1987 and he was told that his services were no longer required by the Institute.
On 29th August, 1987, the workman made a representation to the Institute for reinstatement in service.
Meanwhile, one Shri Subey Singh who was working with the Institute as a `Cleaner', was appointed as a `Driver'.
Having received no positive reply from the Institute, the workman raised an industrial dispute before the Conciliation Officer, and on failure of the conciliation proceedings, the matter was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication, vide reference dated 1st July, 1988.
After pleadings were complete, evidence was adduced by both the parties and by the award dated 4th December, 1988, the Labour Court decided the issues in favour of the workman and against the Institute and accordingly ordered for reinstatement of the workman, without back wages.
It is the aforesaid award of the Labour Court, which Is the subject matter of both the writ petitions.
3.
Learned counsel for the Institute sought to point out various loopholes in the impugned award.
The first contention raised by him was that the Labour Court could not have entertained the matter at all, in view of the fact that the Institute being a hospital, is not an "Industry" under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter in short referred to as `the Act') and therefore neither was the respondent No. 1 a workman, nor was the dispute raised by him an industrial dispute, and consequently the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the claim of the workman.
It was stated that the AIIMS is an `Institute' of national importance and its objects and functions are purely of research, education etc. and it is not an 'industry' under the Act.
Reliance was placed on pares 42 and 43 in the case of State of UP v. Jai Bir Singh, reported as 2005(3) SCT 143 : (2005)5 SCC 1, where a three- Judge bench of the Supreme Court, accepted the view expressed by the six-Judge bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Safdarjung Hospital v. Kuldip Singh Sethi, reported as (1970)1 SCC 735 and referred the judgment of the seven Judge bench of the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa, (1978)2 SCC 213, to a larger bench for reconsideration.
It was urged by the counsel for the Institute that in view of Safdarjung Hospital's case (supra) having been affirmed, and the Bangalore Water Supply's case (supra) having been referred to a larger bench for reconsideration, the Institute can no longer be deemed to be an 'industry' within the meaning of the Act.
The Institute sought to rely on the following paras of the judgment in the case of Jai Bir Singh (2005 Lab IC 2092) (supra) :  "41.
In the Bangalore Water case, not all the Judges in interpreting the definition clause invoked the doctrine of noscitur-a-sociis.
We are inclined to accept the view expressed by the six judges Bench in the case of the Management of Safdarjung Hospital (supra) that keeping in view the other provisions of the Act and words used in the definition clause, although 'profit motive' is irrelevant, in order to encompass the activity within the word `industry', the activity must be 'analogous to trade or business in a commercial sense'.
We also agree that the mere enumeration of 'public utility services' in Section 2(n) read with the First Schedule should not be held decisive.
Unless the public utility service answers the test of it being an 'industry' as defined in Clause (j) of Section 2, the enumeration of such public utility service in the First Schedule to the Act would not make it an 'industry'.
The six Judges also considered the inclusion of services such as hospitals and dispensaries as public utility services in the definition under Section 2(n) of the Act and rightly observed thus :- "When Parliament added the sixth clause under which other services could be brought within the protection afforded by the Act to public utility services, it did not intend that the entire concept of industry in the Act, could be ignored and anything brought in.
Therefore, it said that an industry could be declared to be a public utility service.
But what could be so declared had to be an industry in the first place."
The decision in the case of Management of Safdarjung Hospital (supra) was a unanimous decision of all the six Judges and we are inclined to agree with the following observations in the interpretation of the definition clause :-  "But in the collocation of the terms and their definitions these terms have a definite economic content of a particular type and on the authorities of this Court have been uniformly accepted as excluding professions and are only concerned with the production, distribution and consumption of wealth and the production and availability of material services.
Industry has thus been accepted to mean only trade and business, manufacture or undertaking analogous to trade or business for the production of material goods or wealth and material services."
The six Judges unanimously upheld the observations in Gymkhana Club case (1968 Lab IC 547) (supra) :-  ".........before the work engaged in can be described as an industry, it must bear the definite character of 'trade' or 'business' or 'manufacture' or `calling' or must be capable of being described as an undertaking resulting in material goods or material services".
42.
In construing the definition clause and determining its ambit, one has not to lose sight of the fact that in activities like hospitals and education, concepts like right of the workers to go on 'strike' or the employer's right to 'close down' and 'lay off' are not contemplated because they are services in which the motto is 'service to the community'.
If the patients or students are to be left to the mercy of the employer and employees exercising their rights at will, the very purpose of the service activity would be frustrated."
4.
The next argument advanced on behalf of the Institute was that, assuming but not conceding that the Institute was an `industry' within the meaning of the Act, still the burden to prove the same was on the workman and not on the Institute, which fact was overlooked by the Labour Court, while passing the impugned award.
In this regard, reliance was sought to be placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Gujarat and Ors v. Pratam Singh Narsinh Parmar, reported as 2001(2) SCT 1081 : 2001(9) SCC 713.
5.
Learned counsel for the Institute further submitted that the Labour Court ought to have taken into consideration the fact that the workman was merely employed on a daily wage basis and that the term of engagement of a daily wage worker starts with the day and ends with the day.
It was submitted that the services of the worker were terminated when his services were no longer required and when process of regular selection was contemplated.
It was stated that the recruitment was sought to be made through a proper process of selection made in consonance with the Recruitment Rules and it was mandatory for the candidates to be sponsored by an employment exchange and since the workman was not so sponsored, he could not be taken into service.
Reliance was placed on the following judgments to state that appointment to regular posts cannot be made by bypassing the constitutional scheme and that where recruitment rules existed, appointments ought to be made in accordance with the said rules and that there was no right vested in the daily wagers or contractual employees to claim regularization.
(i) Secretary, State of Karnataka v. Uma Devi, 2006(2) SCT 462 : 2006(4) SCC 1 : (AIR 2006 SC 1860); (ii) AIIMS Employees Union v. AIIMS and others, 1999(II) AD (Delhi) 866.
It was also submitted that the Labour Court failed to notice that even when a circular was issued for appointment to the same post, the workman never applied for the same.
6.
Per contra, learned counsel for the workman, supported the impugned award on all grounds except for the refusal to pay back wages.
On the question as to whether the Institute was an 'industry' or not within the meaning of the Act, it was submitted that in the case of Jai Bir Singh (2005 Lab IC 2092) (supra), a three-Judge bench of the Supreme Court had only referred the case of Bangalore Water Supply case (1978 Lab IC 467) (supra) to a larger bench, on which nothing further had taken place as the larger bench was yet to be constituted.
It was submitted that the workman cannot be kept in limbo to await the outcome of the reference in the Bangalore Water Supply case (supra).
It was also stated that since there was no stay on the operation of the judgment in the Bangalore Water Supply case, the same holds the field as on date, and in view of the same, the Institute is an 'industry', within the meaning of the Act.
7.
Learned counsel for the workman further argued that the Labour Court rightly arrived at the conclusion that the entire action of the Institute in terminating the services of the workman, was vitiated being mala fide and illegal.
It was stated that mala fide intentions of the management of the Institute was writ large in view of the fact that the termination order passed against the workman was not in writing, but was issued orally.
It was also stated that the very factum of appointing Shri Subey Singh, who was working as a cleaner with the Institute since 1962 and was much older to the concerned workman, as a driver in place of the workman was clearly illegal and tainted with mala fides.
8.
As against the contention of the Institute that the name of the workman was not sponsored by the employment exchange, and, therefore, he could not be appointed permanently against the post of the driver.
It was submitted by the counsel for the workman that same is not mandatory in case of recruitment to class IV posts.
Support was sought to be drawn from the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. N Hargopal and Others, reported as 1987(3) SCC 308.
9.
On the issue of payment of back wages, learned counsel for the workman urged that though no specific averment was made by the workman in his statement of claim to the effect that he was not gainfully employed during the period when his services stood terminated, but the attention of this Court was drawn to the prayer of the workman in his statement of claim, to state that directions therein were sought to reinstate the workman with continuity of service and full back wages for the intervening period along with other statutory benefits admissible under law, with costs.
Reliance was also placed on the deposition of the workman, during his cross-examination as recorded in the proceedings, wherein it was stated by him that he remained unemployed during the period of his termination and was being financially supported by his brother and father.
In support of his arguments, learned counsel for the workman sought to place reliance on a judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Allahabad Jal Sansthan v. Daya Shankar and Anr., reported as 2005(2) SCT 699 : (2005)5 SCC 124 where the Apex Court granted 50% back wages to the workman even in the absence of any specific averment to the effect that he had remained unemployed during the period of his termination.
10.
On the issue of payment of back wages, learned counsel for the Institute stated that the workman was not entitled to any back wages in view of the fact that back wages are neither the natural consequence, nor the automatic relief on the grant of reinstatement and the discretion with respect to the same lies with the Labour Court, and the said discretion is to be carefully exercised taking into account the facts and circumstances of each case.
In support of the said contentions, reliance was placed on the following judgments :  1.
AP SRTC and Another v. BS David Paul, 2006(1) SCT 648 : 2006(2) SCC 282 : (AIR 2006 SC 961); and  2.
UP SRTC v. Mitthu Singh, 2006(4) SCT 98 : 2006(7) SCC 180.
11.
I have heard the counsels for both the parties and have perused the material placed on record, including the impugned award and have given my careful consideration to all the issues raised by both the parties.
12.
So far as the first issue raised by the Institute to the effect that it is not an "industry" within the meaning of the Act, and, therefore, neither could the workman raise an industrial dispute, nor could the Labour Court entertain the same for want of jurisdiction is concerned, the same is devoid of merits.
Undoubtedly, the three-Judge bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Jai Bir Singh (2005 Lab IC 2092) (supra) has shown its inclination towards the law that was laid down in the Safdarjung Hospital case (1970 Lab IC 1170) (supra), wherein it was held that "hospital" is not an industry within the meaning of the Act, and accordingly referred the case of Bangalore Water Supply case (1978 Lab IC 467) (supra) which laid down a very wide definition of the term "industry" so as to bring hospitals also within the ambit of the Act, to a larger bench of the Supreme Court, however, in the absence of any stay imposed on the operation of the judgment in Bangalore Water Supply case, the same does not lose its precedential value and still holds the field.
As a result, the Labour Court, as also this Court as on date, is bound by the law laid dawn therein.
In view thereof, the Labour Court cannot be faulted in holding that Institute is an "industry" within the meaning of the Act.
13.
The plea taken by the learned counsel for the Institute that the burden of proof lay on the workman to show that the Institute was an "industry" within the meaning of the Act, is valid.
In the case of Pratam Singh Narsinh Parmar (supra), it was held by the Apex Court that the burden lies on the person claiming the establishment to be an "industry", to place before the Court positive facts in support of the claim.
However, having held that in view of law as it stands today, the Institute is an "industry" within the meaning of the Act, the issue of burden of proof would not have much bearing on the validity of the award passed by the Labour Court.
14.
Moving on to the next argument advanced in support of the Institute that the workman was only a daily wager and, therefore, does not have any right to be regularized, the records reflect that just five days after termination of the workman, a circular was issued for recruitment to the same post, and the cleaner of the Institute was appointed against the said post.
This makes it evident that the post held by the concerned workman was of a permanent nature, and the mala fide intentions on the part of Institute in terminating the services of the workman and appointing a cleaner working in the Institute as a driver, cannot be ruled out.
15.
Even assuming that there were no mala fide intentions on the part of the management of the Institute in appointing the cleaner to the post of a Driver, the argument of the Institute that recruitment to the said post were being made only in compliance with the Recruitment Rules which mandates sponsorship by the employment exchange is self defeating as the Institute failed to explain as to how the said cleaner was appointed to the post of driver since he was also not sponsored by the employment exchange.
Taking the argument of the Institute further, and even considering that while some candidates sponsored by the employment exchange were considered by the Institute, fact remains that some other candidates from within the Institute were also considered, yet it is difficult to understand as to why was the workman not considered for the said post when he was already working as a driver with the Institute for about the past three years.
16.
In the case of Union of India v. N Hargopal & Ors, (1987 Lab IC 915) (supra) it was held by the Apex Court that the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, does not oblige any employer to employ those persons only who have been sponsored by the Employment Exchanges.
Also, in view of the law laid down by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam, Krishna District, AP v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and Ors, reported as (1996)6 SCC 216 : (1996 AIR SCW 3979), it is not mandatory that the appointments were to be made only through the employment exchange, but mere intimation of vacancy to the employment exchange is sufficient.
17.
Reliance placed by the counsel for the Institute on the cases of Umadevi (AIR 2006 SC 1806) (supra) and AIIMS Employees Union (supra) is misconceived, for the reason that these cases pertained exclusively to the issue of regularization and it was held that daily rated, casual, contractual or temporary workers had no right to be regularized and that appointments could not be made by bypassing the constitutional scheme of appointment.
The present case, however, does not deal with the issue of regularization, but is one of illegal termination and mala fide action on part of the Institute.
18.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the Institute urged that the workman had not rendered 240 days of continuous service in the year immediately preceding his termination and was therefore not entitled to the protection of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was submitted that the onus to prove that the workman had completed 240 days of service, lies on the workman and reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Range Forest Officer v. S.T.
Hadimani, reported as 2002(3) SCT 382 : (2002)3 SCC 25.
It is relevant to note that the said plea has not been taken in the writ petition and was raised for the first time only at the stage of final arguments.
Therefore, the same cannot be entertained at this stage.
Even assuming that the same is acceptable, still this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction ought not to interfere with the findings of facts arrived at by the Courts and the tribunals below.
19.
Now, coming to the issue of payment of back wages to the workman, it is admitted that the workman did not raise a specific plea either in his statement of claim or in his affidavit, that he was not gainfully employed during his termination.
It is a settled law that back wages is not a natural consequence of wrongful termination; there is an element of discretion in the grant of back wages, which the Court has to exercise keeping in view the facts and circumstances of each case.
20.
Reference may be made to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Thakur Singh Rawat and Ors v. Jagjit Industries Ltd, reported as 2006(2) SCT 139 : (2006)1 LLJ 775, wherein this Court has held that the state of employment or unemployment of the workman is within the special knowledge of the workman and therefore it should be his first duty to make an assertion that he was unemployed.
Having so asserted in his statement of claim, he may even state on oath about his state of unemployment, for nothing more is required to prove his side of the case.
It will then be for the management to assert or prove if the workman was at all employed.
Similar view has also been taken by the Apex Court in the case of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Anr. v. SC Sharma, reported as 2005(1) SCT 569 : AIR 2005 SC 768, where it has been held as under :  "Para 15 : ... when the question of determining the entitlement of a person to back wages is concerned, the employee has to show that he was not gainfully employed.
The initial burden is on him.
After and if he places materials in that regard, the employer can bring on record materials to rebut the claim..." 21.
Reliance placed by the counsel for the workman on the judgment of the Supreme court in the case of Allahabad Jal Sansthan (2005 Lab IC 2030) (supra) to claim back wages is misplaced.
In the said case, the Supreme Court after making a survey of the entire case law existing on the issue, came to the following conclusion :  "6.
A law in absolute term cannot be laid down as to in which cases, and under what circumstances, full back wages can be granted or denied.
The Labour Court and/or Industrial Tribunal before which industrial dispute has been raised, would be entitled to grant the relief having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case.
For the said purpose, several factors are required to be taken into consideration.
It is not in dispute that the Respondent No. 1 herein was appointed on an ad hoc basis; his service were terminated on the ground of a policy decision, as far back as on 24-1-1987.
The Respondent No. 1 had filed a written statement wherein he had not raised any plea that he had been sitting idle or had not obtained any other employment in the interregnum.
The learned counsel for the Appellant, in our opinion, is correct in submitting that a pleading to that effect in the written statement by the workman was necessary.
Not only no such pleading was raised, even in his evidence, the workman did not say that he continued to remain unemployed.
In the instant case, the Respondent herein had been reinstated from 27-2-2001.
..... ....... ......... ........ 16.
We have referred to certain decisions of this Court to highlight that earlier in the event of an order of dismissal being set aside, reinstatement with full back wages was the usual result.
But now with the passage of time, it has come to be realized that industry is being compelled to pay the workman for a period during which he apparently contributed little or nothing at all, for a period that was spent unproductively, while the workman is being compelled to go back to a situation which prevailed many years ago when he was dismissed.
It is necessary for us to develop a pragmatic approach to problems dogging industrial relations.
However, no just solution can be offered but the golden mean may be arrived at."
22.
No doubt the Supreme Court granted 50% back wages to the workman in the aforesaid case by applying the golden mean, but it is to be noted that, the said case was one where the Labour Court had granted full back wages even in the absence of any averment by the workman to the effect that he was not gainfully employed during the period of termination of his services.
Considering the peculiar facts and circumstances the said of the said case, and reiterating the law that it is mandatory for the workman to make a pleading to the effect that he had been sitting idle or was not gainfully employed, the Supreme Court reduced the back wages payable to the workman from 100% to 50%.
However, in the present case since no back wages have been granted, even on facts, the said decision in the case of Allahabad Jal Sansthan (2005 Lab IC 2030) (supra) is of no help to the workman.
23.
In this context, it is also pertinent to note a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of UP State Brassware Corpn.
Ltd. and anr. v. Udai Narain Pandey, reported as 2006(1) SCT 77 : (2006)1 SCC 479 : (AIR 2006 SC 586), wherein the court affirmed the judgment rendered in the case of Allahabad Jal Sansthan (supra), relied on the judgment in the case of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (2005 Lab IC 843) (supra) and again applied the golden mean rule to reduce the full back wages granted by the Labour Court to 25%, keeping in view, amongst others, the fact that the workman had not taken a specific plea regarding his unemployment during the period of his termination from service and noted as under :  "Para 61.....It is now well-settled by various decisions of this Court that although earlier this Court insisted that it was for the employer to raise the aforementioned plea but having regard to the provisions of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act or the provisions analogous thereto, such a plea should be raised by the workman."
24.
In the present case, therefore, keeping in view the law as laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court and considering the admitted fact that no assertion whatsoever was made by the workman to the effect that he had remained unemployed during the period of his termination from service, the impugned award cannot be faulted in so far as no back wages have been granted to the workman.
Even if the claim of the workman to the effect that he remained unemployed, is assumed to be true, mere mention of the said fact in his cross-examination, would not take his case any further, because the primary onus was on him to assert/claim/plead in his claim petition as also in his affidavit by way of evidence that he was not gainfully employed during the period of his termination.
In the absence of such an assertion and also keeping in view the totality of the facts and circumstances, this Court does not consider it appropriate to interfere with the conclusions arrived at by the Labour Court, in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
25.
In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and the discussion of the case law, this Court declines to interfere with the award dated 4th December, 1998 passed by the Labour Court.
The impugned award does not suffer from any such perversity, infirmity or illegality so as to warrant interference by this Court.
Both the writ petitions are dismissed being devoid of merits.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
26.
The interim order passed in WP (C) No. 2771/1999 stands vacated.
Petitions dismissed.