Arvind Kumar, J - This instant petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for quashing of award dated 2392004, copy Annexure P-1 passed by respondent No. 1 by virtue of which industrial dispute raised by the petitioner-workman has been dismissed.
2.
The facts leading of the institution of instant petition are that the petitioner was appointed on the post of Wireman on 1721983 in the office of respondent Nos. 2 to 4 department.
Thereafter on 311987 his services were terminated.
The petitioner challenged the action of termination of his service by the respondents-department by filing an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as CAT in short).
However, the CAT dismissed the application of the petitioner on 2091993 on the ground of maintainability.
Thereafter, the petitioner challenged the order of CAT dated 2091993 by filing a SLP before the Hon'ble Apex Court, which too was dismissed.
Ultimately, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute.
The appropriate Government vide order dated 1181998 referred the industrial dispute to respondent No. 1-Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
Respondents-department contested the claim of the petitioner.
After settling of issues, both the parties led their respective evidence.
Thereafter, vide the impugned award dated 2392004, respondent No. 1, without touching the merits of the dispute, considering the lapse of period of 10 years in raising the dispute, dismissed it solely on the ground of delay and latches.
Hence.
The present petition.
3.
Upon notice, respondents No. 2 to 4 filed their joint written statement controverting the averments contained in the instant petition.
Justifying the impugned award of the Labour Court, dismissal of the instant petition has been sought.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have gone through the paper-book carefully.
5.
The sole question that requires consideration is whether the impugned award of the Labour Court rejecting the reference on account of delay can be said to be justified ?
No doubt it is appropriate that the dispute effecting the rights of the workmen should be raised as soon as possible after they have arisen so that upon reference it can be timely adjudicated.
But it is equally true that delay in raising the dispute would be circumstance, which is liable to be taken into consideration.
In cases no reasons are given in support of the delay, it would have a bearing on the rights of the workmen concerned and he is liable to be non-suited on the ground of delay.
However, where reasons are given and there is explanation for the delay in raising the dispute, the same would be a factor for consideration by the appropriate Government or the Court, as the same may be.
In Sapan Kumar Pandit v. UP State Electricity Board and others, 2001(3) SCT 806 : 2001(6) SCC 222, it has been held that there are cases in which lapse of time had caused fading or even eclipse of the dispute.
If nobody had kept the dispute alive during the long interval, it is reasonably possible to conclude in a particular case that the dispute ceased to exist after some time.
But when the dispute remained alive though not galvanized by the workmen or the union on account of other justified reasons, it does not cause the dispute to wane into total eclipse.
In the instant case, the petitioner had challenged his termination before CAT, who dismissed his application on 2091993 simply on the ground that he had not exhausted the remedy provided under the Industrial Disputes Act.
It necessitated the petitioner to challenge the order of the CAT before the Hon'ble Supreme Court where he met with the same fate and his SLP was dismissed on 1011997.
This led him to raise industrial dispute in the same year on 23121997.
Therefore, it is not the case that he kept silent and slept over the matter till he raised the demand notice on 23121997.
Rather his grievance remained pending adjudication either before the CAT or before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In other words, the dispute was very much alive when he raised the demand on 23121997.
In these backdrop of the fact, the Labour Court should not have rejected the reference merely on the ground of delay and latches.
Of course, the long delay in making the reference could be considered by the Labour Court while moulding its relief, in the given circumstances, discussed above.
The Labour Court has certainly gone wrong in axing down the dispute raised by the petitioner only on account of delay.
6.
In view of the discussion made above, the present petition succeeds and the same is allowed, thereby setting aside the impugned award dated 2392004 passed by the Labour Court.
The matter is remanded back to the Labour Court for decision on merits and that the parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court on 30.11.2006.
In the facts and circumstances of this case where the workman is pursuing his grievance, though wrongly, since 1987, it shall be appreciated if the Labour Court decides the matter expeditiously preferably within a period of six months.
Petition stands allowed accordingly.
Petition allowed.