RS Madan, J - This regular second appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 15.5.1981, passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Faridkot, whereby he accepted the appeal of the respondent-department, set aside the judgment and decree dated 28101980 passed by the trial Court, and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant.
2.
In brief the facts of the case are that on 2081976, appellant Sukhmander Singh, and his two accomplice Constable Karnail Singh and Constable Joginder Singh were posted at Police Station, City Moga, District Faridkot.
They absented themselves from duty on 2081976 at 5 pm and a DDR No. 37 was recorded in this regard.
Later on, they were detected doing immoral activities with a girl in the area of said police station.
Karnail Singh was apprehended at the spot, while Joginder Singh and the appellant remained absent from duty for 4 days, 22 hours and 30 minutes, without any leave or permission.
They turned up on 2581976 at 430 pm On account of their aforesaid act, they were charge-sheeted and a departmental enquiry was ordered to be initiated against them by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot.
Shri Sarup Singh, District Inspector (Headquarters), Faridkot, was appointed as the enquiry officer.
The enquiry officer submitted his report to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, to the effect that Karnail Singh was responsible for doing immoral activities while the appellant and Joginder Singh were held guilty of the same and also for having remained absent from duty without permission.
On receipt of the enquiry report, a show cause notice was issued to them on 11.1.1977.
They were supplied copy of show cause notice, the finding of enquiry officer and the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, granted an opportunity to defend themselves.
They filed their written replies.
After going through the record and written replies, the appellant along with his co-accused was found guilty.
The Senior Superintendent of Police dismissed them from service vide order dated 3131997, communicated on 141977.
Against the order of dismissal from service passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, the appellant filed an appeal before the Inspector General of Police, Punjab.
The same was also dismissed on 21111979.
3.
Thereafter, the appellant filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 141977 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, and order of dismissal of appeal dated 21111979 passed by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab, whereby he was dismissed from service, was illegal, void, unlawful and unconstitutional, arbitrary, capricious, against the principles of law, Police Rules, and rules of natural justice, without jurisdiction and authority and, therefore, were not binding on him and he was entitled to continue in service as before 141977 and was also entitled to all service benefits.
4.
In the plaint, the appellant submitted that he joined the service of police department on 2381972 at Bhatinda and was also awarded commendation certificate for good work.
He submitted that on 2081976, he was posted in Police Station, City Moga.
He alleged that his relations with ASI Kartar Singh were not good as he could not meet his illegal demands.
ASI Kartar Singh in connivance with SHO implicated him in a false case bearing FIR No. 184, dated 2081976, registered under Sections 342 and 376 of IPC in Police Station, City Moga.
He further submitted that after trial he was acquitted of the charges mentioned above, by the Additional Sessions Judge, vide his judgment and order dated 651978.
He also averred in the plaint that he was not supplied copies of documents and even the list of witnesses.
It was also pleaded that the Inspector General of Police dismissed his appeal without considering his submissions.
5.
The respondent-State contested the suit.
It was pleaded that the suit was barred by limitation and no valid notice under Section 80 CPC was served and it was also hit by Section 42 of the Punjab Police Rules.
It was contended that the order of dismissal is perfectly legal and valid and the appellant was given opportunity of personal hearing to defend himself.
The other allegations of the appellant were denied.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD 2.
Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC was not validly served ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is barred by Section 42 of the Police Act ?
OPD 5.
Whether the impugned order dated 141977 is bad, illegal, ultra vires, without jurisdiction and in effective against the rights of the plaintiff ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
The trial Court recorded findings on all the issues in favour of the appellant-plaintiff and suit was decreed.
But, the first appellate court affirmed the finding on issue No. 1.
The arguments on issue Nos. 2 and 3 were not addressed.
While disposing of issue No. 4, the first appellate court reversed the verdict of the trial court and dismissed the suit of the appellant-plaintiff, holding that he had failed to prove his claim and accepted the appeal of the State.
7.
The plaintiff, thereafter, came up in this regular second appeal, challenging the verdict of the first appellate court.
8.
Since regular second appeal could be heard only on a substantial question of law, the appellant-plaintiff placed on record the following questions of law by filing Civil Miscellaneous No. 10171/C of 2002, describing those as substantial questions of law :-  (i) Whether the learned Additional District Judge has erred in law in reversing the order dated 28-10-1980 passed by learned Sub Judge 1st Class, Faridkot ?
(ii) Whether the learned Additional District Judge, Faridkot is right while appreciating the evidence on record ?
(iii) Whether the order dated 141977 of the SSP, Faridkot and order dated 21111979 of the IGP, were passed in violation of the principles of natural justice ?
(iv) Whether the SSP and IGP has followed Article 311 of the Constitution of India, while passing the order of dismissal against the appellant ?
(v) Whether the orders passed by the SSP and IGP against the appellant, were in accordance with the specific provision mentioned under Rule 1624 of Punjab Police Rules ?
(vi) Whether the SSP and the IGP could have ignored the order passed by the learned Judge acquitting the appellant on merits of the case ?
(vii) Whether the charges mentioned in the charge-sheet served upon the appellant, under which the appellant has been awarded the punishment of dismissal were vague ?
(viii) Whether the punishment of dismissal awarded to the appellant was in proportionate to the absence from duty for 3-4 days ?
(ix) Whether the judgment dated 15-5-1981 passed by the Addl.
Distt.
Judge under appeal is perverse and as a result of misreading of evidence of law so pleaded before the learned Court below ?
However, the substantial questions of law having bearing on the matter in controversy can be summarized as under :-  Where in the departmental proceedings action has already been taken much prior to the concluding of criminal proceedings by court of law, which resulted in acquittal, its affect on the departmental action.
Whether the appellant can take shelter of Rule 163. of Punjab Police Rules ?
9.
I have heard arguments addressed by learned counsel for both sides and have also carefully gone through the record.
10.
It is a case where the departmental proceedings were initiated and the appellant was dismissed from service prior to the decision of the criminal case registered against him.
Although the appellant was acquitted in the criminal case, but in the departmental proceedings he was found guilty of misconduct and accordingly awarded the punishment of dismissal from service by the order dated 141977.
The relevant part of the impugned order dated 141977, passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Faridkot, is reproduced below :-  "I have carefully gone through the whole of the departmental file as well as written statements filed by the defaulters.
They have taken number of arguments in their written statements.
The first argument is that the fact disclosed the commission of a criminal offence & therefore it was necessary to obtain the sanction of the District Magistrate, Faridkot in terms of 1638 (1) and (2).
I have considered these arguments carefully & find no force because no criminal offence was committed by them in relation to their duties with the public in official capacity.
Hence these arguments fails.
2nd Argument put forward by the defaulters is that a criminal case has already been registered against them & that during the pendency of the said case they can not be dealt with departmentally.
I have considered these arguments carefully & I am of the opinion that mere registration of the case is no ground for non-handling of the departmental proceedings.
According to PPR 16(1) departmental action is only barred when the defaulters are convicted/acquitted, which is not the position.
Hence these arguments also fail.
The next argument put forward by the defaulters is that there is no independent evidence against them & that the Enquiry Officer has wrongly held them guilty of the charges against them.
I have gone through the files.
The evidence of PW-1 Kartar Singh ASI, Surjit Singh PW-2 MHC, Shri Swaran Singh SI/SHO, City Moga, leave no doubt in the prosecution story who captured the defaulters doing immoral acts.
Again their absence is also proved on the records.
I, therefore, accept the recommendation of the Enquiry Officer and hold the defaulter guilty of the charges framed against them.
As regards punishment I have look into their length of service.
The main culprit Karnail Singh No. 855 has about 13 years of service at his credit but he is the main actor of this show who brought the girl for doing immoral acts.
The other two defaulters have only 4/5 years of service at their credit.
The acts committed by them have really brought a bad name to the whole of the police force.
If the custodian of the law act in this manner, there will be anarchy and disorder.
I, therefore, dismiss constables Joginder Singh No. 771, Karnail Singh No. 855 and Constable Sukhinder Singh No. 57 from service with effect from today afternoon.
A copy of this order be supplied to each of the defaulter under proper acknowledgment."
(emphasis added).
11.
Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the entire proceedings of the departmental enquiry are hit by Rule 163 of the Punjab Police Rules, which reads as under :-  "163.
Action following on a judicial acquittal.
- (1) When a Police Officer has been tried and acquitted by a criminal court he shall not be punished departmentally on the same charge or on a different charge upon the evidence cited in the criminal case, whether actually led or not, unless - (a) the criminal charge has failed on technical grounds; or (b) in the opinion of the Court or of the Superintendent of Police, the prosecution witnesses have been won over; or (c) the court has held in its judgment that an offence was actually committed and that suspicion rests upon the police officer concerned; or (d) the evidence cited in the criminal case discloses facts unconnected with the charge before the court which justify departmental proceedings on a different charge; (e) additional evidence admissible under rule 1625 (1) in departmental proceedings is available.
(2) Departmental proceedings admissible under sub-rule (1) may be instituted against Lower Subordinates by the order of the Superintendent of Police but may be taken against Upper Subordinates only with the sanction of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police; and a police officer against whom such action is admissible shall not be deemed to have been honourably acquitted for the purpose of rule 73 of the Civil Services Rules (Punjab), Volume I, Part I."
Taking shelter under this rule, learned counsel for the appellant referred to State of Punjab and others v. Prem Sarup, 2006(2) SCT 115 : 2006(2) Recent Services Judgments 332, and Head Constable Rachhpal Singh No. 132/Jall v. State of Punjab and another, 1998(3) SCT 445 : 1998(1) Recent Services Judgments 400, wherein it was held that Rule 163 of the Punjab Police Rules itself precludes a departmental enquiry after a police official has been acquitted by a Criminal Court except in a few situations set out in clause (a) and (e).
So far as the proposition laid down in these authorities, the same is not disputed but this is a case wherein the departmental proceedings are initiated prior to the decision of the criminal case and the appellant was awarded punishment therein.
The appellant cannot derive strength under Rule 163 of the Punjab Police Rules, as has been held by a Division Bench of this Court in Sukhjit Singh Khaira v. State of Punjab and others, 2005(1) SCT 50 (P&H).
The relevant extract of the judgment is reproduced as under :-  "In our considered opinion there was no statutory bar for the two proceedings to go on simultaneously and the proceedings before the Disciplinary Authority already stood concluded and punishment had been imposed on the basis of the enquiry itself and the acquittal of the appellant later by the criminal court had not effect whatsoever on the conclusions arrived at in the enquiry resulting in punishment.
These proceedings became final much before the verdict of the criminal trial and there was hardly any justification for the authorities to reconsider the case of the appellant after more than two years of the conclusions of the proceedings and finality of the order on the basis of the findings recorded by the criminal court in appeal.
It is further pertinent to point that the punishment of the appellant was not based on the findings of conviction recorded by the learned Magistrate.
It was totally an independent enquiry and the acquittal by the criminal court later had no effect whatsoever on those proceedings."
12.
Another contention of the learned counsel for the appellant was that mere absence from duty for 4 days, 22 hours and 30 minutes cannot be termed as absence from duty and a grave misconduct.
In support of his arguments he relies upon State of Punjab and others v. Nirmal Singh, 2002(4) SCT 1038 : 2003(2) RSJ 704, wherein the Single Judge of this court has observed that, "single act of absence from duty cannot be viewed as a grave act of misconduct.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that he was incorrigible and had rendered himself completely unfit for police service."
This authority is not applicable to the facts of the present case for the reasons that the appellant along with his co-accused were punished by the department for having brought a bad name to the whole of the police force.
The punishing authority while imposing punishment has also specifically commented on the act and conduct of the appellant and concluded that "if the custodian of the law act in this manner, there will be anarchy and disorder".
13.
The last contention of the learned counsel for the appellant was that provisions of Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules have not been complied with and the appellant was not heard in person.
The first appellate court while reversing the findings on issue No. 4 recorded by the learned trial court has categorically observed that "it is thus evident that the complete Inquiry file was got produced by the plaintiff and, therefore, he could not object to the reading of any document placed on the Inquiry file into evidence.
Mark `F' is a show-cause notice dated 11.1.1977.... ..... Signatures of Sukhmander Singh appear on this notice in token of his having received the same and copy of the finding of the Inquiry Officer."
Admission of signatures of the appellant on the notice is sufficient to prove that compliance of Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules has been made by the respondent-department.
No other point was argued by the learned counsel for the parties.
As a sequel to my above discussion and keeping in view the observations of the Division Bench of this Court in Sukhjit Singh Khaira's case (supra), this appeal is devoid of merit and the same is hereby dismissed, living the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.