MM Kumar, J - This petitioner filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for quashing order dated 2412005 (P-11), passed by the Punjab State Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes-respondent No. 3 (for brevity, `the Commission') and the subsequent order dated 2832005 (P-12), passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana-respondent No. 4.
2.
The petitioner in the instant petition is the Managing Committee, Guru Hargobind Khalsa College, Gurusar Sadhar, District Ludhiana (to be referred as `the College').
Shri Balwant Singh-respondent No. 6, who was an Ex-serviceman and served in the Indian Army for about 18 years, was appointed as a Clerk in the College on 27.5.1987.
He was later on confirmed as such and re-designated as Senior Clerk.
On 2751997 he was placed in the selection grade and designated as Junior Assistant.
In 1997, the College advertised one post of Officer-Superintendent Grade-II.
Respondent No. 6 threatened the College that in case he was not appointed to the post of Officer-Superintendent Grade-II, he would commit suicide.
Not only this, showing his intention to commit suicide he wrote a latter and an affidavit dated 2271997 (P-2 and P-3 respectively).
The matter was reported to the police on 2271997 itself by the Principal of the College (P-3).
Later on respondent No. 6 tendered written apology and an undertaking before the police (P-4 and P-5 respectively).
Respondent No. 6 also filed CWP No. 2453 of 2000 in this Court challenging the selection and appointment Shri Bachittar Singh, who was selected and appointed as Officer-Superintendent Grade-II by the College, which stands admitted.
During the pendency of the aforementioned writ petition, Shri Bachittar Singh retired from service and after obtaining permission from this Court the College again re-advertised the post of Officer-Superintendent Grade-II on 2982001.
Respondent No. 6 moved an application for staying the recruitment process, however, in the meantime, selection was made and Shri Chamkaur Singh was appointed as Officer Superintendent Grade-II.
Respondent No. 6 amended the aforementioned writ petition to enable him to challenge the selection and appointment of Shri Chamkaur Singh.
3.
Respondent No. 6 filed a complaint with the Director, National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Regional Office, Chandigarh, levelling allegations against the then Principal of the College, namely, Shri Manjit Singh Khattra that he had abused him by calling in the name of his caste.
On the basis of the said complaint, an FIR No. 13, dated 2522004, under the provisions of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, was registered (P-6).
However, the police after investigation filed a report that the allegations was false and no case was made out.
4.
On 1892004, the College issued a charge-sheet to respondent No. 6 (P-7) to which he filed reply (P-7/A).
Thereafter, he requested for supply of documents vide letter dated 2292004.
On 4102004, respondent No. 6 filed CWP No. 15871 of 2004 in this Court for quashing charge-sheet dated 1892004 and to stay proceedings arising out of the charge-sheet.
Since no stay was granted by this Court in favour of respondent No. 6, departmental proceedings against him continued.
It is alleged that respondent No. 6 never cooperated with the Enquiry Officer since the very first day.
On 1222005, the son of respondent No. 6, who is stated to be an Advocate, created a scene in the office of the Enquiry Officer.
On 28.2.2005, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report that it was not practicable to hold a domestic enquiry in the charges against respondent No. 6 as he has adopted a non-cooperative defiant attitude and creating unhealthy atmosphere during the proceedings (P-8).
On 20122004, respondent No. 6 submitted a complaint to the Chairman of the Commission alleging that the Enquiry Officer is biased and favouring the College (P-9).
On 22122004, again another complaint was filed by respondent No. 6 to the Chairman of the Commission, seeking stay of further departmental proceedings (P-10).
Taking cognizance of the aforementioned complaints, the Chairman of the Commission passed the impugned order dated 2412005 (P-11) directing that the allegations levelled in the complaint dated 20122004 were to be enquired through the Committee consisting of Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, representative of the DPI(C), Punjab and Punjab Welfare Officer, Ludhiana.
The operative part of the order of the Commission reads as under :  "3.
Considering the gravity of the matter, Commission desires that the contents of the complaint dated 20122004 shall be enquired through the Committee consisting of Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana the representative of DPI(C), Punjab and Punjab Welfare Officer, Ludhiana.
The committee shall also enquire the intention of the College authorities in serving the charge-sheet to the complainant by levelling the charges which relates to the year 1990, 1991, 1997 and 1998.
Commission also desires that the College authorities shall not take any decision on the charge-sheet served to the complainant till the matter is under consideration of the Commission and final orders are passed.
In this regard, DPI (Colleges), Punjab shall intimate the orders of the Commission to the Principal of the concerned college for compliance where the complainant is working.
Commission further desires that these orders shall be implemented through the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana who shall also send the compliance report to the Commission within one month of the receipt of the orders.
However, a copy of these shall also be sent to the Committee members and complainant.
A copy of the complaint dated 20122004 shall be supplied to the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana."
On the basis of the aforementioned order dated 2412005 (P-11), the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana had initiated the enquiry vide impugned letter dated 2832005 (P-12).
The aforementioned impugned order dated 2412005 (P-11) and the letter dated 2832005 (P-12) are subject- matter of challenge in the instant petition.
5.
When the matter came up for consideration before this Court on 7.4.2005, further proceedings in pursuance to the impugned order dated 2412005 (P-11) were stayed and the aforementioned order continues to operate till date.
6.
The Commission has been constituted under the Punjab State Commission for Scheduled Castes Act, 2004 (for brevity, `the Act').
The power and function of the Commission have been dealt with by Section 10 of the Act.
The relevant part of Section 10 is extracted below for facility of reference :-  "10.
Powers and functions of the Commission.
- (1) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter under this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely :- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any documents; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any Court or office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and (f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely :- (a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under the Constitution of India, or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; (b) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio- economic development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their development.
(c) to make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the State Government for the effective implementations of the safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes; (d) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare, development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as may be prescribed; (e) to advise the Government on legislative and development policies affecting Scheduled Castes; (f) to undertake necessary steps at the Government and public level to protect the constitutional and legal rights of Scheduled Castes; (g) to monitor the implementation of laws and welfare measures concerning Scheduled Castes and initiate action for legal and administrative reforms to improve status of Scheduled Castes; (h) to investigate suo motu or on complaint with respect to the deprivation of rights or discrimination or victimization of the Scheduled Castes and to recommend remedial action to the Government and initiate judicial proceedings wherever necessary for effectively remedy; (i) to (o) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx" A similar provision exist in Article 338 of the Constitution, which postulates for establishing National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
The contents of Article 338 and its various clauses are akin to Section 10 of the Act.
In the case of All India Indian Overseas Bank SC and ST Employees' Welfare Association v. Union of India, 1996(6) SCC 606, Article 338(5) & (8) came up for consideration.
While considering the question as to whether the Commission had the power to issue direction in the nature of interim injunction, it has been held that no such power could be read in Article 338(5) & (8) merely because the Commission has been granted all the powers of Civil Court while investigating any matter or inquiry into any complaint.
The aforementioned view flows from the perusal of paras 10 and 11, which read as under :- "10.
Interestingly, here, in clause (8) of Article 338, the words used are "the Commission shall ... have all the powers of the Civil Court trying a suit".
But the words "all the powers of a Civil Court" have to be exercised "while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause 5."
All the procedural powers of a civil court are given to the Commission for the purpose of investigating and inquiring into these matters and that too for that limited purpose only.
The powers of a civil court of granting injunctions, temporary or permanent, do not inhere in the Commission nor can such a power be inferred or derived from a reading of clause (8) of Article 338 of the Constitution.
11.
The Commission having not been specifically granted any power to issue interim injunctions, lacks the authority to issue an order of the type found in the letter dated 431993.
The order itself being bad for want of jurisdiction, all other questions and considerations raised in the appeal are redundant..." When the aforementioned principles are applied to the provisions of Section 10 of the Act, we find that the language used in Section 10(1) is pari materia to the language of Article 338(8).
Once the powers of the civil court as conferred on the Commission, have held to be excluded for the purposes of issuing injunction by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of All India Indian Overseas Bank SC and ST Employees' Welfare Association (supra) then those principles would fully apply to the facts of the present case.
The impugned order directs the college authorities not to take any decision on the charge-sheet served to respondent No. 6 till such time the matter was under consideration of the Commission and final orders were passed.
The orders of the Commission were required to be communicated to the Principal of the College for compliance.
It is pertinent to mention that respondent No. 6, who was complainant before the Commission, had already approached this Court by filing CWP No. 15871 of 2004.
He had also prayed for staying further proceedings in the charge-sheet.
He remained unable to persuade this Court to pass any interim order staying the proceedings on the basis of the charge- sheet and only notice of motion was issued on 1892004.
It is further appropriate to mention that respondent No. 6 is facing charges of absence from duty, wilful in-subordination and disobedience.
There are further allegations with regard to handling of employees Provident Fund, his conduct concerning the selection of Office Superintendent Grade-II in the year 1997 and his habit of filing false and frivous complaints against the College Management.
The enquiry proceedings were continued as there was no interim direction issued by this Court on a petition filed by respondent No. 6.
During the inquiry proceedings respondent No. 6 and his son alleged to have misbehaved with Presenting Office and the Enquiry Officer time and again.
Eventually, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report dated 28.2.2005, stating that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the domestic inquiry into the charges against respondent No. 6 as he had adopted in-defaint and non-cooperative attitude and has been creating un-conducive atmosphere at the time of proceedings (P-8).
It is, thus, obvious that respondent No. 6 had approached the Commission after having approached this Court by filing CWP No. 15871 of 2004.
It was after his failure to secure an interim order that the petitioner approached the Commission.
It is sheer misuse of the process of the Court and cannot be countenanced.
Therefore, the impugned order dated 2412005 (P-11), passed by the Commission is liable to be set aside as the Commission has no jurisdiction once the matter is subjudice before this Court.
For the reasons aforementioned, the order dated 2412005 (P-11) along with consequential letter dated 2832005 (P-12) are hereby quashed.
The proceedings before the Commission are declared to be without any jurisdiction.
The Management of the petitioner College is at liberty to proceed against respondent No. 6 on the basis of the charge-sheet dated 1892004 (P-7) in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.