Arvind Kumar, J - Both the above-referred petitions are being taken up together for hearing.
Since in both the petitions similar questions of law and facts are involved, therefore, they are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the instant petitions are that the petitioner-management is a Unit engaged in manufacturing sugar.
Respondent No. 2 in both the writ petitions namely Polu Ram and Shamsher Singh, at one point of time, were its workmen.
Both of them separately raised industrial dispute in the month of January 2000 by serving demand notices and thereby claimed their reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages.
Their plea was that since they had completed 240 days of service with the petitioner- management during the period 1992 to 1999, therefore, the termination of their services by the petitioner is bad.
Their further grouse was that the petitioner had also retained persons junior to them after termination of their services.
Their claims were contested by the petitioner more or less on the similar grounds.
The stand of the petitioner-management was that they engaged the services of respondents as Mali (extra hand), as a daily wager and they were given the work, during the season, as and when available.
It was further averred that the workmen stopped coming to their duties from 9111999, therefore, due to their absence, alternative arrangement was made.
It was also denied that the workmen had ever completed 240 days with them.
3.
On failure of the conciliation proceedings, the appropriate Government referred the matter for adjudication to the Labour Court.
There also the petitioner-management filed written statement on the same lines and controverted the averments made in the demand notice.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, issues were framed.
Both the parties led their respective evidence.
Thereafter, on conclusion of proceedings, the Labour Court, vide the impugned awards dated 1122005, passed separately qua workmen Polu and Shamsher, concluded that the services of workmen were terminated in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for brevity the Act).
Accordingly, it ordered their reinstatement with continuity of service.
Respondent-workman Polu Ram, was granted back wages to the extent of 50% whereas the Labour Court awarded full back wages to respondent-workman Shamsher Singh.
4.
Feeling dissatisfied with the same, the petitioner-management has preferred the instant petitions questioning the legality of the impugned awards dated 1122005.
5.
Upon notice of the petitions, respondents Polu and Shamsher filed their separate written statements, thereby controverting the averments made in the petitions.
While justifying the awards of the Labour Court, they both prayed for dismissal of the instant petitions.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the paper-book carefully as also the impugned awards.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the Labour Court has completely fallen into error of law while concluding that the workmen had rendered service for 240 days when their services were terminated, as such their termination without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act is bad; while concluding so, the Labour Court has also not considered the documentary evidence produced by the petitioner showing the details of working of the workmen.
The finding given by the Labour Court in the case of Polu Ram workman that persons junior to him have been retained, is not based on any evidence but is a result of presumption and assumption alone.
8.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that the awards of the Labour Court are well reasoned and are passed on the evidence of correct appreciation of evidence.
9.
The arguments have been scanned.
On a careful scrutiny of the impugned awards and the documents annexed with the petitions, we are of the considered view that the Labour Court has completely misconstrued and misinterpreted the pleadings as well as the evidence led by the petitioner.
10.
Section 25-B of the Act contemplates procedure for calculating 240 days which has to be evaluated during twelve calendar months preceding to the date of termination.
In order to invoke the fiction enacted in Section 25-B of the Act, it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, i.e. the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment.
After ascertaining the date, move backward to a period of twelve months just preceding the date of termination and then ascertain whether within a period of 12 months, the workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days.
These facts, if answered affirmatively in favour of the workman, it will have to be assumed that the workman is in continuous service for a period of one year.
Thus, he would be taken to have satisfied the eligibility qualifications enacted in Section 25-F of the Act.
11.
Once these principles are applied in the present case, we are afraid that the finding arrived at by the Labour Court is totally divergent.
A perusal of the impugned award shows that as against the oral testimony of the respondent-workmen, the petitioner had produced the documents Ex.M-1, separately, showing the details of working of respondents Polu Ram and Shamsher Singh.
Polu Ram has been shown to have worked for 186 days in the year 1992-93, 191 days during the year 1993-94, 119 days in the year 1994-95, 187 days in the year 1995-96, 99 days in 1996-97, 198 days in the year 1997- 98, 112 days in the year 1998-99 and only for 3 days and 8 respectively (as per Annexure P-1) in the months of October and November, 1999; whereas workman Shamsher Singh has been shown to have worked for 144 days in 1995-96, 119 days in the year 1996-97, 106 days in 1997-98, 63 days during the year 1998-99 and 24 days in the year 1999-2000, which he worked in the month of September 1999 (as per Annexure P-1).
These facts have also been noticed by the Labour Court.
It has come on record before the Labour Court that both the workmen worked upto November 1999.
The service rendered by them 12 months preceding November 1999 has only to be considered while computing their continuous service.
Thus, to seek protection of Section 25-F of the Act, the workmen were required to prove that they had worked for 240 days during that period.
But, it is crystal clear that the workmen had not rendered service with the petitioner- inanagement to the tune of 240 days and admittedly they were much behind this magical figure.
But the Labour Court, under misconception, took into consideration the period of service rendered by Polu Ram prior to 12 months preceding the date of his termination i.e. 9111999, which is inconsequential in determining the continuous service.
Further, the procedure adopted by the Labour Court by adding 69 days consisting of Sundays and other holidays in each calendar year towards the working days of workman, is also not sustainable.
For getting the benefit of these days, it was incumbent upon the workman to show that he had infact rendered services for those days and paid as well for which there is no evidence.
12.
So far as Shamsher Singh is concerned, the Labour Court wrongly excluded the document Ex.M-1 from the zone of consideration, finding the merit in the contention raised on behalf of the workman that the same is beyond pleadings as the details of working days have never been pleaded by the petitioner- management.
On the other hand, a perusal of reply to demand notice (Annexure P-3) and written statement filed before the Labour Court (Annexure P-4) reveals that the stand of the petitioner, right from the beginning is that the workman concerned had not completed 240 days neither in the preceding year of termination nor in any calendar year.
Thus, the Labour Court has gone totally wrong in considering only the reply of the petitioner-management to para No. 1 of the demand notice, in isolation, without considering the reply as well as written statement filed by the petitioner to the demand notice wherein, as said above, they have specifically denied that the workman had not completed 240 days.
13.
Except their bald statements, nothing substantial was produced by the workmen, as against the documentary evidence led by the petitioner to show that in fact they had worked for more than 240 days in calendar months preceding the date of their termination.
In Range Forest Officer v. ST Hadimani, 2002(3) SCT 382 (SC) : 2002(1) L.L.J.
1053, it has been held that it was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year preceding his termination.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has gone to the extent in observing that mere filing of affidavit is only his own statement in his favour and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that a workman had in fact, worked for 240 days in a year.
Similar view was taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Essen Deinki v. Rajiv Kumar, 2002(4) SCT 900 (SC) : A.I.R. 2003 SC 38 and Rajasthan State Ganganagar S Mills Ltd v. State of Rajasthan and another, 2004(4) SCT 214 (SC) : 2004(III) L.L.J.
832 (SC).
14.
Thus, by no stretch of imagination, it could be said that the workmen had rendered service of 240 days with the petitioner when their services were terminated.
They are not entitled to any protection as provided under Section 25-F of the Act.
15.
So far as the findings given by the Labour Court in the case of workman Polu Ram to the effect that while terminating his services, the petitioner had retained persons junior to them, is concerned, the same is also not sustainable.
This time again, except the bald statement of workman Polu Ram, there is nothing on record which could prove the factum of violation of provisions of Section 25-G of the Act by the petitioner while terminating the services of the workman.
Only the names of Joginder, Pahal Singh, Satpal, Sham Lal and Sagar, allegedly working with the petitioner had been mentioned.
But it has not been shown as to in what manner they are juniors to the workman with reference to their date of appointment.
His version also without there being any specific pleadings that they had been proclaiming that they are junior to him is not sufficient to establish violation of Section 25-G of the Act.
16.
The net result of the aforesaid discussion is that the instant petitions succeeds and the same are hereby allowed, thereby quashing the impugned awards dated 1122005 passed by the Labour Court qua workmen Polu Ram and Shamsher Singh.
Their claims stand dismissed accordingly.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.