We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper- book.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the husband of the petitioner, who was working with the respondents-Bank died in a road accident on 1.5.2005.
After his death, the petitioner has been sanctioned family pension in the amount of Rs. 2329+DA.
Thereafter, she made an application that appointment on compassionate grounds be given to any one of her three sons.
On 22102005, the petitioner was informed by the Bank that the scheme for appointment on compassionate grounds has been superseded by a scheme for payment of ex gratia amount in lieu of appointment on compassionate grounds w.e.f.
4.3.2005.
She was advised that her claim for appointment on compassionate grounds will be considered under the revised scheme.
The petitioner has been denied the benefit of ex gratia compensation as well as the appointment on compassionate grounds since the income of the family of the deceased husband was more than 60% of the last pay drawn by the deceased.
Learned counsel for the petitioner does not deny that on the death of the husband of the petitioner, the petitioner has received a total amount of Rs. 5,56,93885-14,31185 = 5,42,56700.
The amounts paid to the petitioner and the income of the family are as under :-  "C. Details of Assets and Liabilities :-  (a) Immovable Property  (i) House  (a) Market value  35 lakhs  (ii) Land  (b) Monthly income,, if any  NIL  (b) xx  xx  (c) Details of dues settled by Bank :  Dues  Amount  Outstanding Loans  Amount (Payable/ Paid)  (Rs)  Provident Fund  1,27,56757  Housing Loan  - Gratuity  1,19,848.85  Consumer/Personal Loan  - Leave Encashment  78,833.00  Clean OD  8,871.85 Adhoc Grant from Welfare Trust  1,50,00000  Festival Advance  5,500.00 Accidental Insurance  Vehicle  Grant from Welfare Society  Society Loan with bank's permission  Others,, if any  30,68943  59,00000  Total (A)  5,56,93885  Total (B)  14,31185 (d) Net amount received from Bank (A-B) = 55693885-14311.85 = Rs. 54256700  (e) Details of other investments :  xxx xxx xxx xxx  Net amount received = NIL  (d) Details of family income :  (a) Family Pension (Total of Basic + DA) 2329+159537 = Rs. 392437  (b) Army Pension (Total of Basic +DA), xx  (c) xx, xx  (d) xx, xx  The petitioner would be entitled to the ex gratia amount only if the family fulfils the conditions laid down in Clause 8 of the Scheme for Payment of ex gratia (Lump-Sum Amount) contained in Annexure A of Circular No. Per/62/27/2005/38 dated 552005.
The aforesaid Clause is as under :- "8.
Procedure for Calculation of Ex gratia Amount : Ex gratia may be granted to the family of the employee in the manner and subject to the ceilings specified below, if the monthly income of the family from all sources is less than 60% of the last drawn salary (net of taxes) of the employee."
3.
As noticed above, the claim for ex gratia payment has been rejected as the income of the family from all sources is more than 60% of the last drawn salary (net of taxes) of the deceased employee.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submits that the aforesaid amount cannot be taken into consideration by the respondents while considering the claim of the petitioner as the petitioner was entitled to receive the same as statutory dues.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
We are, however, of the opinion that no relief can be granted to the petitioner, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 138, wherein it has been observed as under :-  "As a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
Neither the Governments nor the public authorities are at liberty to follow any other procedure or relax the qualifications laid down by the rules for the post.
However, to this general rule which is to be followed strictly in every case, there are some exceptions carved out in the interest of justice and to meet certain contingencies.
One such exception is in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
In such cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration taking into consideration the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules to provide gainful employment to one of the dependents of the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood."
The aforesaid judgment has been followed by the Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of India and others v. Jaspal Kaur, 2007(2) S.C.T.
226 : 2007(1) R.A.J.
901, [Appeal (Civil) No. 409 of 2007 decided on 122007].
In this case, the Supreme Court was considering the facts and circumstances which are almost identical to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In the present case, the petitioner has applied for appointment on compassionate grounds on the basis of the Scheme that was circulated by the Oriental Bank of Commerce vide Circular No. Per/53/75/96/184 dated 1691996.
The aforesaid Scheme has been superseded by the aforesaid Scheme dated 552005.
As noticed earlier, under this Scheme, there is no provision for providing employment on compassionate grounds.
It was replaced by the Scheme for payment of ex gratia amount.
The petitioner would have been eligible to receive the ex gratia amount under the aforesaid Clause 8.
Considering the claim of the petitioner under the aforesaid Scheme, the respondents have rejected the same on the ground that the present income of the family was more than 60% of the last pay drawn salary (net of taxes) of the deceased employee.
On 13.9.2006, the Bank has issued a last pay drawn Certificate of the deceased which shows that in the month of April, 2005, he had been paid a net salary of Rs. 7,70678.
A perusal of the table reproduced above would also show that the petitioner was in receipt of Rs. 3,92437 as family pension.
Therefore, in our view, the claim of the petitioner for ex gratia payment has been rightly rejected under Clause 8 of the Ex gratia Scheme.
In the case of State Bank of India and others (supra), the Supreme Court considered a similar Scheme made by the State Bank of India.
In that case, the family of the deceased employee consisted of a widow, twin daughters and one son.
The financial condition of the family was as under :-  "(a) a sum of Rs. 4,57,607/- as terminal benefit has been paid (after deducting Rs. 19,183/- towards liabilities); (b) a sum of Rs. 2,055/- pm was being paid towards family pension and monthly income under Staff Mutual Welfare Scheme.
(c) The total monthly income of the family comes to Rs. 5,855/- (monthly pension of Rs. 2055/-+Rs.
3800/-) p.m. As notional interest on the investment of Rs.
4,57,607/-)."
5.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid financial conditions, the claim of the respondent therein was rejected by the Bank.
She, therefore, filed a Civil Writ Petition in this Court.
A Division Bench directed the respondents to re-consider the claim of the petitioner.
On reconsideration, the claim was again rejected.
The petitioner, therefore, filed the second writ petition praying for quashing of the impugned order rejecting her claim for the second time.
A Division Bench of this Court allowed the writ petition filed by the petitioner and observed that "the aforesaid kitty of Rs. 4,57,607/- granted to the family on account of terminal benefits could not be accepted to be sufficient.
The said amount was naturally in the shape of a security for the marriage of the daughters.
In our considered view the aforesaid income is not sufficient for the bare maintenance of the family."
The Bank filed appeal before the Supreme Court against the aforesaid judgment of the Division Bench of this Court and the same was allowed by the Supreme Court with the following observations :-  "The law with regard to employment on compassionate grounds for dependents of a deceased employee was laid down by this Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others (supra), where this Court observed that, "Appointments in the public services are made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
However, exceptions are made in favour of dependents of employees dying in harness and leaving their family in penury and without any means of livelihood."
This Court has further observed in General Manager (D&PB) and others v. Kunti Tiwary and another (supra), that, "that particulars of their income have been noted in their application and it certainly could not be said on the basis thereof that the respondents were living hand to mouth.
The Division Bench erred in diluting this criteria of penury to one of "not very well to do."
It was again observed in 2005 by this Court in the case of SBI v. Vikas Dubey, Civil Appeal No. 7003 of 2005 dated 21112005, also followed the decision in Kunti Tiwary (supra) case.
Hence a major criterion while appointing a person on compassionate grounds should be the financial condition of the family the deceased person left behind.
Unless the financial condition is entirely penury, such appointments cannot be made.
In the present case the financial condition of the respondents family is not one of destitution, the appellants have already paid a sum of Rs. 4,57,607/- as terminal benefits (after deducting Rs. 19,183/- towards liabilities); a sum of Rs. 2,055/- pm was being paid towards family pension and monthly income under Staff Mutual Welfare Scheme and in addition the total monthly income of the family comes to Rs. 5,855/- (monthly pension of Rs. 2,055/- + Rs. 3,800/- pm as notional interest on the investment of Rs. 4,57,607/-).
The competent fact finding authority on the basis of the above financial details had arrived at the conclusion that the financial condition of the family is not penurious and that the family earns sufficient income to maintain themselves.
Hence appointment on compassionate grounds was not granted to the respondent.
We, however, do not feel the necessity to interfere with this order of the Bank Authority on the fact situation of this case.
The competent authority of the Bank had to consider the case of the respondent as per the laid down parameters laid down in the scheme.
Accordingly, while deciding on the financial condition of the respondent factors like :  (a) Family Pension (a) Gratuity (c) Employee's/Employer's contribution to the Provident Fund (d) Any compensation paid by the Bank or its Welfare Fund (e) Proceeds of LIC Policy & other investments of the deceased employee (f) Income for family from other sources (g) Employment of other family members (h) Size of the family and liabilities, if any, etc. were taken into consideration by the Competent Authority and based on these details appointment was declined to the respondent on compassionate ground."
6.
From the above, it becomes apparent that appointment on compassionate grounds is not to be granted as a matter of right.
It also cannot be granted to replace the deceased employee with one of the dependents.
The aim and object of granting appointment on compassionate grounds is to help the family who may have been reduced to abject poverty by sudden demise of the sole bread-winner of the family.
As noticed earlier, such is not the situation in the present case.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.