MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for quashing order dated 592001 (P-11) passed by the Financial Commissioner & Principal Secretary, Govt. of Haryana, Finance Department, Chandigarh.
In pursuance to the direction issued by this Court in CWP No. 3656 of 2001 which was earlier filed by the petitioners and disposed of on 14.3.2001, the representation has been rejected by the impugned order and the petitioners feeling aggrieved, have approached this Court.
2.
Facts in brief are that petitioner No. 1 Pravin Kumar Singh has been working on the post of Assistant Director (Demography) and petitioner No. 2 Ashutosh has been working as Statistical Officer in the Health Department of respondents-State.
They have claimed higher scale of pay on two grounds.
Firstly, it is asserted that the pay scale of 6500-10,500 w.e.f.
111996 for the post of Assistant Director (Demography) and that of the feeder post of Statistical Officer/Statistician in the Health Department has been the same.
According to the petitioners the pay scale of promotional post must be higher than the pay scale of feeder post.
Likewise, petitioner No. 2 has claimed that for promotion to the post of Statistician higher pay scale are required to be granted.
Secondly, these posts in the department of Health are equivalent and identical to the post of Deputy Economic and Statical Adviser (in brief Deputy E.S.A.)
and District Statistical Officer/Research Officer in the department of Economic and Stastical Organisation.
The petitioners have claimed that the nature of duties, responsibilities and functions of both the posts in two services are similar in nature.
It is maintained that the petitioners working in Health Department coordinate with the other department so as to implement the National Programmes.
Their main duty is to compile, interpolate and analyse the data for the State so as to assist the policy formation.
The data provided by Health Department has been claimed to be more significant than the data of any other department as it directly relates to the human being and society and, therefore, there is no qualitative and quantitative difference in the nature of duties and responsibilities in the functions of both the departments.
The impugned order is challenged on the ground that an imaginary distinction has been drawn in order to circumvent the legitimate rights of the petitioners.
The petitioners have founded their claim by placing reliance on a judgment of this court in case of Sunder Lal Jain v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(2) RSJ 95.
The pay scale granted to the petitioners are 6500-10500 whereas the pay scale granted to the Research Officer/District Statistical Officer in ESO Department is 7450-11500.
The petitioners have also claimed that the method of recruitment, qualification of both the posts in the aforementioned two departments are identical.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents-State, the stand taken is that the pay scales of government employees in Haryana were revised in the year 1987 w.e.f.
111986 keeping in view the recommendations of 4th Pay Commission and in the process 70 old pay scales were bunched into 30 pay scales.
As a consequence the scales of promotional and feeder post became identical.
To remedy the aforementioned anomaly the clarificatory letter was issued on 731988 with the direction that in cases where the pay scale of feeder and promotional posts are identical then on promotion the pay of the Government employee was to be fixed at next higher stage under the provisions of Rule 4.4(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1 Part I.
A copy of the letter has been placed on records as Annexure R-II.
The clarificatory letters have also been written on 232001 and 20.4.2001 (R-II and R-IV) and it has been claimed that the rule could take care of such a situation by providing for fixation in next higher grade provided an employee moves from feeder cadre to promotional cadre in the same pay scale.
The second ground raised by the petitioners in respect of equation of posts with Dy.
E.S.A., has also been rebutted by placing reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Secretary, Finance Department v. West Bengal Registration Service Association and others, 1992(2) SCT 301 (SC) : 1992(2) SLR 82.
It has been claimed that there is no executive order passed by the respondents-State by equating the post of Assistant Director (Demography) and Statistician in the department of Economic and Statistical Organisation and, therefore, in the absence of any order of equivalence of the posts no parity as of right in the scale of pay could be claimed by the petitioners.
The respondents have also placed reliance on various cases to highlight the distinction between the hierarchy of the various posts in both the departments.
The service in both the departments is governed by separate statutory rules.
The petitioners are governed by Haryana Health Department, non-medical Gazetted Officers Statistical (Group B) Services Rules, 1995 (for brevity to be referred as Health Rules).
These rules cover the post of Assistant Director (Demography) and Statistical Officer/Statistician.
The post of Deputy ESA and Research Officer are governed by the rules known as Punjab Economic and Statistical Organization (Group A) Services Rule, 1963 as amended in 1996 (for brevity ESO Rules) and Haryana Economic and Statistical Organisation (Group `B').
4.
Mr. RN Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that for promotion to the post of Assistant Director (Demography) Rule 9 of the Health Rules provides that the posts of Statistician/Statistical Officer are feeder post.
According to the learned counsel both the posts have been kept in the same scale of pay of 2000-3500 w.e.f.
111986, which has been further revised to 6500-10500 w.e.f.
111996.
He has placed reliance on two Division Bench judgments of this Court in the cases of Sunder Lal Jain's case (supra) and Pawan Kumar v. State of Haryana, 2003(1) S.C.T.
286, CWP No. 4704 of 2000, decided on 682002 and argued that the pay scale of promotional posts and feedeer post cannot be same merely because the respondent had resorted to bunching of a large number of posts.
In that regard reliance has also been placed on a Division Bench of this Court in Harkishan v. State of Punjab, 1985(5) SLR 539.
5.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel has then argued that in case the nature of duties and responsibilities, hierarchy of service, method of recruitment, educational qualification, experience and avenues of promotions etc. are also identical then the equation between the posts of Assistant Director (Demography)/Statistician/Statistical Officer must be maintained with the Deputy ESA/Research Officer in the department of Economic and Statistical Organization.
6.
Mr. Harish Rathi, learned Senior Advocate General Haryana for the respondents has argued that the question of equal pay for equal work has been entrusted to expert bodies like Pay Commission and the Courts are not equipped to find out whether one post is equivalent to that of another.
He has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, 1989(1) SCC 121, and argued that the incumbents of two different posts may do the same work but their quality of work may differ.
According to the learned counsel the impugned order dated 592001 (Annexure P-11) has considered all aspects in detail and it has been concluded that the posts in the Department of Economic and Statistical Organization are different with regard to their qualification and even nature of duties.
On the aforementioned basis, learned counsel has argued that no interference of this Court would be warranted.
He has further submitted that on facts, it could not be argued by the petitioners that the pay scale of the post of Statistical Officer and Statistician are equivalent to that of Assistant Director (Demography), which is a promotional post.
He has referred to the executive instructions dated 731988 (Annexure R-II), 232001 (Annexure R-III) and 20.4.2001 (Annexure R-IV).
On that basis he has argued that different pay scale in the feeder cadre and the promotional cadre might have provided an ideal situation yet the administrative hierarchy does not permit to achieve the ideal situation especially when number of pay scales were reduced from 70 to 30 by adopting the process of bunching of various pay scale at the time of revision.
Therefore, provision has been rightly made on the basis of Rule 4.4(a) of Civil Services Rules Volume 1 Part 1 that on promotion the pay of an employee should be fixed at a stage next to the stage from which he has been promoted provided pay scales of both the posts are the same.
In that regard, learned counsel has placed reliance of a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of SK Bishnoi and others v. State of Haryana, 1993(4) S.C.T.
127, CWP No. 12483 of 1990, decided on 151980.
7.
Having heard learned counsel, perusing the documents on record along with pleadings of the parties, we proceed to record our views.
A perusal of the impugned order dated 592001 (Annexure P-11) would show that after detail examination of the Rules applicable to both sets of posts, respondent No. 2 has concluded that no case was made out for granting the pay scale of Rs. 7450-11500 w.e.f.
111996 to petitioner No. 1.
Respondent No. 2 has made a detailed reference to the Health Rules and ESO Rules which brings out the following hierarchy in the cadre of the petitioners :  Sr. No.  Post  Group  Pay Scale as on 111996  Pay Scale as on 1.1.1995 1.
Assistant Director  `B'  2000-3500  6500-10500 2.
Statistical Officer/Statistician  `B'  2000-3500  6500-10500 3.
Head Assistant/(Stacs) Jr. Statistical Nosologist  `C'  1600-2600  5450-8000 4.
Statistical and Vital Health Supervisor/Statistical Assistant/Investigator/Machine Operator/Field Evaluation Worker.
`C'  1400- 2600  6000-7850 5.
Senior Computer/Compilation Clerk  `C'  1200-2040  4000-6000 6.
Computer/Statistical Clerk/Punch Operator/Verifier Operator  `C'  950-1500  3050-4500 8.
On the basis of above table, it has been calculated that in the case of Statistical Officer/Statistician 50% of the posts are filled up by way of promotion from amongst Head Assistants, which is shown at Sr. No. 3 in the table.
Likewise the post of Assistant Director is filled up by way of promotion to the extent of 50% from amongst the Statistical Officer/Statistician and both posts have been shown at Sr. No. 2 in the table.
Both the posts of Assistant Director and Statistical Officer/Statistician have been included in Group B post.
The education qualifications prescribed for the post of Assistant Director (Demography) are Master's degree with at least 50% marks in Mathematics with Statistics as one of the papers/Statistics/Econometrics/Operations Research/Demography or Graduation with Mathematics with Statistics as one of the subjects, two years diploma in Statistics from a recognized institution or graduate with Mathematics or with Statistics as one of the subjects and one year diploma in Health Statistics from a recognized University.
A period of five years experience in Demography including Vital and Health Statistics and Census has also been prescribed with qualification of Hindi up to Matric Standard.
For a Statistician other qualification was same but in the second alternative three years experience in Social Survey and Social Research additionally has been prescribed.
Similar is the position with regard to educational qualification for the post of Statistical Officer.
9.
On comparison with the post of Deputy ESA and Research Officer in the ESO Department, it has been concluded that according to Rule 13 of ESA Rules the post of Deputy ESA is Group `A' post and according to Group `B' ESO Rules, the following hierarchy in the cadre emerges :  Sr. No.  Post  Group  Pay Scale as on 111986  Pay Scales as on 111996 1.
Research Officer/Distt.
Statistical Officer/Economist/Planning Officer/Credit Planning Officer.
`B'  2000-3500  7450-11500 2.
Assistant Research Officer/Asstt.
Distt.
Statistical Officer.
`C'  1640- 2900  6500-9900 3.
Statistical Assistant/Investigator  `C'  1600-2600  5450-800 4.
Field Assistant  1400-2600  5000-7850 5.
Jr. Field Investigator  `C'  950-1500  3050-4500 6.
Computer  `C'  950-1500  3050-4500 10.
The qualifications prescribed for the post of Research Officer are MA with Economics or Agriculture Economics or Mathematics or Commerce with minimum 50% marks with Statistics as one of the papers.
Three years experience in collection, compilation and analysis of Statistical date or Research Work in Applied Economics or Statistics or Economic planning in a State or Central Government or a recognized University or research institution or State/Central Government Public Undertaking is required.
11.
On the basis of aforementioned comparison made by the respondent, it has been rightly concluded that the posts held by the respondents namely Assistant Director (Demography) and Statistical Officer/Statistician could not be compared with the post of Deputy ESA and Research Officer in the Department of ESO.
Even otherwise it is well settled principle that the qualification of post and determination of pay scale is the primary function of the executive, which is well equipped with all the expertise and data.
In the case of Secretary, Finance Department v. WB Registration Service Association, 1993 Supp.
(1) SCC 153, their Lordships of the Supreme Court in para 12 has observed as under :  "We do not consider it necessary to traverse the case law on which reliance has been placed by counsel for the appellants as it is well settled that equation of posts and determination of pay scales is the primary function of the executive and not the judiciary and, therefore, ordinarily courts will not enter upon the task of job evaluation which is generally left to expert bodies like the Pay Commissions, etc.
But that is not to say that the Court has no jurisdiction and the aggrieved employees have no remedy if they are unjustly treated by arbitrary State action or inaction.
Courts must, however, realize that job evaluation is both a difficult and time consuming task which even expert bodies having the assistance of staff with requisite expertise have found difficult to undertake sometimes on account of want of relevant data and scales for evaluation performances of different groups of employees.
This would call for a constant study of the external comparisons and internal relatives on account of the changing nature of job requirements.
The factors which may have to be kept in view for job evaluation may include (i) the work programme of his department (ii) the nature of contribution expected of him (iii) the extent of his responsibility and accountability in the discharge of his diverse duties and functions (iv) the extent and nature of freedoms/limitations available or imposed on him in the discharge of his duties (v) the extent of powers vested in him (vi) the extent of his dependence on superiors for the exercise of his powers (vii) the need to coordinate with other departments, etc. We have also referred to the history of the service and the effort of various bodies to reduce the total number of pay scales to a reasonable number.
Such reduction in the number of pay scales has to be achieved by resorting to broadbanding of posts by placing different posts having comparable job charts in a common scale.
Substantial reduction in the number of pay scales must inevitably lead to clubbing of posts and grades which were earlier different and unequal.
While doing so care must be taken to ensure that such rationalization of the pay structure does not throw up anomalies.
Ordinarily a pay structure is evolved keeping in mind several factors, e.g. (i) method of recruitment, (ii) level at which recruitment is made, (iii) the hierarchy of service in a given cadre, (iv) minimum educational/technical qualifications required, (v) avenues of promotion, (vi) the nature of duties and responsibilities, (vii) the horizontal and vertical relativities with similar jobs, (viii) public dealings, (ix) satisfaction level, (x) employer's capacity to pay, etc. We have referred to these matters in some detail only to emphasize that several factors have to be kept in view while evolving a pay structure and the horizontal and vertical relativities have to be carefully balanced keeping in mind the hierarchy arrangements, avenues for promotion, etc.
Such a carefully evolved pay structure ought not to be ordinarily disturbed as it may upset the balance and cause avoidable ripples in other cadres as well."
12.
Similar view has been expressed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Indian Railway Staff Association v. Union of India, 1998(1) SCT 639 (SC) : 1998(2) SCC 651; Deb Narayan Shyam v. State of West Bengal, 2005(1) SCT 166 (SC) : 2005(2) SCC 286 and State Bank of India v. KP Subbiah, 2003(3) SCT 709 (SC) : 2003(11) SCC 646.
13.
When the aforementioned principles are applied to the facts of the present case, it emerges that the ESO Department is charged with the responsibilities of centralized collection of data and statistics of all the departments in Government, interpolate the same and analyse it with a view to frame the economic policies and assisting the Government in the analysis and impact evaluation of its various programs.
The core activity of the Health Department is to provide health services in the State and the Statistical Wing is only one of the subsidiary wings in collection, compilation of data and statistics pertaining to the activities of Health Department alone.
Therefore, there cannot be any comparison of the various posts in both the departments as has been rightly concluded by the respondent No. 2 in the impugned order.
14.
We are further of the view that the structural hierarchy of various posts in both the departments are different.
The post of Assistant Director (Demography) is a Group `B' post which has been held by petitioner No. 1 whereas the post of Deputy ESO in the ESO Department is a `Group `A' post and there cannot be any comparison.
The post of Research Officer in the Department of ESO, which is a Group `B' post could also not been compared with the post of Deputy ESO in view of the qualification prescribed, experience required as compared with that of the qualification prescribed for the post of Assistant Director (Demo).
The impugned order further analyzed the structure of Statistical Wing in the Health Department and the structure of the services in the ESO which have been found to be are together different and the same reads as under :-  "For instance, the basic feeder post in the ESO is Statistical Assistant which is filled up to the extent of 50% by way of direct recruitment for whom the qualification prescribed are Master's degree in Economics with one year experience or a Graduate in Economics with three years experience whereas the post of Statistical Assistant in the Statistical Wing of the Health Department is filled up by way of 25% direct recruitment and 75% by way of promotion from lower posts.
Similarly, the post of AROs in the ESO are filled up 50% by way of direct recruitment and 50% by way of promotion amongst Statistical Assistants whereas it is 25% by way of direct recruitment and 75% by way of promotion from amongst the lower cadres in the Health Department.
It is, thus, clear that there is difference in method of recruitment, the level on which the recruitment is made and the hierarchy of service in the given cadres."
15.
In view of the above on principles as well as precedents, it is concluded that the posts in both the departments cannot be equated by undertaking any judicial exercise.
Moreover, the Courts cannot enter into an inquiry of comparing two posts belonging to different departments for the purposes of equal pay for equal work.
Therefore, the first ground pressed by the petitioners for claiming higher pay scale must fail and the same is hereby rejected.
16.
The second ground on which the claim of the petitioners has been founded can also not been sustained because in order to remove the grievance of the petitioners, respondent-State has issued instructions dated 731988 by making a provision for re-fixation of pay at the next higher stage.
Under the revised scale of pay when it is certified that post in higher pay scale prior to 111986 carried higher responsibility and heavier duties and that the pre-revised scale of pay for the promotion post were higher than the feeder post which became equivalent after the revision then pay of such a promotee is required to be fixed at one stage higher than the petitioner was getting in the feeder post.
The aforementioned position emerges from a perusal of para No. 4 of the instructions wherein it is admitted that the post of Assistant Director (Demography) is a promotional and higher post than the post of Statistical Officer/Statistician under the Health Rules.
It is also admitted that both the posts have been granted the pay scale of 2000-3500 w.e.f.
111986 and 6500-10500 w.e.f.
111996.
In order to remove the anomaly, it has now been provided by issuance of instructions dated 731988 (Annexure R- II) that in such a situation, the pay of the government employee is to be fixed at next higher stage under the provision of 4.4(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
It is not the case of the petitioners that the benefits contemplated by instructions dated 731988 (R-II) have not been given to them.
Therefore no case is made out for issuance of any direction as there is no infraction of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
17.
The arguments of the learned counsel that there was parity in the pay scale of the posts held by the petitioners in the Health Department and those of in the ESO department does not require any detail consideration because mere identical scale of pay in two different departments would not ipso facto lead to a conclusion that parity must be maintained.
Such an argument could be conceded in case there is a conscious decision of the Government accepting two posts equivalent to each other as has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Secretary, Finance Department case (supra).
Similarly reliance on the judgments of this Court in the case of Sunder Lal Jain (supra) and other cases is absolutely misplaced as the position in the present case has been completely changed by instructions dated 731988 (R-II) as has already been discussed in the preceding paras.
Therefore, we do not feel impressed by the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
18.
In view of the above, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.