JS Narang, J - The State has invoked the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the impugned award dated September 26, 2005, passed by the Labour Court, Hisar, copy Annexure P-1.
2.
The facts need to be noticed are that Smt. Suresh wife of Mangat Ram, the work-woman had been employed as a Beldar in August 1997 on daily wages by the Public Works Department (B&R), National Highway Division No. 3, Hisar.
It has been averred that she had worked from the aforesaid month and year but with substantial break.
It is also the case of the department that she had left the job on her own in January 1999, therefore, is not entitled to any relief.
However, the work-woman has claimed that she continued to work from 581997 to 1.2.1999 when her services were terminated without giving any retrenchment compensation and also without giving any notice and that the persons junior to her have been retained.
3.
The work-woman issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
Conciliation efforts were made but all in vain and that the appropriate government referred the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The work-woman filed the claim, which has been refuted by the management as noticed earlier.
Apart from what has been recorded above, it has also been pleaded that she had left the job of her own and on many occasion she was not present and that some other daily wagers, with different names, had worked.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, the issues had been framed and the ocular as well as documentary evidence has been brought on record.
4.
The pivotal plea of the respondent-petitioner is that the workman had not completed 240 days in the 12 preceding months from the date of alleged termination of the work-workwoman.
Therefore, the reference as well as the claim before the Labour Court could not be sustained.
It has also been contended that the work-woman had not come present, therefore, her name could not be found in the muster roll and that the Labour Court has incorrectly drawn the inference to the effect that the workman had worked for a period of 240 days in the 12 preceding months from the date of termination.
It has also been contended that the management had produced Ram Dhari as witness and he has testified that the work-woman had left the job of her own and that this fact has been completely ignored by the Labour Court.
Resultantly, the petition deserves to be allowed and the award dated 1692005, ought to be quashed.
We have heard learned Deputy Advocate General at length and have perused the paper book as also award impugned before us.
5.
The work-woman has categorically pleaded in the demand notice that she had worked from August 5, 1997 to February 1, 1999, the date of termination and that she had worked beyond 240 days within 12 preceding months from the aforesaid date and further she had not been given any notice of retrenchment and obviously the retrenchment compensation had not been paid.
It has also been pleaded that junior persons to her had been retained.
It is also the case of the workman that an application had been submitted before the Labour Court for production of the muster roll and the wages bill of the relevant period.
Pursuant to the direction of the Labour Court one Krishan Pal Clerk had appeared for and on behalf of the Management on November 2, 2004 but had produced the Muster roll of few months only and had tendered their photocopies, which have been exhibited as under :  "Ex. W1 August 1997 Ex. W2 September 1997 Ex. W3 November 1997 Ex. W10 May 1998 Ex. W5 June 1998 Ex. W9 July 1998 Ex. W6 December 9, 1992; and Ex. D7 January 1999."
6.
It has been categorically noticed that he did not produce the muster roll of remaining months and the explanation rendered is that the muster roll of August and September 1998 had been lost but no evidence in this regard is forthcoming as to whether any FIR had been registered or not.
It is obvious that the management by not producing the record has virtually helped the work-woman and that the Labour Court has correctly drawn inference accordingly and has held that the work-woman had completed the required 240 days in 12 preceding months from the date of termination.
Admittedly, no notice or compensation has been given to the workman and, therefore, is entitled to the relief.
One Ramdhari has also appeared as MW-1 and has stated that the work- woman had left the job of her own but could not substantiate the submissions so made and in cross-examination conceded that there is no entry on the record regarding abandonment of service.
It is obvious that the management failed to prove the case of abandonment against the work-woman.
7.
We find no infirmity in the award rendered by the Labour Court and it does not call for any interference.
The petition deserves to be dismissed and we order accordingly.
8.
Before we part with this judgment, we have seen on a number of occasions that such like petitions are being filed by various departments where the daily wagers are taken into employment and that the departments are obligated under Section 25-D of the Act for maintaining the muster rolls meticulously and regularly by obtaining the signature of the work-woman/workman at the requisite place in the muster roll for having received the remuneration accordingly.
It is unfortunate that in such like cases, the records are not being produced and the persons, who may have been given the back door entries are sought to be regularised through the process of the Court.
In the first instance seeking reference from the appropriate government and thereafter by not producing the relevant record i.e. "Muster roll" for the reasons best known to the authorities, who are obligated to maintain such records and then suffer the adverse inference drawn against them.
It is obvious that the persons, who are at the helms of affairs in these departments, perhaps are not aware of such situations or they appear to have closed their eyes in this regard.
We deprecate such practices and the callous attitude for not producing the statutory document required to be maintained under the Act.
The litigants (including the State) ought to come to the forums with clean hands and clear picture vis-a-vis the record so that it becomes easier for the courts to dispense justice in a fair and clean manner.
It has left an impression on us that by using and abusing the process provided under the statute, the seals of the forums including the courts are obtained/procured by making the forums and the courts helpless in view of the law laid down and the statutory provisions provided.
Such use and abuse ought to be avoided and the person who is responsible in this regard has to be proceeded against.
9.
We request the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, to look into this matter/such similar matters and advise the persons involved in this regard to act and react judiciously, fairly and in a right thinking manner so that the seals of the forums and the Courts are not allowed to be used and abused, as observed above.
Copy of this judgment be sent to the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, for issuing appropriate communications to all concerned.
Petition dismissed.