SS Nijjar, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks quashing of the order dated 3122004 (Annexure P-10) vide which he has been dismissed from service of the Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation (PUNSUP) (respondent No. 2) (`Corporation' - for short).
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as a driver in the respondent- Corporation on 2561979.
During the course of his service an FIR was registered against him on 2321988 under Section 409 IPC alleging that while serving as a driver he had misappropriated 500 Tins of Palm Oil between the period from June 1985 to January 1986.
The petitioner was prosecuted and on successful completion of the prosecution he was convicted by judgment dated 1471995 by the learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Nakodar.
He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment of two years and a fine of Rs. 2,000/-.
Against the order of conviction, the petitioner filed an appeal which has also been dismissed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jalandhar by judgment dated 2232004.
The petitioner thereafter filed a criminal revision petition in this Court, which has been admitted on 642004 qua the sentence only.
Sentence of imprisonment imposed on the petitioner has been suspended during the pendency of the revision petition and he is on bail.
3.
In the meantime, after registration of the FIR two charge-sheets were also issued against the petitioner under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (`Rules' - for short) vide No. Admn.
12(370)-86/32479 dated 591986 and No. Admn.
12(370)-89/25948 dated 7/1271989.
The first charge-sheet contained six charges.
Charges Nos. (i), (ii) and (iv) related to misappropriation.
Charge No. (iii) related to misappropriation of 200 tins of Palm Oil on 1061985.
Charge No. (v) pertained to remaining on unauthorized leave.
Charge No. (vi) pertained to the petitioner being challaned for driving the truck without a driving licence.
The second charge-sheet contained only one charge pertaining to embezzlement of 300 tins of Palm Oil.
In respect of the two charge-sheets a departmental enquiry was held.
The petitioner was found guilty of all the charges in both the charge-sheets, except Charge No. (ii) of the first charge-sheet which was partially proved.
He had been charged with embezzlement of 93 litres of diesel by making cutting in the log-book.
It was proved that he had embezzled diesel to the extent of 63 litres and not 93 litres.
Inspite of the aforesaid findings of the Enquiry Officers, in the aforesaid charge-sheets, the petitioner was not dismissed from service.
Rather he was ordered to be reinstated in service by an order dated 121996 passed by the respondent Corporation.
By this order, it has been further directed that an amount of Rs. 94,393/- be recovered from the petitioner, as the value of the oil misappropriated by him and that his two increments be stopped with cumulative effect.
After the suspension of sentence of imprisonment by this Court on 642004 and despite the order of reinstatement, the petitioner was not permitted to join duty.
He, therefore, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 14482 of 2004, seeking directions to the respondents to reinstate him in service.
The aforesaid writ petition is pending at motion stage for 31.8.2006.
The petitioner claims that on notice of motion having been issued in the aforesaid writ petition, the respondents have passed the impugned order dated 642004 (Annexure P-10), dismissing him from service.
The said order of dismissal from service has been challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that imposition of penalty of dismissal amounts to double jeopardy as the petitioner had already been punished by order dated 121996.
The aforesaid order had been passed after the conviction of the petitioner by the learned trial Magistrate and during the pendency of the criminal appeal.
The respondents, therefore, cannot be permitted to pass an order of dismissal from service on the basis of the same conviction.
6.
After giving our thoughtful to the matter we are unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel.
In normal circumstances, on conviction in respect of offences involving misappropriation/ embezzlement, a delinquent official is liable to be dismissed from service.
The petitioner was shown leniency in terms of the order dated 121996.
The appeal of the petitioner against his conviction by the trial Magistrate has been dismissed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge Jalandhar on 2232004.
Even the criminal revision petition has been admitted only qua sentence.
Therefore, the conviction on account of embezzlement/misappropriation is not effaced.
We have not been informed as to whether the petitioner had moved any further appeal in the Supreme Court as the criminal revision petition has been admitted by this Court only qua sentence.
7.
A reading of the impugned order of dismissal from service of the petitioner passed on 3122004 (annexure P-10) would show that the same has been passed under Rules 5 and 13 of the rules in consequence of a finding of guilt and conviction recorded by the courts in respect of the petitioner.
The order dated 121996 imposing recovery of Rs. 94,393/- and punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was passed by way of departmental action.
Rule 13 of the rules in terms of which the petitioner has been dismissed from service provides for special procedure in certain cases.
It is inter alia provided therein that notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 where any penalty is imposed on a Government employee on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge, the punishing authority may consider the circumstances of the case and make such order thereon as it deems fit.
The procedure provided in terms of Rule 13 of the rules is in fact even contemplated by Article 311(2)(a) of the Constitution of India.
This procedure, therefore, is in conformity with the constitutional provisions.
In Union of India and others v. Sunil Kumar Sarkar, 2001(2) SCT 64 (SC) : 2001(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 40 : 2001(3) SCC 414, the delinquent employee therein was found guilty in proceedings conducted by a General Court Martial (GCM) under the provisions of the Army Act, 1950.
He was sentenced to undergo RI for six months.
In the meantime, the said delinquent employee was also proceeded against by way of disciplinary proceedings under Rule 19 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and appeal) Rules, 1965 (`Central Rules' - for short).
On conclusion of the departmental inquiry he was dismissed from service.
The orders of conviction under the Army Act as well as dismissal from service in the departmental proceedings were assailed by the respondent therein.
It was held by the Supreme Court that all that a disciplinary authority is expected to do under Rule 19 is to be satisfied that the officer concerned had been convicted of a criminal charge and has been given a show cause notice and reply to such show cause notice, if any, should be properly considered before making any order under the said rule.
Also it would have to bear in mind the gravity of the conviction suffered by the Government servant in the criminal proceedings before passing any order under rule 19 to maintain the proportionality of punishment.
Besides, the question regarding double jeopardy as has been contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the present case was also considered.
It was observed as follows :-  "Before concluding we must point out that during the course of arguments, a doubt was raised as to the maintainability of the concurrent proceedings initiated against the respondent by the authorities.
The respondent in this case has been punished for the same misconduct both under the Army Act as also under the Central Rules.
Hence, a question arises whether this would tantamount to "double jeopardy" and is in violation of Article 20 of the Constitution of India.
Having considered the arguments addressed in this behalf, we are of the opinion that so far as the concurrent proceedings initiated by the organisation against the respondent both under the Army Act and the Central Rules are concerned, they are unexceptionable.
These two proceedings operate in two different fields though the crime or the misconduct might arise out of the same act.
The court-martial proceedings deal with the penal aspect of the misconduct while the proceedings under the Central Rules deal with the disciplinary aspect of the misconduct.
The two proceedings do not overlap."
In view of the above observations, it is evident that the departmental action taken against the petitioner leading to the passing of the order on 121996 and also the impugned order of dismissal from service passed on 3122004 (Annexure P-10) in consequence of the finding of guilt and conviction recorded by the Courts are independent in nature and operate in different fields and that they do not overlap.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not raised any objection with respect to the procedure followed for imposing the penalty of dismissal from service.
Therefore, the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service impugned in the present petition has been passed on account of the finding of guilt and conviction of the petitioner by the criminal Courts.
The same is independent of the earlier order imposing recovery of Rs. 94,393/- and punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
Even otherwise the impugned order of dismissal from service was passed on 3122004 and in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case we are not inclined to entertain this writ petition at this belated stage.
The Supreme Court in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1974 SC 2271, has observed as follows :-  "It is not that there is any period of limitation for the Courts to exercise their powers under Article 226 nor is it that there can never be a case where the Courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time.
But it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for the Courts to refuse to exercise their extra-ordinary powers under Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by and allow things to happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claims and try to unsettle settled matters."
The petitioner in fact has not even cared to avail the remedy of appeal either against the order of punishment dated 121996 or against the order of dismissal dated 3122004.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.