SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Driver in the year 1976 in the Punjab Backward Classes Land Development and Finance Corporation, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the respondent- Corporation').
The petitioner was on duty with one Jaswant Singh, Recovery Officer on 2652001.
He was driving jeep No. CH-01Q-5421 which was involved in an accident with a Punjab Roadways bus.
It is the case of the petitioner that the accident occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of the bus driver.
FIR No. 141 dated 2652001 was registered with Police Station, Barnala.
The petitioner suffered multiple injuries on the head and other parts of the body.
After a lapse of about 9 months on 25.2.2002, Jaswant Singh made a false report to the respondent-Corporation that the petitioner is habitual of drinking and that he has weak eye sight.
He stated that the accident occurred due to the weak eye sight of the petitioner as well as due to drinking.
The respondent Corporation sent all its drivers for a medical examination before the Medical Board on 3062003.
The Medical Board reported that clinically there was nothing to indicate that the petitioner was not fit to drive provided he does not consume alcohol.
He was advised to attend the hospital regularly.
Subsequently on 2912004, the Medical Board submitted another report in which it was observed that the petitioner was not fit for driver's job.
On the basis of the aforesaid report, a show cause notice dated 1722004/2722004 was issued to the petitioner under Clause 20(3)(b) of the Punjab Backward Classes Land Development and Finance Corporation Staff Regulations, 1979 known as `BACKFINCO' Staff Regulations, 1979.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the show cause notice on 332004.
Respondent No. 2 passed order dated 932004/2232004 terminating the services of the petitioner.
The request (Annexure-P.2) made by the petitioner for the grant of alternative Class IV post of Peon was rejected.
The petitioner submitted a statutory appeal against the order of termination dated 932004 to the Chairman of the respondent-Corporation.
The appeal filed by the petitioner has also been dismissed.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid orders dated 732004 (Annexure-P.3) and dated 1592004 (Annexure-P.5) in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It has been stated that the petitioner initially joined service as Driver on ad hoc basis on 4.5.1977.
He was appointed on regular basis by letter dated 2831980.
He joined duty as Driver on 361980.
The respondents denied for want of knowledge as to whether the petitioner has sustained any injuries in the accident.
It is accepted that the petitioner appeared before the Medical Board but only after show cause notice was issued to him for not appearing for medical examination when he was first ordered to do so.
Ultimately when the petitioner appeared before the Medical Board, the following report was given :  "Mr. Bahadur Singh was diagnosed to be suffering from ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE and its complication like Generalised cerebrrale, astrophy and Multiple Lacunar Infarcts for which he was suitably investigated and treated.
At present there is nothing to suggest clinically that he is not fit for driving provided he does not consume alcohol in future for which he is advised to attend this hospital regularly."
Since the aforesaid report was not clear, he was again examined by the Board when the following report was given :  "Sh. Bahadur Singh was subjected to repeat PSYCHOMETRY EXAMINATION at GMC, Sector 32, Chandigarh vide No. 11/04 on 19-1-04, the report of which concludes that he has MARKED DEFICITS, in perceptual motor integrative ability, memory and intellectual functioning resulting from ORGANICITY.
In view of the above stated facts, the Board is of the opinion that Mr. Bahadur Singh is NOT FIT FOR DRIVER'S JOB."
After the report, the petitioner went on leave from 2272003 till 21.3.2004.
On the basis of the report given by the Medical Board, the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner under Regulation 20(3) (b) of the `BACKFINCO' Staff Regulations, 1979.
Thereafter order terminating his services was passed on 932004 (Annexure P-3).
As noticed earlier, the statutory appeal filed by the petitioner has been dismissed on 15.9.2005 (Annexure P-5).
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper book.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the provisions of Clause 20(3) (b) are wholly arbitrary as it gives the power to the respondent-Corporation to dismiss even a confirmed/permanent employee without assigning any reason.
Under this clause the respondents have also been granted a very harsh power even to terminate the services of an employee who has become incapacitated during the period of his service.
Learned counsel further submits that the provisions contained in Clause 20 (3) (b) of the `BACKFINCO' Staff Regulations, 1979 is also ultra vires the provisions contained in Section 47 of Persons with Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as `1995 Act').
He points out that the respondent-Corporation is established under the Punjab Backward Classes Land Development and Finance Corporation Act, 1976.
The `BACKFINCO' Staff Regulations, 1979 were framed under the powers conferred under Section 34 of the aforesaid Act.
The respondent-Corporation is wholly controlled acid managed by the State of Punjab.
The provisions of 1995 Act would, therefore, be applicable to the employees of the respondent- Corporation.
In support of the aforesaid submissions, learned counsel has relied on Section 2(k) of the 1995 Act which may be reproduced as under :  "2(k) `Establishment' means a corporation established by or under a Central Provincial or State Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a local authority or a Govt. Company as defined in Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1950 and includes department of a Government".
Learned counsel further submits that orders Annexures-P.3 and P.5 apart from being wholly without jurisdiction and arbitrary are liable to be quashed as the respondents have even failed to exercise the power vested in them under Clause 20(3) (b) of the `BACKFINCO' Staff Regulations, 1979.
He submits that under this very regulation, the respondent-Corporation had the discretion to rehabilitate the petitioner in an alternative job.
However, the respondents have brushed aside the claim of the petitioner even for being appointed on a Class-IV post of Peon.
Clause 20(3)(b) clearly provides that the Corporation shall have the right to continue an employee who has been incapacitated in the service of the Corporation.
The Medical Board merely stated that the petitioner is unfit for the job of a Driver.
The Medical Board did not declare him unfit to be kept in service on any other post which did not entail driving.
In normal circumstances, the petitioner would have retired on superannuation at the age of 58 years.
He had 27 years unblemished service to his credit at the time when his services were terminated.
No blame was attached to the petitioner for causing the accident as the FIR was registered against the Driver of the bus for rash and negligent driving.
5.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Regulation 20 is as under :  "Termination of Service by notice :- (1) An Officer or an employee shall not leave or discontinue his service in the Corporation without first giving notice in writing of his intention to do so to the Executive Director.
The period of notice required shall be : (a) three months in the case of confirmed employee; and  (b) one month in the case of temporary : Provided that in case of breach by an officer or an employee of the provision of this Sub-Regulation he shall be liable to pay the Corporation as compensation a sum equal to his pay for the period of notice required of him : Provided further that the payment of such compensation may be waived by the Executive Director with the approval of the Board in special circumstances to be recorded in writing.
(2) The Corporation may terminate at any time the service of any officer or employee after giving him (a) three months notice or pay in lieu thereof in the case of an officer; and (b) one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof if he is an employee.
This power shall be exercised by the Executive Director subject, in the case of officers, to the prior approval of the Board.
(3) Nothing in sub-regulation (2) shall affect the right of the Corporation : (a) to retire or dismiss an employee without notice or pay in lieu thereof in accordance with the provisions of Regulations; and  (b) to terminate the service of an employee without notice or pay in lieu thereof on his being certified by the Civil Surgeon of the District concerned or Corporation's Medical Officer when appointed to be permanently incapacitated for further continuous service in the Corporation.
Explanation : The expression `month' used in this regulation shall be reckoned according to the English Calendar and shall commence from the day following that on Which notice is given by the employee or the Corporation, as the case may be.
Explanation II : A notice given by an employee under sub- regulation (i) shall be deemed to be proper only if he remains on duty during the period of the notice, and an employee shall not be entitled to set off any leave earned and not availed of by him against the period of such notice.
Explanation III : If an employee to whom notice is given by the Corporation in pursuance of sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 20 shall absent himself from duty without permission during the period of notice, he shall not be entitled to receive any pay or allowance during the period of absence and shall further be liable to such further penalties as the Executive Directory may deem fit to impose."
A perusal of Regulation 20(2) (a) (b) shows that the Corporation has been given the power to terminate the services of even a confirmed employee without assigning any reason.
The aforesaid regulation is clearly ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It does not lay down any guidelines and gives absolute and arbitrary power to Corporation to terminate the serves of an employee.
The vires of such a regulation was considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd And Another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Another, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1571.
In this land mark Judgment, the Supreme Court has held that a regulation giving absolute power of termination of services of even a confirmed employee without assigning any reason would be ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In the aforesaid case the Supreme Court was considering Rule 9 of the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd Service Discipline and Appeal Rules of 1979 which is as under :-  "9.
Termination of Employment for Acts other than Misdemeanour.
(i) The employment of a permanent employee shall be subject to termination on three months' notice on either side.
The notice shall be in writing on either side.
The Company may pay the equivalent of three months' basic pay and dearness allowance, if any, in lieu of notice or may deduct a like amount when the employee has failed to give due notice.
(ii) The services of a permanent employee can be terminated on the grounds of "Services no longer required in the interest of the Company" without assigning any reason.
A permanent employee whose services are terminated under this Clause shall be paid 15 days basic pay and dearness allowance for each completed year of continuous service in the Company as compensation.
In addition, he will be entitled to encashment of leave at his credit."
Considering the aforesaid rules, the Supreme Court observed as follows :- "99.
No apter description of Rule 9 (i) can be given than to call it "the Henry VIII clause".
It confers absolute and arbitrary power upon the Corporation.
It does not even state who on behalf of the appellants that it would be that Board of Directors.
The impugned letters of termination, however, do not refer to any resolution or decision of the Board and even if they did, it would be irrelevant to the validity or Rule 9 (i).
There are not guidelines whatever had down to indicate in what circumstances the power given by Rule 9 (i) is to be exercised by the Corporation.
No opportunity whatever of a hearing is at all to be afforded to the permanent employee whose service is being remained in the exercise of the power.
It was urged that the Board of Directors would not exercise this power arbitrarily or capriciously as it consists of respondents and highly placed a persons may be, he must necessarily possess human frailties.
It also overlooks the will known saying of Lord Action, which has now almost become a minimum, in the Appendix to his Historical Essays and Studies," that "power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."
Similar view has been expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of OP Bhandari v. Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd, and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 111.
Both the aforesaid judgments have been followed by this Court in the case of Shiv Kumar Bishnoi v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(4) SLR 286.
A similar view was expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of The Senior Regional Manager, Punjab Region, Food Corporation of India and another v. Labh Singh and others, 1986(3) SLR 275.
In this case, the Division Bench was considering the provisions of Regulation 19(1) of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulation 1971 which was as under :-  "9.
Termination of service and discharge : (i) The service of any employee who has been appointed on a regular basis to any post in the Corporation and has satisfactorily compelled his period of probation may be terminated by the competent authority on giving such employee 90 days notice or pay in lieu thereof."
After considering the provisions, the Division Bench observed as follows :- "10.
It is well-recognized that rule or regulation which clothes the employer with authority to terminate the services of a permanent employee without holding an enquiry or without affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard and in violation of principles of an natural justice, it attracts the frown of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Such an arbitrary and discriminatory provision cannot be sustained because it offends the principle of equality and equal protection of laws enshrined in Article 14.
In Desh Bandhu Ghosh's case (supra) the Supreme Court struck down Regulation 34 of the West Bengal Electricity Board's Regulations which empowered the employer to terminate the services of a permanent employee on the ground that the power vested in the Board was capable of vicious discrimination and offends Article 14 of the Constitution.
A reference was made to the earlier decision in Workmen, Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Hindustan Steel., AIR 1985 SC 251, wherein the standing order conferring arbitrary, uncanalised and drastic power enabling the employer to dispense with an inquiry and to dismiss an employee, without assigning any reason.
By merely stating that it was expedient and against the interest of the security to continue to employ the workman, was violative of the basic requirement of natural justice.
6.
In our opinion, the aforesaid observations would be fully applicable to the facts on circumstances of the present case.
We hold that the provisions contained in Regulation 20(2) (a) (b) and Regulation 20 (3) (b) to be ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Apart from this the aforesaid clause is ultra vires Section 47 of the 1995 Act.
The aforesaid Section of the 1995 Act clearly provides that no establishment shall dispense with or reduce in rank an employee who acquires the disability during his service.
The Medical Board clearly shows that the petitioner has incurred the disability during service.
Therefore, his claim for an alternative employment has to be considered in view of Section 47 of the 1995 Act.
The respondent Corporation clearly falls within the definition of establishment as given in Section 2 (k).
Even Clause 20(3) (b) gives the discretion to the respondent Corporation to continue with the service of an incapacitated employee on some other post in the Corporation.
Under Section 47 of 1995 Act, the petitioner would be entitled to an alternative job which would carry the same pay scale as the post on which the petitioner was working when his services were terminated.
7.
Consequently, the petition is allowed.
Impugned Orders Annexures-P. 3 and P 5 are quashed.
The petitioner is reinstated into the service of the respondent-Corporation with all consequential benefits.
The respondents shall be at liberty to employ the petitioner or take work from the petitioner on any suitable post other than the post of Driver.
Necessary consequential relief be granted to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.