PS Patwalia, J. (Oral) - The present regular second appeal has been filed by the plaintiff against the judgment of the lower Appellate Court whereby the suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed after reversing the findings recorded by the trial Court decreeing the suit filed by the plaintiff.
2.
The plaintiff was appointed as Junior Engineer in the Public Health Sub Division, Budhladha in the year 1985.
He submitted his resignation on 2261992.
In the resignation he had specifically stated that the same should be accepted within a period of one month of its being tendered i.e. up to 3171992.
Thereafter it is the case of the plaintiff that he withdrew his resignation vide his request dated 31.12.1999 i.e. after a period of 7-1/2 years.
When his request was not accepted then he sent a telegram on 1212000 and another letter dated 732000 seeking reinstatement.
When there was no response to the same, he served a legal notice.
Thereafter the plaintiff filed the present suit in the month of August 2002.
3.
The defendants appeared and contested the same.
However the defendants could not produce any specific order by which the resignation filed by the plaintiff had been either accepted or declined.
The defendants relied on a Government Circular No. 184 C.O.
1-77/40341 dated 14/15.9.77 and contended that the resignation had become effective after the expiry of a period of one month and therefore it would be deemed to have been accepted.
4.
The trial Court after considering the case held that since the resignation had not been specifically accepted by the defendants the plaintiff continued to be a Government servant as a Junior Engineer and issued a mandatory injunction directing that a posting order should be issued posting the plaintiff as a Junior Engineer within two months from the date of the judgment.
However liberty was granted to the State to take action against the plaintiff for remaining absent from duty, if permissible under the Rules.
On issue No. 3 regarding limitation finding was recorded in favour of the plaintiff.
5.
A first appeal was filed by the State Government.
The Lower Appellate Court relying on the circular dated 14/15.9.77 found that the resignation was deemed to have been accepted and reversed the findings recorded by the learned trial Court on merits.
Even on the question of limitation the findings recorded by the trial Court were reversed.
The relevant observations are as hereunder :  "Under issue No. 3 learned trial court has wrongly held that plaintiff continued to be a government servant and he was entitled to file the present suit in August 2002.
Learned trial court failed to appreciate that since 22.6.92 the plaintiff never applied within a reasonable period to join him on the date and limitation has been running against the plaintiff since the day of submitting the resignation.
Therefore, the findings of learned trial Court on issue No. 3 are set aside and it is held that the suit filed by the plaintiff is beyond the period of limitation.
The findings of learned trial court on issue No. 4 has not been challenged before me and the same are affirmed."
The suit filed by the plaintiff was therefore dismissed.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. GC Gupta, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab.
6.
On merits, Mr. Malik has argued that the circular dated 14/15.9.77 which was placed on record by defendant-State relates to voluntarily retirement and it would not be applicable to the case of resignation.
He submitted that the said circular was issued drawing the strength from Rule 15.32-B(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II which relate to voluntary retirement only.
He therefore submits that the findings recorded by the lower appellate Court on merits cannot be sustained.
He further submitted that even the findings recorded by the lower appellate court on the issue of limitation cannot be sustained.
He states that once it is found that there is no order of acceptance of resignation then the plaintiff continued to be remained in service of the State Government.
At the most liberty was granted to the State to take action against the defendant-appellant for having absence from the duty.
On the other hand Mr. Gupta learned Deputy Advocate General states that the resignation submitted by the plaintiff-appellant is very specific.
He has categorical averred that the same should be accepted within one month.
He therefore submits that relying on the circular dated 14/15.9.77 that after the expiry of one month resignation is deemed to have been accepted.
He further submits that the suit filed by the plaintiff was rightly dismissed on the ground of limitation.
He states that in fact the plaintiff had stopped attending his duties from 15.1.1992.
He was thus absent from duty.
It was during the period of absence that he had sent his resignation.
He further states that right from January 1992 up to 31.12.1999 which is a period of almost eight years the plaintiff did not come to join his duty.
He had therefore abandoned his job.
He further submits that in case the resignation was not accepted within one month of 2261992 then limitation would start running after the expiry of one month.
The plaintiff should have been filed the suit within the period of three years from July 1992.
But the plaintiff did not do so and therefore the suit filed by the plaintiff on 782002 has rightly been rejected by the lower appellate Court on the ground of limitation.
7.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the findings recorded by the lower appellate Court dismissing the suit on the ground of limitation deserve to be confirmed.
In the present case the plaintiff had stopped attending his duties his duties in January 1992 itself.
While absent from his duties he had tendered his resignation in June 1992.
Thereafter for a period of seven years he never bothered to approach the department to seek to re-join his duties he filed the present suit after the expiry of eight years from January 1992.
The plaintiff had clearly abandoned his job.
Being a Government servant he cannot be allowed to approach the court after eight years and claim that he should be reinstated in service.
In my opinion if at all the plaintiff was aggrieved by the non acceptance of his resignation then the cause of action had accrued to him in July 1992 itself.
The suit for declaration could have been filed within a period of 3 years and two months from the date.
In my opinion the suit has rightly been rejected by the lower appellate Court on the ground of limitation.
This contention has been supported by the earlier decision of this Court in Punjab State and others v. Manohar Lal, 2004(1) SCT 836 : [2003(8) SLR 646 (Pb.
& Hry.)].
The relevant observations of this judgment are as under :-  ".....Secondly, the learned first appellate court has committed grave illegality while reversing the finding of the learned trial court with regard to the issue of limitation.
In the instant case, the cause of action could have arisen on 17.9.1968 when the resignation was not alleged to have been accepted, or on 12.1.1972 when the resignation was not allowed to be withdrawn and the respondent-plaintiff was not allowed to join duty, but in no circumstance it can be said that the cause of action arose to the respondent plaintiff on 13101980, when he served notice (Ex. P1) under Section 80 of the code upon the appellants-defendants.
The suit filed by the respondent plaintiff was hopelessly time barred and the learned first appellate court has illegally reversed the said finding and decreed the suit of the respondent- plaintiff.
Keeping in view the conduct of the respondent-plaintiff, his claim in the suit totally unjust and unreasonable and the same could not have been accepted."
In view of the above that I have found that the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant to be barred by limitation I need not go into the issue on merits.
8.
The order passed by the lower appellate Court dismissing the suit on the ground of limitation is therefore confirmed and I find no substantial question of law arising for consideration in this appeal.
The same is therefore dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.