BP Dharmadhikari, J - By this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of Constitution of India, the petitioner.
employer has questioned the concurrent orders passed by the Labour Court and Industrial Court.
The Labour Court by its order dated 2321994 held that dismissal of present respondent from service by order dated 4101986 was illegal and directed present petitioner to reinstate him with continuity and 50% back wages.
The petitioner challenged this order in Revision under Section 44 of Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, (hereinafter referred to as MRTU & PULP Act), before the Industrial Court, Bhandara, and the Industrial Court dismissed that revision on 591994.
Thereafter present petition has been filed.
This Court has admitted the petition on 21.2.1995 and granted stay to payment of back wages.
The said stay is operating even today.
2.
The respondent is working as a Conductor with petitioner and he was given a charge-sheet on 2031986 for misconducts falling under clauses 10, 22 and 45 of Schedule .A.
of Discipline and Appeal Procedure in relation to incidence dated 1831986 and 1931986.
Clause 10 is about indiscipline, clause 22 is about violating any administrative circular or order while clause 45 deals with consumption and being under influence of any alcoholic substance or liquor while on duty.
It will be relevant to point out that said clause 45 which requires that employee must be shown to be under influence of alcohol or liquor has been amended later on and portion requiring proof of such influence has been removed and mere consumption of said substance while on duty has been made a misconduct.
3.
The said order was questioned by the respondent by filing ULP Complaint before the Labour Court and later on said complaint was transferred to Labour Court at Bhandara, where it was registered as Complaint/PULP/ No. 185 of 1989.
The Labour Court delivered its judgment on 2321994.
It found that the departmental enquiry against the respondent was fair and valid, however, the findings were not justified.
It held that misconduct allegedly committed on 1831986 by the respondent was not proved.
Similarly, misconduct under clause 45 in relation to incidence dated 1931986 was also not proved.
In para 23 it considered the gravity of misconduct and after presuming the allegations in relation to misconduct dated 1831986 to be correct, it found that the act of respondent i.e. quarreling with Shri Shende while he was holding steering and bus was plying was very serious.
It, therefore, granted respondent relief of reinstatement with 50% back wages.
The said order has been maintained by the Industrial Court in revision.
The Industrial Court also made reference to judgment dated 191982 in Writ Petition No. 2806 of 1991 between M.S.R.T.C.
Amravati v. Ramchandra Ukandrao Jambhulkar, to hold that alco test conducted by Depot Manager on 1931986 could not have been relied upon to establish the misconduct.
4.
I have heard Shri Wankhede, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Jaiswal, learned counsel for the respondent.
5.
Shri Wankhede, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Corporation has contended that the Labour Court has erred in holding that findings of Enquiry Officer are perverse.
He points out the statement of Conductor, who was on duty in the bus of Driver Shri Shende, to show that said conductor also stated that respondent entered the cabin of bus in which the driver Shri Shende was sitting while driving the bus and assaulted him.
He further stated that the discussion in this respect by Labour Court is not proper and it shows material omissions.
In relation to incidence dated 1931986, he relies upon alco test to contend that alco test and its panchnama prepared immediately was proved on record.
The Labour Court or Industrial Court could not have overlooked the same and arrived at a different finding.
In view of these submissions, he concludes by stating that punishment of dismissal was sufficient and proportionate considering the nature of misconduct proved and Courts could not have interfered with the quantum of punishment.
6.
Shri Jaiswal, learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, contends that charge sheet served upon the respondent was very vague.
It did not disclose the necessary details of misconduct and the evidence before the Enquiry Officer also did not support the finding that present respondent in any way beat driver Shri Shende.
He states that alleged incidence was after duty hours of respondent and in cross examination, the said material has been properly brought on record by the respondent but Enquiry Officer overlooked it.
He argues that the Labour Court as also the Industrial Court have concurrently held that the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer are perverse and this being a concurrent decision, this Court should not interfere with the same in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
7.
In relation to charge under clause 45 of Schedule A of Discipline and Appeal Procedure, the learned counsel for the respondent argues that the findings arrived at by both the Courts are just and proper because as per the judgment of this Court, to which learned Member of Industrial Court has made reference, mere Alco test is not sufficient and the petitioner ought to have established by other scientific material on record that the respondent had on 1931986 consumed alcohol.
He further argues that in any case even if it is presumed that alco test is correct, still the petitioner should have proved misconduct under clause 45 because the petitioner has not demonstrated that at that time the petitioner was under influence of alcohol.
He states that mere consumption of alcohol in 1986 was not covered under clause 45 of Schedule .A.
of Discipline and Appeal Procedure.
8.
The perusal of judgment of the Labour Court as also the order of Industrial Court leaves no manner of doubt that the Labour Court and Industrial Court both found that the respondent was not shown to be guilty in relation to misconduct dated 1831986.
The material available on record has been considered by the Labour Court and thereafter it has arrived at a finding that the said misconduct in relation to incidence dated 1831986 is not at all proved.
Moreover, both the Courts have also found that at the relevant time, the respondent was not on duty because his duty was over at about 600 O' Clock and misconduct is reported to have taken place thereafter.
In view of these concurrent findings, it is not possible for this Court to take other view of the matter.
The only statement of Conductor that the respondent entered the cabin of Driver Shri Shende on 1831986 while Shri Shende was driving bus is not sufficient to hold that the misconduct under Items 10 and 22 is proved.
The respondent was not shown to have indulged in any indiscipline or has violated any administrative circular or order on 1831986 after duty hours.
Therefore, technically, the misconduct under these items is not proved.
9.
Coming to the misconduct dated 1931986, I find substance in the arguments of learned counsel for the respondent that particular head in the charge sheet itself requires petitioner to demonstrate that the respondent was under influence of Alcohol or other narcotic substance.
The entire material on record does not reveal any such influence upon the respondent on 1931986.
The fact that alco test was successful and the colour of balloon changed from yellow to green will at the most show that respondent had consumed alcohol.
Further, it will not be sufficient to hold that at that time, he was under the influence thereof.
The learned Member of Industrial Court has considered this aspect and has also relied upon unreported judgment in the case of M.S.R.T.C.
Amravati v. Ramchandra Ukandrao Jambhulkar (supra) and hence I am not in a position to take any other view of the matter looking to the evidence on record.
The said finding cannot held to be either erroneous or perverse.
10.
It cannot be forgotten that the respondent has been punished by the Labour Court by denying him 50% back wages for whatever violent behaviour he committed on 1831986 and also on account of result of alco test on 1931986.
The petitioner has reinstated respondent already.
The said respondent is denied 50% back wages for the period from 4101986 to 2321994 i.e. for about eight years.
I, therefore, find that the denial of 50% back wages which represent salary of respondent for four years is sufficient, looking to the findings delivered by the Labour Court and Industrial Court.
11.
Under the circumstances, no case is made out for interference in writ petition.
Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
Rule is discharged.
There shall be no order as to costs.
12.
Shri Jaiswal, learned counsel for the respondent states that this Court while admitting writ petition had stayed the payment of 50% back wages to the respondent and now, as the petition is dismissed, the petitioner should be directed to deposit the said amount.
13.
Under the circumstances, the petitioner to deposit the said amount within a period of three months with Labour Court, Bhandara.
.