PS Patwalia, J - The petitioner Pardaman Singh has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India being aggrieved by the order dated 14072004 by which seniority has been granted to one Shri Raj Karan Singh respondent no 3 over and above the petitioner in the cadre of Vaidya.
This has been done by treating roster point no. 1 as being reserved for Scheduled Castes (Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikh) and considering respondent no 3 to have been appointed against that roster point and consequently giving him seniority on that point as well in spite of the fact that in the process of selection, petitioner was higher in the merit than respondent no 3 and both were appointed as vaidyas on the same date.
The factual matrix of the case is as hereunder.
2.
To fill up the vacant posts of vaidyas in the department of Ayurveda in the State of Punjab a regular process of selection was conducted in the year 1987 as a result of which both the petitioner as also respondent no 3 were selected in the reserved category of Scheduled Castes.
They were consequently appointed vide appointment letter dated 04061987.
In accordance with the merit determined by the Selection Committee petitioner was higher in rank than respondent no 3 and therefore in the appointment order the petitioner figured at Sr.No.
9 and respondent no 3 at Sr.No.
10.
3.
Both the petitioner as also respondent no 3 were confirmed in service by an order dated 07.05.1998 in which order the petitioner was shown at Sr.No.
44 and respondent no 3 at Sr.No.
48 i.e. lower than the petitioner.
4.
It is further the case of the petitioner that provisional seniority lists were issued in October 1998, December 1998, December 1999 and yet again in December 2003.
In all the seniority lists the name of the petitioner figured above the name of respondent no 3.
The petitioner consequently claims to have remained senior to respondent no 3 throughout.
5.
On 22092003, the petitioner received a letter from the Director of Ayurveda, intimating him that respondent no 3 claimed seniority over the petitioner on the ground that he belonged to Mazhabi Sikh/Balmiki category and as per instructions dated 08041989 50% of the posts reserved for Scheduled Castes were to be offered to Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikhs and still further the first vacancy had to be offered to the aforementioned category.
On this basis it was claimed by respondent no 3 that he was entitled to be appointed on the first roster point and was consequently also entitled to seniority on that roster point thus making him senior to the petitioner who was to occupy the next roster point.
The petitioner filed reply to the said representation.
He contended that the instructions issued by the State Government were only to provide for the quantum of reservation and roster points were earmarked to identify that quantum.
A candidate however could not claim seniority against the roster point which was to be determined as per the merit prepared by the Selection Committee.
Since the petitioner was higher in merit, he had rightly been considered senior to respondent no 3.
6.
Ultimately by an order dated 14072004 the State Government accepted the representation of respondent no 3 and treating the first roster point as being reserved for Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikh category, granted seniority to respondent no 3 on the said point making him senior to the petitioner.
It is this order which has been impugned by the petitioner in this writ petition.
7.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the State Government and respondent no 3.
In both the written statements, the action of the Government has been defended on the premises that 50% of the vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes are to be filled up by appointment of Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikhs.
It is further stated that this category is to have first preference and the first reserved vacancy has to be given to this category even though their name in the merit list may be lower down.
On this basis, it is stated that the first reserved vacancy being earmarked for Balmiki.
Mazhabi Sikhs has to be given to respondent no 3 and therefore on that basis being appointed against first reserved roster point, respondent no 3 is entitled to seniority over the petitioner.
8.
We have heard Shri Vikas Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner as also Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab and Shri RK Sharma, learned counsel appearing for respondent no 3 and have also examined the pleadings of the parties.
9.
Shri Vikas Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that instructions granting reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and earmarking roster point for the aforesaid category are only to determine the quantum of reservation.
The roster point however can not give to the reserved category candidate accelerated or consequential seniority.
The seniority of the reserved category candidates would have to be determined on the basis of their position in the merit determined by the recruiting agency.
Therefore it is contended that the giving seniority to respondent no 3, on the basis of roster point, is bad.
For this proposition, he has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Ajit Singh Januja v. State of Punjab, JT 1996(2) SC 727 and the subsequent constitution bench judgment in Ajit Singh and others v. State of Punjab (Januja-II) - reported as JT 1999(7) SC 153.
The counsel for the respondents have however contended that the instructions issued by the State of Punjab on 08041989 clearly state that 50% of the vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes are to be offered to Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikhs and the first vacancy is to be offered to the aforementioned category even if their merit may be low in the merit list.
It is contended that once these instructions envisage that the first vacancy is to be offered to Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikhs, then their roster point is fixed and they must consequently get seniority against that roster point as well.
10.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties we are of the opinion that this proposition of law stands concluded against the respondents by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the two judgments relied upon by counsel for the petitioner.
In Ajit Singh Januja's case (supra), while dealing with the issue of inter se seniority between reserved category candidates and general category candidates, who were promoted from the lower category Hon'ble the Supreme Court concluded that the rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion but does not give accelerated consequential seniority.
The relevant observations occurring in paragraph 16 of the judgment are as hereunder :-  "We respectfully concur with the view in Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan, (supra) that seniority between the reserved category candidates and general candidates in the promoted category shall continue to be governed by their panel position i.e. with reference to their inter se seniority in the lower grade.
The rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, but it does not give the accelerated `consequential seniority'."
Subsequently the aforementioned judgment was again considered by a constitution bench of the Supreme Court on interlocutory applications filed by the State of Punjab in Januja-II case.
One of the arguments raised was that any rule, circular or order which gave seniority to the roster-point promotees, was bad.
This question was answered by Hon'ble the Supreme Court as under :-  "In our opinion, there is no conflict in the principles laid down in these two judgments, nor is there anything wrong in the above elucidation of the law.
In Virpal it was not necessary for the Court to go into the question whether any circular - if it gave seniority to the roster point promotees (reserved candidates) - could be treated as valid.
But, in Ajit Singh which was in appeal against the Full Bench judgment in Jaswant Singh 1989(4) SLR 257, this Court was dealing with a declaration made by the Full Bench for implementation of the Punjab circular dated 19769 (see para 29 of the Full Bench) which positively declared that the "roster points were seniority points".
That was why in Ajit Singh this Court had to consider the validity of such a Circular.
In Ajit Singh this Court held that the declaration granted in the impugned judgment of the Full Bench in Jaswant Singh on the basis of the Punjab circular would be in conflict with Article 14 and Article 16(1).
This Court had therefore to lay down that any circular, order or rule issued to confer seniority to the roster point promotees, would be invalid.
Thus, the decision in Ajit Singh cannot be found fault with."
A reading of the concluding lines of the judgment quoted above would show that the court concluded that any order, circular or rule issued to confer seniority to the roster point promotees would be invalid.
Thus, the clear enunciation of law in the two aforementioned judgments is that roster point are only to calculate the quantum of reservation and can not be made the basis to grant accelerated seniority.
A roster point therefore is not a point against which seniority can be given to the reserved candidate.
Seniority would have to be determined within the reserved category on the basis of their position as per merit determined by the selecting agency.
Since the petitioner had a higher merit than respondent no 3, he was rightly considered senior by the respondents all along prior to the passing of the impugned order.
The impugned order dated 14072004 granting seniority to respondent no 3 over and above the petitioner is therefore against law and can not be sustained.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated 14072004 (Annexure P-1), annexed with the writ petition is set aside.
12.
In the circumstances of the case however there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.