PS Patwalia, J - This judgment will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 2773 of 2005, C.W.P.
No. 8747 of 2005, C.W.P.
No. 9213 of 2005, C.W.P.
No. 15447 of 2005, C.W.P.
No. 2048 of 2006, C.W.P.
No. 2756 of 2006, C.W.P.
No. 5303 of 2006, C.W.P.
No. 6634 of 2006 as common questions of law arise in these writ petitions for determination by this Court.
For facility, facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 8747 of 2005.
2.
Petitioners in this writ petition are all wards/dependents of serving or retired officials of the Punjab Police.
They claim to have made an application to the Director General of Police, Punjab seeking recruitment as a Constable in the police department under Rule 1214(3) of the Punjab Police Rules.
The same is reproduced hereunder :-  "1214 Recruits - Status of - (1) Recruits shall be of good character and great care shall be taken in selecting men of a type suitable for police service from candidates presenting themselves for enrolment.
(2) xxxxxxxx (3) sons and near relatives of persons who have done good service in the Punjab Police or in the army shall, subject to the consideration imposed by rule 1212 have preference over the other candidates for police employment."
Acting on this application, the Director General of Police, Punjab ordered the enlistment of the petitioners as constables as a special case.
In almost all cases, relaxation either in physical requirements or in age was also accorded by the Director General of Police again as a special case.
3.
It may be stated here that in some of the connected matters, a few persons are those who, not being related to serving/retired officials, made applications to the Director General of Police which were taken up again as special cases and orders were made for enlistment as constables as a special case.
Even in these cases, relaxations were ordered in physical requirements or in the upper age limit prescribed under the rules.
4.
The petitioners further contend that as per the instructions issued by the Director General of Police on 25.4.2003 and also reiterated by a teleprinter message dated 2042003, 10% of the vacancies in the cadre of constables were reserved to be filled up under the discretionary quota of the Director General of Police.
The petitioners contend that they are within the 10% of the total available vacancies in the cadre of constables.
They further contend that in spite of recommendations having been made in their favour by the Director General of Police, abruptly a decision was taken on 28.9.2004 whereby it was decided that all cases for recruitment as constables as a special case of wards of serving/retired employees where approvals for enlistment were given by granting relaxation by the former Director General of Police, should be filed.
It was further decided that as and when any recruitment was to take place in future, the same would be governed by the rules applicable at the time of recruitment.
The only exception to this was where recommendations have been made in the case of special police officers approved by the Selection Board, who were to be enlisted in accordance with their seniority and cases of compassionate appointments under the instructions issued by the State of Punjab.
5.
The petitioners claim that they made representations to the Home Secretary, Punjab and the Director General of Police seeking enlistment as constables, who declined to interfere.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not enlisting them as constables, the petitioners filed C.W.P.
No. 822 of 2005, which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on 1412005 with a direction to the respondents to decide the representation by passing a speaking order within a period of two months from the receipt of certified copy of the order.
The said representation filed by the petitioners has also been rejected by an order dated 2832005.
6.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents in not enlisting them as constables and rejecting their claim, the petitioners have approached this Court by way of this writ petition wherein they have claimed writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-State to appoint them as constables and to allot them constabulary numbers without further delay.
7.
We have heard counsel appearing for the petitioners as also learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab and perused the paper book.
The petitioners made individual applications on which orders for their enlistment were made by the Director General of Police.
For the reasons mentioned herein below, we are of the opinion that these writ petitions lack merit and must fail.
8.
Article 16 of the Constitution of India guarantees to all citizens in the country equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
It flows from the said article that in all cases of recruitment to government service where vacancies/posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment, the employer must adopt a mode through which all eligible candidates are given an opportunity to compete.
In the present case, it is clear that no such opportunity was accorded to any candidate when recommendations were made by the then Director General of Police for the enlistment of the petitioners.
The petitioners made individual applications on which orders for their enlistment were made by the Director General of Police.
Neither were the vacancies advertised or circulated amongst all eligible candidates by any reasonable method nor were any applications invited from persons registered with various employment exchanges in the State.
The appointment made was therefore totally illegal and against the rigor of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
In so far as reliance of the petitioners on Rule 1214(3) is concerned, the matter is no longer res integra.
In Yogender Pal Singh and others v. Union of India and others, reported as 1987(1) SLR 379, Hon'ble Supreme Court had occasion to consider the constitutional validity of this very rule which provides preference in the matter of appointment to children or other relatives of serving or retired police officers.
The Court concluded that the said rule showing preference in the matter of public employment on grounds of descent, was unconstitutional.
The relevant observations are as under :-  "15.
We should, however, point out at this stage a fundamental defect in the claim of the appellants, namely, the rule 1214(3) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 which authorised the granting of preference in favour of sons and near relatives of persons serving in the police service became unconstitutional on the coming into force of the Constitution.
Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 of the Constitution which are material for this case read thus :- "16.
(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State."
16.
While it may be permissible to appoint a person who is the son of a police officer who dies in service or who is incapacitated while rendering service in the Police Department, a provision which confers a preferential right to appointment on the children or wards or other relatives of the police officers either in service or retired merely because they happen to be the children or wards or other relatives of such police officer would be contrary to Article 16 of the Constitution.
Opportunity to get into public service should be extended to all the citizens equally and should not be confined to any extent to the descendants or relatives of a person already in the service of the State or who has retired from the service.
In Gazula Dasaratha Rasma Rao v. The State of Andhra Pradesh and others (1961)2 SCR 931 the question relating to the constitutional validity of section 6(1) of the Madras Hereditary Village-Offices Act, 1895 (3 of 1895) came up for consideration before this Court.
That section provided that where two or more villages or portion thereof were grouped together or amalgamated so as to form a single new village or where any village was divided into two or more villages all the village officers of the class defined in Section 3, clause (1) of that Act in the villages or portions of the villages or village amalgamated or divided as aforesaid would cease to exist and the new offices which were created for the new village or villages should be filled up by the Collector by selecting the persons whom he considered best qualified from among the families of the last holders of the offices which had been abolished.
This Court held that the provision which required the Collector to fill up the said new offices by selecting persons from among the families of the last holders of the offices was opposed to Article 16 of the Constitution.
The Court observed in that connection at pages 940-941 and 946-946 thus : "Article 14 enshrines the fundamental right of equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
It is available to all, irrespective of whether the person claiming it is a citizen or not.
Article 15 prohibits discrimination on some special grounds-religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
It is available to citizens only, but is not restricted to any employment or office under the State.
Article 16 cl(1), guarantees equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State; and cl. (2) prohibits discrimination on certain grounds in respect of any such employment or appointment.
It would thus appear that Article 14 guarantees the general right of equality; Articles 15 and 16 are instances of the same right in favour of citizens in some special circumstances.
Article 15 is more general than Article 16, the latter being confined to matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
It is also worthy of note that Article 15 does not mention `descent' as one of the prohibited grounds of discrimination, whereas Article 16 does.
We do not see any reason why the full ambit of the fundamental right guaranteed by Art. 16 in the matter of employment or appointment to any office under the State should be cut down by a reference to the provisions in Part XIV of the Constitution which relate to services or to provisions in the earlier Constitution Acts relating to the same subject .....................(Pages 940-941) There can be no doubt that s.6(1) of the Act does embody a principle of discrimination on the ground of descent only.
It says that in choosing the person to fill the new offices, the Collector shall select the persons whom he may consider the best qualified from among the families of the last holders of the offices which have been abolished.
This, in our opinion, is discrimination on the ground of descent only and is in contravention of Article 16(2) of the Constitution."
(Pages 946-947).
17.
We are of the opinion that the claim made by the appellants for the relaxation of the Rules in their cases only because they happen to be the wards or children or relatives of the police officers has got to be negatived since their claim is based on `descent' only, and others will thereby be discriminated against as they do not happen to be the sons of police officers.
Any preference shown in the matter of public employment on the grounds of descent only has to be declared as unconstitutional.
The appellants have not shown that they were otherwise eligible to be recruited as Constables in the absence of the order of relaxation on which they relied.
Hence they cannot succeed."
Thus, the reliance of the petitioners on Rule 1214(3) is wholly misplaced as the said rule has already been declared unconstitutional by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
10.
As stated herein above, the petitioners have prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners as constables and allot them constabulary numbers without any delay.
It is well settled law that before this court issues a writ of mandamus, the petitioner would have to satisfy the court that he has a legal right and the opposite party is bound by a legal duty.
In Praga Tools Corporation v. CA Imanual, AIR 1969 SC 1306, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has observed that :  "The condition precedent for the issue of mandamus is that there is in it one claiming a legal right to the performance of a legal duty by one against whom it is sought."
In Mani Subrat v. State of Haryana, AIR 1977 SC 276, the Hon'ble Supreme Court rightly observed that :  "It is elementary though it is to be restated that no one can ask for mandamus without a legal right.
There must be a judicially enforceable right as well as a legally protected right before one suffering a legal grievance can ask for a mandamus.
A person can be said to be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right by some one who has a legal duty to do something or to abstain from doing something."
The pre-requisite of the issuance of writ of mandamus therefore is the existence of a judicially enforceable legal right.
The petitioners' claim for appointment is however based on a provision of the statute which has already been held to be unconstitutional.
The petitioners are seeking to enforce a claim of appointment which they have secured in violation of the Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
In these circumstances, we hold that the petitioners have no enforceable legal right which the respondents can be compelled to enforce by the issuance of writ of mandamus.
Issuing a writ in favour of the petitioners directing the respondents to enlist them as constables would amount to enforcing an appointment which is unconstitutional.
We find that the decision taken by the respondent-State on 28.9.2004 that all cases for enlistment like the petitioners should be filed and all vacancies should be filled up in terms of the rules is wholly justified.
We thus hold that the claim of the petitioners seeking a writ of mandamus claiming appointment must therefore fail.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in this writ petitions and the same are liable to be dismissed with costs assessed at Rs. 2,000/- in each case.
Petition dismissed.