ARvind Kumar, J - The challenge in this petition is to the order dated 2.2.2006 passed by respondent No. 1, awarding compensation amounting to Rs. 11,400/- against the petitioner, on an application filed by respondent No. 2 under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for brevity, the Act).
The Labour Court vide the impugned order has also directed the petitioner to make the payment of aforesaid amount within four months failing which interest @ 6% shall also be payable to respondent No. 1.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at length and have also gone through the paper-book as also the impugned award.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that except his bald statement, no cogent evidence has been led by respondent No. 2 to substantiate his claim, before the Labour Court.
Moreover, there is no employee-employer relationship between the parties.
It has further been contended that the proceedings before the Labour Court were conducted in gross violation of procedure laid down under the Act.
Accordingly, it has been contended that, in the facts and circumstances above, the matter be remanded to the Labour Court for decision afresh after affording reasonable opportunity to the petitioner for defending himself.
4.
We are not at all impressed with the contentions put forth by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Initially the petitioner appeared before the Labour Court but lateron he opted to remain away from the proceedings, for the reasons best known to him.
Resultantly, he was proceeded ex parte and the proceedings were concluded accordingly.
The pleas with which the petitioner has approached this Court were already available to him before the Labour Court.
He could very well contest the claim of respondent No. 2 by leading cogent and convincing evidence.
But, as said above, he evaded the proceedings before the Labour Court of his own and did not even bother to file reply to the claim statement.
Once he opted to keep away from the proceedings, it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to say that the proceedings so conducted were against the principles of natural justice.
Normally, the ex parte orders are not appreciated and it is always the desire of the Courts that the parties should contest the litigation on merits.
However, where the process of the Courts is sought to be misused and exploited with the idea to delay the proceedings and to scuttle the due process of law, then the Courts are not to grant indulgence to such a party.
The petitioner has failed to show his bona fide for absence before the Labour Court which would not, thus, warrant any interference.
Rather it appears that the petitioner slept over the matter and intentionally avoided the proceedings before the Labour Court.
The Labour Court has rightly drawn adverse inference against the petitioner while allowing the claim of respondent No. 2.
Moreover, the petitioner in the present petition has also not placed anything on record to show that there was no employee-employer relationship between the parties.
For the reasons aforesaid we find no infirmity in the impugned award of the Labour Court.
The writ petition is wholly without merit and the same is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.