Arvind Kumar, J - Petitioner has invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing of award dated 12122003, Annexure P-5, dismissing his claim statement.
2.
It is the case of petitioner-workman that he worked as Chowkidar at DC rates at PR Centre, Ambala Cantt from 2191994 till 1121995 and had completed more than 240 days' service in the 12 preceding months before the termination of his services.
It was on 1121995 when his services were terminated without giving any notice or compensation in lieu of the notice.
Petitioner has stated that the persons junior to him were retained and even fresh appointments were also made thereafter and thus, this act of the respondent-department is in violation of the provisions of Section 25(F) to (H) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (in short, the Act).
Petitioner challenged the termination order by serving upon the respondent-department a demand notice.
Later, the dispute was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication where the petitioner-workman filed his claim statement.
Upon notice thereof, respondent-department in its reply took up the plea that the workman was engaged as Chowkidar only on daily wages at DC Rates on 2191994 to guard the stock at PR Centre, Ambala and on delivery of stock to Food Corporation of India, the services of the workman were not required and accordingly, he was relieved of his duties on 30111995.
It was denied that he had worked for 240 days.
It was further stated that neither any worker junior to the petitioner-workman was retained in service nor any one was appointed afresh after the termination of his services.
It was denied that the petitioner-workman ever wrote any letter to them to re-employ him.
Replication was filed by the petitioner-workman to the written statement denying the averments contained therein and reiterated the one in the claim statement.
3.
In support of their respective case, evidence was led by the parties.
4.
The learned Labour Court on appreciation of evidence led by the parties, observed that the demand was raised belatedly by the petitioner i.e. after more than five years of his termination and thus, such an inordinate delay in raising the demand, that too without any plausible explanation, could not be reconciled in any way.
Thus, holding the reference to be bad and incompetent the learned Labour Court dismissed the claim statement.
Hence, the present writ petition by the petitioner-workman.
5.
Upon notice of the writ petition, written statement has been filed by the respondent No. 2-department.
It has been stated therein that the petitioner- workman was engaged as PR Chowkidar to watch and ward the stocks and stock articles, purely on daily wages/contract basis.
On completion of work, the services of the workman automatically came to an end as no longer required and thus, his case does not amount to retrenchment or termination.
Violation of Sections 25(G) and 25(H) has also been denied.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has mainly relied upon a decision rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Limited and another, 1996(6) SCC 82, to contend that there is no period of limitation prescribed under the Act ibid to raise the dispute.
It is open to a party to approach the Court even belatedly and the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal can properly mould the relief by refusing or awarding part-payment of back wages.
The contention is meritless.
In Ajaib Singh's case (supra) the management did not raise any plea of delay and the Court observed that had such plea been raised, the workman would have been in a position to show the circumstances which prevented him in approaching the Court at an earlier stage or even to satisfy the Court that such a plea was not sustainable after the reference was made by the Government.
8.
In the instant case, petitioner-workman had raised the industrial dispute after about five years.
He has placed reliance upon Annexures P-6 to P-9, namely, letters dated 951997, 23.4.1998, 1731999 and 1922000 to show that he had been pursuing his grievance in between.
The said letters are of no help to the petitioner in any manner.
Respondent-department has denied having received any such letters.
Petitioner-workman has not placed anything on record to show that in fact these letters were factually sent by him.
It has rightly been observed by the learned Labour Court that the workman did not even disclose the mode of sending these letters and merely that the copy of letters have been placed on record, is not sufficient to conclude that these were actually despatched or sent to the respondent-department.
There is another feature against him.
He neither in the demand notice, Annexure P-1, nor in the statement of claim, Annexure P-2, has claimed to have sent any letter to the department and as such, the said letters which he claims to have sent to the respondent-department, have not come to his rescue.
9.
The issue of delay has also been discussed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the recent case of Haryana State Coop.
Land Dev.
Bank v. Neelam, 2005(2) SCT 113 (SC) : 2005(2) RSJ 438 wherein the ratio of Ajaib Singh's case has also been noticed.
It has been opined that although the Court cannot import a period of limitation when the statute does not prescribe the same, as was observed in Ajaib Singh's case (supra), but it does not mean that irrespective of facts and circumstances of each case, a stale claim must be entertained by the appropriate government while making a reference or in a case where such reference is made the workman would be entitled to the relief at the hands of the Labour Court.
Thus, the decision of Ajaib Singh's case (supra) must be held to have been rendered in the facts and situation obtaining therein.
No ratio of universal application can be culled out therefrom.
The conclusion thus was drawn that "the conduct of workman in approaching the Court after more than 7 years had, therefore, been considered to be a relevant factor by the Labour Court for refusing to grant any relief to her.
Such a consideration on the part of the Labour Court cannot be said to be an irrelevant one."
Reliance can also be placed on the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5870 of 2006 titled as Amar Singh v. State of Haryana and another, decided on 2042006.
10.
Similarly, in the instant case such unexplained inordinate delay has rendered the dispute in question as patently stale.
The dispute having been raised after a long time lapses by efflux of time.
In view of what has been stated above, we are of the opinion that the Labour Court has rightly declined the indulgence.
We do not find any infirmity with the award passed by the Labour Court, which is just and reasoned.
Accordingly, the petition being without any merit is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.