Ranjit Singh, J - In this Letters Patent Appeal, the judgment of learned Single Judge dated 132006, dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant is under challenge.
The appellant is basically aggrieved against the amendment carried out by the respondent-University while amending Clause 4 of the Ordinance governing the BAMS Course which, he says has caused serious prejudice to him.
The main ground of the challenge in the writ petition was that this amendment cannot be applied to the case of the appellant as it is not with retrospective effect.
Otherwise, the effect of amendment is that is has resulted in disqualification of the petitioner for passing the BAMS Course.
The facts leading to the filing of the writ petition and the LPA are as follows :-  2.
The appellant appeared in Pre-Medical Entrance Test (PMET) in the year 2000.
The first counseling for grant of admission to BAMS Course was held in July 2000.
The course, for those candidates who were selected for admission in August, commenced in August-September, 2000.
The appellant did not succeed in the first counseling and as such was not granted admission.
However, the second counseling for the said course was subsequently held and as being successful, the appellant was admitted for the BAMS Course at respondent No. 3-college in January, 2001.
When the appellant was admitted in the BAMS Course the study thereof was divided into three professionals out of which first and second professionals were of 18 months' duration, whereas final professionals was for 24 months followed by 6 months of internship.
The Ordinance regulating the duration of the course was amended w.e.f.
5122001.
By this amendment, duration of all the three professionals was made of 18 months and the period of internship was increased to one year from six months.
It is this amendment, which according to the appellant, is standing to his prejudice for completion of course by him.
3.
In order to substantiate his plea, the appellant has pleaded that when he was admitted in January, 2001 the first professional was of 18 months' duration.
Accordingly, the examinations for the first professional were held in May-June, 2002.
Though, the petitioner had joined the course in January, 2001, he cleared all the papers while appearing for the examinations in May- June, 2002.
He was promoted to the 2nd Professional and the examination for which was held after 18 months' completion of the course in November-December, 2003.
While appearing in 2nd Professional examination, the petitioner got reappear in two papers.
As per the provisions made in the Regulations, the appellant was entitled to continue his studies in 3rd Professional, despite having got reappear in two papers in the 2nd Professional.
The appellant accordingly, was permitted to attend classes for the 3rd Professional.
He ultimately cleared both the reappears for 2nd Professional in April-May, 2005.
He had also studied for 18 months of the final professional course.
If the unamended Regulation was to apply to the appellant then the final professional course was to end on November-December, 2005.
However, in view of the amended Ordinance, the duration of the final professional was reduced to 18 months and accordingly, the appellant was required to appear in the final professional examination also in April-May, 2005.
Since the result of reappear examination of 2nd Professional had not been declared, the appellant was not eligible to appear in final professional examination which was to be held in April-May, 2005 though he had appeared in the re-appear examinations in the 2nd Professional.
The University did not grant permission to the appellant to appear in the final professional examination.
This forced him to file a Civil Writ Petition No. 6672 of 2005.
4.
On 10.5.2005, a Division Bench of this Court as an interim measure directed the respondent-University to permit the appellant to appear in 3rd Professional BAMS course, which was to commence from May, 2005.
It was, however, directed that his result shall be kept sealed in a sealed cover and was to be declared only after express orders of this Court.
The appellant, accordingly appeared in the final professional examination.
He moved an application for declaration of results of examination in which he had appeared.
This was with an aim to enable him to clear the examination if he was reappear in any of the subjects.
This Court directed the respondent- University to declare the result of the appellant for the 3rd Professional examination in which he had appeared under the interim order passed by the Court.
It was further directed that in case the appellant had got reappear in any of the subjects, he shall be permitted to sit in the said examination also.
This declaration of the result was on provisional basis and was not to create any equitable right in favour of the appellant.
The result of the appellant was declared and he was required to re-appear in one subject in which he ultimately appeared in November, 2005.
On 1912006, the result of the appellant was shown as "Result Lateron".
The writ petition filed by the appellant was admitted and finally heard.
On 132006, the writ petition was dismissed, and this order has been impugned in the present Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
The main contention of the appellant before the learned Single Judge was that the amended provision of the Ordinance decreasing the duration of the 3rd Professional could not be made applicable to his case.
It was submitted before the learned Single Judge that the appellant had been admitted to this course in January, 2001 and at that time the duration of the 3rd Professional was for 24 months.
If this Ordinance had continued then the appellant could have appeared in the 3rd Professional examination in November-December, 2005.
On account of the amendment, the duration of the 3rd Professional was cut short by 6 months and hence the appellant was required to appear in the final profession examination in April-May, 2005.
As pleaded by the appellant this amendment had been introduced in December, 2001.
Accordingly, as per him, he was to be governed by the unamended Ordinance.
Relying upon various judgments it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the rights which had accrued to him could not be taken away by any subsequent amendment.
The learned Single Judge, however, repelled the contention of the appellant and while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Panjab University v. Subhash Chander and another, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1415 held that the principle laid down in this judgment would govern the case of the appellant.
It was further held by the learned Single Judge that no promise was made to the appellant in January, 2001 that duration of 3rd Professional course will not be changed during the studies.
It is in these circumstances that the writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by holding that the examination undertaken by the appellant in 3rd Professional course was void.
6.
We have heard Mr. DS Patwalia, Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Atul Nehra, Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent- University.
After making reference to the fact that the appellant was granted admission to the course after 2nd counseling, the counsel has submitted that the amendment made in the Ordinance on 5122001, cannot be made applicable to the appellant, as it would then have retrospective effect.
As per the counsel, the case ought to be governed by the unamended Regulations and accordingly the appellant was eligible and entitled to appear in the final professional examination upto November-December, 2005.
If this happens then the objection of the respondent-University in regard to the eligibility of the appellant, who appeared in the final professional examination on completion of 18 months' study would not be open, as by November-December, 2005, he had cleared 2nd Professional and was fully eligible to appear in final professional examination.
7.
The short question that requires determination in this case is whether the appellant is to be governed by the amended or unamended Ordinance.
The appellant had been permitted to appear in the 3rd Professional examination held in April-May, 2005.
If the original duration of the 3rd Professional had not been amended, the appellant had cleared the reappears of the 2nd Professional and on that account there was no impediment before him to appear in the final examination which was then to be held in November-December, 2005.
As per the appellant, he is suffering on account of the wrong application of the amended Ordinance in his case.
8.
It is the conceded position that the appellant belongs to the year 2000 batch and was admitted in the course in January, 2001, on account of second counseling.
The doubt in this regard, if any can be repelled by noting that, though admitted in January, 2001, the appellant appeared for 1st Professional course during May-June, 2002 alongwith those students who were admitted in August-September, 2000.
If the appellant was to be treated as one belonging to 2001 batch then he could not have been permitted to appear in 1st Professional examinations during May-June, 2002.
Thus for all purposes, the appellant was treated as belonging to 2000 year batch.
The effect of the amendment in Ordinance 4 is that the eligibility of the appellant to clear the 3rd Professional examination was curtailed by 6 months.
If the original duration had continued then the appellant could have cleared the examination of all the professionals without facing any hurdle.
It is this amendment which had prejudiced the case of the appellant to that an extent that he may lose all the studies done by him.
On behalf of the University, reliance was placed on the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court noted above in order to justify the applicability of the amended Ordinance, we find that this judgment may not strictly apply to the facts in the present case.
The case before the Hon'ble Supreme Court related to the award of grace marks.
In the said case, as per the unamended Rule, the petitioner was entitled to get 16 grace marks, being 1% aggregate of all the four subjects, whereas by amendment it was provided that the grace marks would be awardable only as 1% of the aggregate marks in one particular subject.
In the case before Supreme Court, the candidate had got admission in the year 1965, and had appeared in the examination in 1947 after 9 years of his admission.
Four years prior to the date of the examination, the Rule was amended in 1970.
It was in this context that the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Rule amended in 1970 would apply in the said case.
It is to be noted that question in issue before the Supreme Court was concerning grace marks and did not relate to change in the duration of the course.
The case before us is different on many counts and does not relate to grant of grace marks.
Here the eligibility to appear in the examination had become an issue on account of change made in duration of one of the professional after the grant of admission to the appellant.
In this context it can certainly be seen that by curtailing this duration, the appellant has been put to a great prejudice.
Appellant has completed the prescribed period of study and has appeared in the examination but is being deprived of study on the ground that he was not eligible to appear in final examination that too due to changed Ordinance.
If the duration of the course had not been curtailed then the appellant would have been perfectly eligible to appear in examination without any difficulty and without any objection.
Having regard to these facts, it is clear that the amendment introduced in the Ordinance after grant of admission to the appellant has caused a serious prejudice to appellant and has rendered him ineligible to appear in examination.
By applying this amendment to the case of the appellant the Ordinance is being given a retrospective operation.
A perusal of the amendment does not give any indication if it was to apply to those batches admitted prior to the date of the amendment.
The appellant was permitted to appear in the examination upon completion of 18 months' duration of the 3rd Professional.
It may not now be fair to declare him ineligible by applying amended Ordinance.
If this is done it may result in retrospective operation of the amendment.
In this regard para 11 of the Ordinance which makes a provision for final Professional examination may be referred.
This provides as under :-  "11.
FINAL PROFESSIONAL EXAMINATION : (i) A : For students admitted prior to 2001 : The Final Professional Examination shall beheld two years after the Second Professional Examination and shall comprise the following subjects : (ii) For students admitted in 2001 and onwards : The Final Professional Examination shall be held one and half year after the second professional Examination and shall comprise the following subjects : xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (ii) If a candidate secured re-appear/failed in one or more subjects in final professional examination he/she shall be eligible to appear in those subjects in subsequent Final Professional Examination which may be held every six months.
The students shall be allowed to clear all the subjects of final professional BAMS examination in six consecutive attempts including the first attempt in which they were eligible to appear, failing which they shall have to appear in all the subjects of the Final Professional BAMS Examination.
[Amended by BOM on 11112004, vide para (c)].
(iii) He/she shall not be allowed to commence Internship training without passing all the subjects of Final Professional BAMS examinations".
9.
Since the appellant is required to be treated as belonging to batch of year 2000, as already noticed, the provision of para 11 reproduced above would also come to his rescue.
When the appellant joined the course, he was entitled to take position that he would be eligible to clear 1st and 2nd Professional by November-December, 2005.
He really could not have any say in fixing the durations of the 3rd professional by amendment in the Ordinance after he had joined the course.
To remedy such a situation only perhaps the provision of para 11 of Ordinance specifically provided that candidates admitted prior to 2001 will appear in final professional after two years of study.
It can be noticed that the appellant has studied with the batch in 1st and 2nd Professional examinations.
Thus a different duration of the course if being applied to similarly situated candidates.
We do not say that it amounts to discrimination but parity need to be maintained between similarly situated candidates and that is what is sought to be achieved by Ordinance 11 reproduced above.
We are thus of the view that unamended Ordinance would govern the case of the appellant and the provisions of the amended Ordinance cannot be made applicable to him.
For reasons aforementioned, we are of the view that the judgment of the learned Single Judge cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, we allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of learned Single Judge.
The result of the appellant of final Professional examination, if not already declared be now declared and in case he is successful then he may be permitted to complete the remaining studies, if any, including his internship.
It may need a mention that the appellant has undertaken before us even to complete internship for one year.
We leave the parties to bear their respective costs.
Appeal allowed.