Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - Gurbax Singh, the appellant before us is the unsuccessful writ petitioner.
He has impugned the order dated 2761991, Annexure P-12 whereby he had been dismissed from service by dispensing with the departmental inquiry in terms of the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
The appeal filed by him against the order aforesaid was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Patiala Range, Patiala vide order dated 2831992, Annexure P-14.
Both these orders have been impugned in the present Letters Patent Appeal.
2.
The facts of the case are as under :-  The petitioner was appointed as a Constable on 141963 and was promoted as head Constable in the year 1970.
On account of his hard work, as pleaded by him, he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
June 3, 1984.
He was given an out of turn promotion as Sub-Inspector w.e.f.
561989 vide order, Annexure P-5, by the DIG of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar for having shown exemplary courage and bravery and his case was also forwarded to the Department for a gallantry award.
A certificate specifying to his integrity was also given to him.
The petitioner was promoted as Sub Inspector on regular basis on 1851990 vide order, Annexure P-5/A to the petition, by the D.I.G.
Jalandhar and it was directed that the formal order would be issued by the S.S.P.
of the District concerned.
The appellant was, however, compulsorily retired vide Annexure P-12, w.e.f.
2761991 under the proviso to Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution with the remark that no inquiry was practicable in his case.
3.
The learned Single Judge in his judgment held that the reasons specified for dispensing with the inquiry were germane to the facts of the case as it was clear from the written statement filed by the State that there was ample information with the respondent-authorities that the appellant had been conniving with terrorists and attempting to further their cause and in this view of the matter, it was practicable to hold an inquiry against the appellant.
The writ petition was accordingly dismissed.
4.
Hence, the present Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
Mr. Akshay Bhan, the learned counsel for the appellant, has raised two basic arguments before us during the course of hearing, firstly, that no reasons for dispensing with the inquiry under proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution had been specified and secondly that as the appellant had been promoted by the DIG of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar, the order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar, an officer subordinate to him, the impugned order, Annexure P-12, could not be sustained.
In this connection he has relied on a Single Bench judgment of this Court reported as Ashok Kumar, Sub-Inspector of Police v. State of Punjab and others, 1990(3) SLR 127, and Ram Lal v. State of Haryana, 1997(2) SLR 421, that there was ample material on the file to warrant dismissal without an enquiry.
6.
Mr. AS Grewal, the learned State counsel has, however, pointed out that as per Rule 121 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 when read with Rule 161, it was clear that the appointing authority\dismissing authority of a Sub- Inspector was the Senior Superintendent of Police and the mere fact that the appellant had been promoted by the DIG of Police would not take away the jurisdiction of the SSP to make and order of dismissal.
He has, in this connection, relied on State of Punjab and another v. ASI Balkar Singh 2003 Supreme Court Cases (L&S) 89 and State of Punjab and others v. Manohar Lal, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 201.
7.
We have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record as also the record of the Department with regard to the proceedings, which led to the order dispensing with the enquiry, and dismissal of the appellant.
It appears that information had been received by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar, where the appellant stood posted at that time, that he was mixed up with a terrorist, Manjit Singh alias Manna and had agreed to coordinate with him for personal benefit.
The record further shows that a letter dated 2661991 had been received by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar from the Senior Superintendent of Police, Chandigarh that a hardcore terrorist Arvinder Singh @ Harinder Singh and several others had been arrested from District Ropar and that they had confessed that Manjit Singh @ Nanu had reported that the appellant was on good terms with them and that after committing terrorist activities, they often took shelter with him.
Accordingly, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar on 2761991 recorded that it was not practicable to hold an inquiry against the appellant and ordered his dismissal.
8.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Akshay Bhan has argued that the criminal case registered against Manjit Singh alias Manna had resulted in his acquittal with a finding that he had not been involved in any manner in terrorist activity and as such the statement allegedly made by Manjit Singh to the police with regard to the involvement of the appellant had not been accepted by this Court.
9.
Be that as it may, the mere acquittal of Manjit Singh in the criminal case would not detract from the departmental proceedings against the appellant and would not affect the outcome thereunder.
It is now well settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576, that reasons for dispensing with the inquiry must exist but it is not for the Court to examine threadbare the reasons that weighed with the authorities while dispensing with the enquiry, though, the reasons must have some connection with the action proposed.
We find that these are clearly available in the file, which has been produced before us.
10.
The second argument raised by Mr. Bhan too requires to be rejected.
Undoubtedly, certain observations in Ashok Kumar's and Ram Lal's case (supra), do not support his case.
We, however, find that Ram Lal's case was based on a concession.
Moreover, a contrary view has been taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Balkar Singh's case and Manohar Lal's case.
In this case, the promotion had been made by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police whereas the order of dismissal/compulsory retirement had been made by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that as per Rule 121 and 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, the appointing authority/dismissing authority was the Senior Superintendent of Police and merely because the Deputy-Inspector General of Police had made an order of promotion would not change the statutory rules i.e. of the Police Rules.
This is what the Court said in Manohar Lal's case (supra) :-  "On considering the provisions of the aforesaid rules, it is quite clear and apparent that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur being the competent authority to make the appointment to the non-gazetted ranks of Sub- Inspectors, is also legally competent to pass the order of compulsory retirement of the plaintiff-respondent in public interest in accordance with the provisions of Rule 3(1)(a) and (b) of the said rules.
It has been tried to be contended by referring to the provisions of Rule 139, Sub Rule (2) by the respondent wherein it has been provided that substantive promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector is to be made by the Deputy Inspector General of Police in accordance with the principles prescribed in rule 131 that the Superintendent of Police is not the competent authority to make the order of compulsory retirement in question.
This argument cannot be sustained in view of the specific provisions made in Rule 121 wherein it has been provided that the Superintendent of Police is competent to make the appointment to the non- gazetted ranks of Sub-Inspectors of Police and Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
On a reading of both these provisions of the Rules 121 and 13.9(2) it is clear and apparent that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur is legally competent to make the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the plaintiff respondent from service in public interest after his attaining 50 years of age in accordance with the provisions of Rules 3(1)(a) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
We have, therefore, no option but to dismiss the appeal.
Appeal dismissed.