Viney Mittal, J - The plaintiff having lost before the learned first Appellate Court has approached this Court through the present Regular Second Appeal.
He filed a suit for declaration claiming that the adverse remarks for the year 1995-96 conveyed to him on September 28, 1999, were illegal, bad and were liable to be set aside.
He also challenged the order dated July 31, 2002 whereby the representation filed by him was rejected by the competent authority.
2.
The plaintiff claimed that the adverse remarks for the year 1995-96 have been communicated to him by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways on September 28, 1999 and were contrary to Government instructions and policy.
He further claimed that his service record was good upto the year 1994-95 and no adverse remarks were ever conveyed to him.
He also maintained that there was no complaint against him and neither any departmental enquiry was held against him and that his honesty also remained above board.
He also claimed that one Roshan Lal Bedi, who was the then Traffic Manager was having a grudge against him, and therefore, punishment was given at his instance.
The plaintiff claimed that the adverse remarks were also as a result of the malafides of the aforesaid Roshan Lal Bedi.
3.
The defendants contested the suit.
It was claimed that earlier to the aforesaid adverse remarks, for the year 1993-94 also, adverse remarks were recorded in the ACRs of the plaintiff and had been communicated to him.
The plaintiff had been punished several times for various acts of omission and commission.
Vide one punishment order his one increment was stopped in a case of embezzlement and at another point of time a punishment of censure was also imposed upon him.
Warning was also imposed on four occasions.
Consequently, the defendants maintained that the Reporting Officer had duly recorded the performance of the plaintiff for the year 1995-96.
The representation filed by the plaintiff was duly considered by the Transport Commissioner but the same was rejected vide order dated July 31, 2002.
4.
The learned trial Court decreed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
5.
The matter was taken up in appeal by the defendants.
The learned first Appellate Court reappraised the entire evidence.
On such reappraisal, the learned first Appellate Court found that sufficient material had been placed on record by the defendants that during the year 1995-96, the plaintiff while working as a Conductor was repeatedly found embezzling Government money and a lenient view of the matter was taken and he was administered repeated warnings.
He was also imposed a punishment of censure and was fined.
His two increments without cumulative effect were also ordered to be stopped during the said period.
It was in these circumstances that the adverse remarks came to be recorded by the Reporting Officer with regard to his honesty and his work being average.
The learned first Appellate Court further found that DW2, the Competent Authority himself had appeared in the witness box and deposed about the conduct of the plaintiff for the relevant period.
It was deposed that the adverse remarks for the year 1995-96 were recorded by him within the stipulated period in accordance with the Government instructions and the same were forwarded to the office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Ambala, who had communicated to the plaintiff later on.
In view of the aforesaid evidence brought on the record by the defendants, the learned first Appellate Court found that the grievance made by the plaintiff with regard to the adverse remarks being contrary to the Government instructions or the factual position on the record, was totally without any basis.
It was also noticed that plaintiff had failed to prove any malafides on the part of the Competent Authority against him.
Consequently, the appeal of the defendants was allowed and the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
I have heard Sh. SP Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff-appellant and Sh. DS Nalwa, the learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the defendant-respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of this case.
7.
Sh. SP Singh, the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has vehemently argued that the learned first Appellate Court has committed an error of law when it had ignored the Government instructions with regard to the recording of the ACRs and the communication thereof.
The learned counsel has also relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Dhani Ram Chaudhary v. State of Haryana and another, 1999(4) SCT 192 (P&H) : 1999(4) Recent Services Judgments 99.
On the strength of the aforesaid judgment it has been argued by the learned counsel that the suit filed by the plaintiff deserves to be decreed.
8.
On the other hand, Sh. DS Nalwa, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, has argued that the learned first Appellate Court had given cogent reasons for accepting the appeal filed by the defendants and had taken into consideration entire material available on the record.
On that basis, the learned counsel has argued that the evidence produced by the defendants showed that prior to the year 1995-96 also the adverse remarks had been recorded against the plaintiff for earlier period as well and on many occasions punishments had been awarded on account of misconduct of the plaintiff.
9.
I have duly considered the rival contentions of the learned counsel and have also gone through the record of the case.
10.
In my considered opinion there is no merit in the present appeal.
11.
The findings recorded by the learned first Appellate Court clearly show that the defendants had proved that prior to the period in question, adverse remarks against the plaintiff had been recorded for the earlier period also.
Further, repeated punishments had been awarded to him.
He was found guilty of misconduct and embezzlement.
A lenient view was taken and only warning/censure were awarded to him.
At one point of time, his two increments without cumulative effect were stopped.
DW2 himself appeared and supported the aforesaid adverse remarks recorded by him.
It was specifically stated by him that the aforesaid remarks had been recorded by him as per the work and conduct of the plaintiff and that the same had been recorded within the stipulated period as per Government instructions.
12.
I have also gone through the judgment in Dhani Ram Chaudhary's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant.
In the aforesaid judgment the adverse remarks for the years 1987-88 and 1990-91 were recorded in the year 1997 and were conveyed after that to the official concerned.
It was in these circumstances that the Division Bench had held that no explanation had been rendered by the Reporting Officer as to why the aforesaid remarks in the ACR had been recorded after 10 years/6 years.
However, in the present case, the Reporting Officer while appearing as DW2 has categorically stated that the aforesaid remarks were recorded within the stipulated period.
Only communication was delayed because of time taken by the higher authorities.
Therefore, the reliance placed by the learned counsel on Dhani Ram Chaudhary's case (supra) is wholly without any basis.
The said judgment is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
13.
It is well settled that the recording of ACRs is based upon subjective satisfaction of the Reporting Officer.
No judicial review of such subjective satisfaction is possible.
The only ground justifying interference by the Court is when it is shown that some Rules/instructions have not been followed in recording the aforesaid ACRs or when the recording of the aforesaid ACRs is on account of some mala fides.
There is no such material available on the record of this case.
14.
As a consequence of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find that the findings recorded by the learned first Appellate Court suffer from any infirmity or are contrary to the record.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in the present appeal.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.