MM Kumar, J - This contempt petition filed under Section 10 and 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, complains violation of the directions issued by a Division Bench of this Court on 7.4.2005 while disposing of C.W.P.
No. 13459 of 2004.
The Division Bench has directed the respondents to declare the result of provisional interview of the petitioner.
It was further ordered that in case she was found to be selected on the basis of the provisional interview, then necessary consequential relief was also to be given to her.
This petition has been filed with the allegation that the aforementioned directions have not been complied with.
2.
In response to the notice to show cause, in the affidavit filed on 20.1.2006, the respondent took the stand that the petitioner has secured 458 marks whereas the last selected candidate has secured 5313 marks.
It was, therefore, deposed that the petitioner was not entitled to be selected for the post of Sanskrit Teacher under handicapped quota due to low merit.
3.
The affidavit filed by the respondent has been controverted by filing the counter affidavit of the petitioner that true facts have not been disclosed.
It has been asserted and there were total 11 posts for handicapped category of Sanskrit Teacher which were advertised and 4 posts were meant for Deaf Handicapped Category.
The claim of those candidates who possessed essential qualification was required to be considered first and those who possessed alternative qualification in contradiction to essential qualification was to be considered only if the candidate possessing essential qualification were not available.
The petitioner has placed on record a copy of the writ petition as well as a photocopy of the reply filed by the State (P-4 and P-5).
As the details of candidates possessing essential qualification and those possessing alternative qualification have not been disclosed it was not possible to conclude that the petitioner was lower in merit because her merit could not be compared with those who had preferential qualification.
4.
Shri KK Khandelwal, respondent, again filed a counter affidavit, dated 1422006, controverting the assertions made by the petitioner in her affidavit dated 6.2.2006, which was filed as rejoinder.
In his affidavit, Shri KK Khandelwal disclosed that out of 8 candidates who applied for the post, only 2 candidates possessed essential qualification, who had appeared before the Selection Committee and were selected.
The other two candidates having preferential qualifications were selected from B.A./B.Ed.
category.
5.
On 16.2.2006, when the matter came up for consideration, Shri Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the petitioner has been fully eligible in the category of candidates possessing essential qualification and was provisionally interviewed as per the directions issued by the Division Bench of this Court.
Learned counsel has drawn my attention to sub-para 3 of para 9 of C.W.P.
No. 13459 of 2004 (P-4) to argue that the petitioner possesses essential qualification and it was an admitted position because in the corresponding para of the reply the averment made by the petitioner in sub-para 3 of para 9 has not been controverted.
Learned State counsel was not able to dislodge the stand taken by Shri Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Therefore, necessity arose to call the respondent personally before this Court, who appeared in the afternoon session on 16.2.2006.
However, the hearing was deferred to 1722006 because the record was required to be produced before the Court.
6.
At the resumed hearing, Shri KK Khandelwal, IAS, respondent, who is present in the Court, appraised the Court that the Selection Committee had evolved a criteria of 50% marks and the persons securing less than 50% marks were not considered within the selection zone.
As per the record, the marks of the petitioner in the selection process are 458 and, therefore, she has not been considered as selected and the persons with alternative qualifications have been considered and appointed.
6A.
Shri Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has made an attempt to address arguments on merit by stating that no such criteria could have been framed by the Selection Committee, especially when the Government has not prescribed the criteria in the selection formula which has been given to the Selection Committee.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the direction issued by a Division Bench of this Court for declaration of the result of the petitioner stand complied with.
As she has not been found to be within the selection zone, no consequential relief is required to be given to her.
However, before parting it is essential to observe that the affidavits filed by the respondent on 20.1.2006 and 1422006 are not consistent with the record and the stand staken before this Court when the respondent himself has appeared.
It is well known that when responsible officers file and affidavit before this Court then it is taken as a gospel truth.
The Court ordinarily does not scrutinize such affidavit for the purpose of finding out its consistency with the record.
The present case leaves much to desire.
Therefore, all possible measures which are required to be taken by the respondent, shall be taken to ensure that in future no such affidavit is filed, which is not based on record.
The affidavits must be properly vetted by the concerned official and then should be scrutinized by the officer signing and filing the same.
At this stage I do not wish to say anymore on the aforementioned issue.
For the reasons aforementioned, the rule is discharged.
However, the petitioner shall be entitled to avail any other remedy in accordance with law, if so advised.
Order accordingly.