Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - State of Punjab and others are the appellants before this Court.
Judgment and decree dated January 5, 1988 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Patiala, whereby the appeal filed by the plaintiff-respondent against the judgment and decree dated October 29, 1985 passed by the trial Court was allowed and consequently the suit of the plaintiff was decreed, have been challenged.
2.
The plaintiff had filed a suit for declaration that order dated July 1, 1981 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Patiala and orders passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and the Inspector General of Police in appeal and revision, respectively, are illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void and contrary to the service rules and that the plaintiff was entitled to all rights, benefits and privileges attached to the post.
It was claimed by the plaintiff that he was involved in a false criminal case under Sections 420 and 170 of the Indian Penal Code for alleging accepting illegal gratification.
He was initially convicted under Section 170 of the Indian Penal Code by the trial Court but was ordered to be released on probation by the trial Court itself.
However, the plaintiff filed an appeal against his conviction.
Vide judgment dated January 8, 1979, the learned Additional Sessions Judge accepted the appeal filed by the plaintiff and he was ordered to be acquitted.
Subsequent to the aforesaid acquittal, a departmental inquiry was ordered against the plaintiff on the same allegations.
On conclusion of the departmental proceedings, punishment of forfeiture of two years service of the plaintiff was imposed upon him by punishing authority vide order dated July 1, 1981.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff against the said order before the Deputy Inspector General of Police was dismissed on September 1, 1981.
The Inspector General of Police also dismissed his appeal/revision vide order dated March 26, 1982.
Consequently, the plaintiff challenged the aforesaid orders passed by the departmental authorities through the present civil suit.
3.
In the said suit it was claimed by the plaintiff that after his acquittal on the facts for which he has been proceeded departmentally, no punishment could have been imposed upon him by the department.
The said suit was contested by the defendants.
It was maintained by the department that the plaintiff had been acquitted by the criminal Court by giving him benefit of doubt and, therefore, the departmental proceedings against the plaintiff were competent and legally maintainable.
4.
Learned trial Court dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
However, on an appeal preferred by him, learned first appellate Court reappraised the entire evidence and also examined the legal position.
On such reappraisal, learned first appellate Court found that the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions Judge in criminal case depicted that the plaintiff had not been acquitted on any technical ground but the judgment of acquittal had been given on the basis of the material available on the record.
Accordingly, it was held that after the aforesaid acquittal, the department could not have proceeded against the plaintiff departmentally on the basis of the similar allegations for which criminal case had also resulted and the plaintiff already acquitted.
Consequently, the appeal filed by the plaintiff was allowed and the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court were set aside.
The suit filed by the plaintiff was decreed.
5.
The State of Punjab has now chosen to file the present regular second appeal before this Court.
6.
I have heard Shri A.S. Grewal, leaned Additional Advocate General, Punjab and Shri Manu K. Bhandari, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff- respondent and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
7.
Shri Grewal has vehemently argued that the plaintiff had been acquitted of the criminal charges since the prosecution witnesses had been won over and, therefore, as per Rule 1631(b), departmental proceedings against him were competent.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the aforesaid contention raised by the learned State Counsel but find myself unable to agree with the same.
9.
Learned first Appellate Court has found it as a fact that the judgment Ex. DX passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge clearly showed that the whole evidence of the prosecution had been discussed and it was thereafter that a conclusion had been drawn by the learned Additional Sessions Judge that the prosecution evidence is not sufficient to pass an order of conviction upon the plaintiff.
Once the charges framed against the plaintiff had been examined by the criminal Court, then it was not of course open to the department to proceed against the plaintiff on same charges all over again in departmental proceedings.
The provisions of Rule 163(1) of the Rules as relied upon by the learned State Counsel are not attracted to the facts and circumstances of the case.
10.
No other point has been urged.
11.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in the present appeal.
12.
Consequently, the present appeal being devoid of any merit is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.