Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present revision petition is to the order passed by the learned Executing Court on 1221994 directing the petitioner to make the payment of the financial benefits admissible to the plaintiff-decree-holder with effect from 5.4.1980 up to 13.4.1988 i.e. the date of his superannuation.
2.
The plaintiff-respondent has filed a suit for declaration challenging the order of termination of his services vide order dated 141983.
The said order of termination was passed as the plaintiff was found absent from duty for a very long period i.e. since 141980.
3.
The said order was found to be void by the Civil Court on 19111991 and plaintiff was found entitled to all consequential benefits.
The operative part of the judgment reads as under :  "In view of my findings on the aforesaid issues, the suit of the plaintiff succeeds and decreed with costs to the effect that impugned order dated 141983 passed by General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa, is void and the same is not binding on the plaintiff and the plaintiff is entitled to all consequential benefits.
Decree sheet be drawn accordingly.
File be consigned to the record room after due compliance."
4.
The plaintiff has sought execution of the decree claiming all the arrears of salary and financial benefits treating the plaintiff to be in service up to the age of 58 years ie the age of superannuation up to 30.4.1988.
In view of the claim of the plaintiff, the learned Executing Court has directed to do the needful within one month.
5.
The question whether in execution of the decree for declaration, the plaintiff is entitled to arrears of salary was considered by Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Mange Lal Sharma, (1998)2 Supreme Court Cases 510, wherein it has been held that in a suit for declaration only rights of the parties are determined and as a consequential relief the arrears cannot be claimed.
It is only status of the parties is determined.
Unless the plaintiff claims further relief of arrears of salary in accordance with law, he is not entitled to arrears of salary.
It has been held to the following effect by their Lordships :  "A declaratory decree merely declares the right of the decree-holder vis-a-vis the judgment-debtor and does not in terms direct the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
Since in the present case decree does not direct reinstatement or payment of arrears of salary the executing Court could not issue any process for the purpose as that would be going outside or beyond the decree.
The respondent as a decree-holder was free to seek his remedy for arrears of salary in the suit for declaration.
The executing Court has no jurisdiction to direct payment of salary or grant any other consequential relief which does not flow directly and necessarily from the declaratory decree.
It is not that if in a suit for declaration where the plaintiff is able to seek further relief he must seek that relief though he may not be in need of that further relief.
In the present suit the plaintiff while seeking relief of declaration would certainly have asked for other reliefs like the reinstatement, arrears of salary and consequential benefits.
He was, however, satisfied with a relief of declaration knowing that the Government would honour the decree and would reinstate him.
We will, therefore, assume that the suit for mere declaration filed by the respondent- plaintiff was maintainable, as the question of maintainability of the suit is not in issue before us."
6.
In view of the said judgment, the direction given by the learned Trial Court to pay all arrears of salary up to the date of superannuation is clearly not sustainable in law.
Consequently, the revision is allowed and the impugned order passed by the learned Trial Court is set aside.
Petition allowed.