Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The plaintiff has filed this appeal to challenge the judgments and decrees dated 7.6.1997 passed by the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Moga, dismissing his suit for declaration; and 811999 passed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, whereby his appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial Court was also dismissed.
2.
In brief the facts giving rise to this appeal are that the plaintiff, who was working as Professor and Head of the Chemistry Department in the Dayanand Mathura Dass College, Moga (for short `the College'), was suspended from service on 831987 on some charges of misconduct and misbehaviour on his part.
He was charge-sheeted and he submitted his explanation to the charge- sheet, which was rejected by defendant No. 1.
Shri PK Sabharwal, Advocate of Jalandhar, was appointed as Inquiry Officer in order to conduct the inquiry against the plaintiff.
On 251987 the plaintiff appeared before the Inquiry Officer.
However, owing to some unsavoury incident, the inquiry could not proceed.
The College was closed for summer vacation from 11.5.1987 to 12.7.1987 and the plaintiff left for his native village Dharampur in Himachal Pradesh.
Next date for inquiry was fixed as 1651987 at 11.30 a.m.
However, the letter posted to the plaintiff at his native village address reached him on the same date at 200 pm The plaintiff addressed a letter to the Inquiry Officer under postal certificate showing his inability to attend the inquiry owing to the late delivery of the letter.
However, the Inquiry Officer conducted the inquiry as per schedule and the plaintiff was proceeded against ex parte.
He submitted the inquiry report to the authorities concerned on 561987.
On the basis of the said inquiry report, the services of the plaintiff were terminated vide order dated 2191987.
The plaintiff filed the present suit to challenge the inquiry report dated 561987 and the termination order dated 2191987.
On notice to the defendants, defendant Nos. 1 and 2 contested the suit by filing a detailed written-statement.
After hearing the counsel for the parties and on going through the evidence adduced on record, the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division) Moga, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
The appeal filed by him has also been dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, vide judgment and decree dated 811999.
The judgments and decrees passed by both the courts below have been challenged by the plaintiff by filing the present appeal.
3.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the inquiry proceedings against the plaintiff-appellant were vitiated as an opportunity of hearing was not afforded to him.
The learned counsel pointed out that the plaintiff had received the intimation with regard to the date of inquiry on 1651987 on the said date itself.
As such, it was not possible for him to attend the inquiry proceedings at Moga as the plaintiff had already proceeded to his native village at Dharampur in Himachal Pradesh.
Inspite of the letter posted by the plaintiff under postal certificate explaining his inability to attend, the inquiry proceedings were conducted and concluded by the Inquiry Officer at the back of the plaintiff.
Thus, the counsel contended that the inquiry proceedings were vitiated and violative of the principles of natural justice.
The counsel has pointedly stated that the DPI (Colleges), Punjab, had written to the College as to how the order of removal against the plaintiff was passed.
In support of his contentions, the counsel has placed reliance on Union of India v. TR Verma, AIR 1957 SC 882; State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chintaman Sadashiva Waishampayan, AIR 1961 SC 1623; State Bank of Patiala and others v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) SCT 568 : 1996(3) Supreme Court Cases 364; Canara Bank and others v. Debasis Das and others, 2003(2) SCT 481 : 2003(4) Supreme Court Cases 557 and Managing Committee for the Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Jullundur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 415.
4.
The contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant have vehemently been controverted by Mr. Rajive Atma Ram, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent- College.
It has been contended by him that the appellant was given adequate opportunity to defend himself before the Inquiry Officer and cross-examine the witnesses.
However, on 251987 when he appeared before the Inquiry Officer, he left the inquiry proceedings in a huff and his attitude before the Inquiry Officer had remained unco-operative.
Learned Senior Counsel contended that the plaintiff-appellant intended to stall the proceedings of inquiry.
With regard to the letter received by him on the date of inquiry, i.e. 1651987, it has been argued by Mr. Rajive Atma Ram that the Inquiry Officer submitted his report on 561987.
During the interregnum the plaintiff did not make any effort to appear before the Inquiry Officer to point out his inability to attend the inquiry proceedings.
With regard to the letter written by the DPI (Colleges) to the respondent-College, it has been contended by the learned Senior Counsel that against the letter written by the DPI, the College Management had filed a writ petition in his Court, which was allowed and it was held by this Court in CWP No. 1796 of 1988 (reported as Managing Committee, DM College, Moga v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) SCT 50 : 1991(4) SLR 576) that the College is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the Director, Public Instruction (Punjab).
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the case file very carefully.
The following question arises for consideration before this court in the present appeal :-  Whether or not the inquiry report dated 561987 is vitiated and the termination order dated 2191987 passed on the basis thereof is bad in the eyes of law ?
6.
So far as the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant was not provided adequate opportunity of hearing as the intimation with regard to the date of hearing was received by him on 1651987 itself is concerned, I do not find any merit therein.
Even if the submission of the learned counsel is accepted, the conduct of the appellant that he never challenged the ex parte proceedings either before the Inquiry Officer or at any stage of the proceedings thereafter is uncalled for.
Even the questionable conduct of the plaintiff on 251987 is very well reflected in the inquiry report dated 561987, which shows that the attitude of the plaintiff from the very beginning was harsh towards the Inquiry Officer.
The plaintiff even did not represent before the Disciplinary Authority with regard to the late delivery of intimation of date of hearing to him.
The interpretation given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court with regard to the principles of natural justice in the various authorities cited by the learned counsel for the appellant are not applicable to the facts of the this case.
However, the Court cannot shut its eyes to the fact that the plaintiff was employed as a Professor in a reputed institution at Moga.
The Inquiry Officer also made a mention in the inquiry report that in the year 1974 also he was found indulging in the activities of drinking, which fact becomes clear from the documents DX and DY placed on the file by way of additional evidence.
7.
So far as the argument that the plaintiff had made a request for grant of adjournment of the date of hearing beyond 1651987 is concerned, he has not placed any document with regard thereto on record.
He has only adduced the UPC on record, which is not a sufficient proof of the contention raised on behalf of the plaintiff.
This contention stands belied when the Court looks to the conduct of the plaintiff thereafter in not making any oral or written submission either to the Inquiry Officer or to the Disciplinary Authority with respect thereto.
As already mentioned above, the plaintiff never challenged the ex parte proceedings against him at any stage of the proceedings.
The plaintiff was supplied with a copy of the inquiry report which fact becomes clear from his cross-examination.
8.
So far as the contention that the DPI (Colleges) had written to the College Authorities as to how the order of removal was passed is concerned, the counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has brought to the notice of the Court a copy of the judgment dated 871991 (Ex. P-10) wherein it was held by this Court that the defendant College was a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India, and, therefore, it was not amenable to the jurisdiction of Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974.
Against the said judgment the plaintiff had filed a review petition as well as a letters patent appeal which were dismissed by this Court.
Consequently, the argument in this regard raised by the learned counsel for the appellant becomes meaningless.
9.
In the light of the above discussion, I am of the considered opinion that neither the inquiry report dated 561987 is vitiated nor the termination order dated 2191987 is bad in law.
Thus, I do not find any infirmity in the well-reasoned judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below.
Consequently, there is no merit in this appeal.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.