S Ravindra Bhat, J - The petitioners in these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, have questioned the MTNL Executive Voluntary Retirement Scheme ('the Scheme') formulated on 1852005.
2.
The respondent (hereafter called 'MTNL') formulated the Scheme with a view to optimising or 'right sizing' its manpower, by providing attractive terminal benefits to eligible employees, and enable them to refire voluntarily before the actual date of superannuation.
As per Clause 5 of the Scheme, the employee is entitled to normal retirement benefits; in addition the Scheme entitles the optee to payment of compensation equivalent to 60 days salary (Basic+DA) for each completed year of service or salary for the number of years/months left till the date of superannuation whichever is less.
This compensation is payable as per a formula indicated in that regard.
3.
Clause 4 of the Scheme prescribes the eligibility; it entitles employees who had completed 50 years and had served MTNL/DOT continuously as regular employees for 25 years.
As per Clause 44 the benefits of the Scheme were inadmissible if the optee has filed a case against MTNL and the same is pending.
4.
Earlier to the Scheme, another Scheme was introduced in respect of non- executives; known as the MTNL Voluntary Retirement Scheme 2004.
This had similar objectives and it was applicable and operated in respect of Group-C and Group-D working employees working in IDA pay scales.
One of the significant clauses which was different from the Executive Scheme was that the earlier Scheme was applicable to eligible Group-C and Group-D employees, the number of years of service and the age was prescribed differently.
The age of the employee had to be at least 40 years and he ought to have put in 20 years of service in the MTNL/DOT.
5.
The impugned Scheme was kept open for a period of about six weeks and the applications were accepted till 3062005.
6.
The petitioners impugn the Executive Voluntary Retirement Scheme on the grounds, inter alia, that Clause 44. which renders employees contesting cases ineligible, is arbitrary as it prescribes an irrelevant disqualification; the prescription of 50 years of age and 25 years of service too has been assailed as discriminatory on the round that in the case of non- executives a lower age and fewer number of years has been prescribed.
The petitioners also assailed another condition namely, Clause 8.3 in the impugned 2005 Scheme, which states that vacancies falling due to voluntary retirement would stand automatically abolished and there would be no recruitment or promotion against such vacancies.
It is averred and contended on behalf of the petitioners that this clause is arbitrary since the official concerned would not be able to assess as to his future career avenues in the organization without getting complete picture,  7.
Learned Counsel for the petitioners Mr. D S Chaudhary reiterated the grounds of challenge to the Scheme.
He contended that there is no standard strength of the employees against a particular post and in the absence of such standard it will be possible to determine the number of employees in a particular grade allowed to retire.
It is also contended that without indicating the grade data on this aspect, the calling of options of retirement was a futile exercise.
8.
Learned Counsel contended that the differentiation between employees, as per the previous 2004 Scheme where the age criteria was less in the sense that the age prescribed was lower and the number of years of qualifying service was also fewer, as compared to what has been prescribed in the impugned Scheme makes the latter arbitrary and discriminatory.
Both sets of employees belong to the same organization.
Hence the requirement to put in more service by officials and also the prescription of a minimum age would be discriminatory, and resulting deprivation of the benefits of the VRS to a sizable number of officers who are, otherwise, eligible.
9.
Learned Counsel also contended that Clause 44 of the impugned Scheme is arbitrary since it disqualifies a persons having approached the Court to ventilate his legitimate grievances.
10.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that representations were made to the respondent-MTNL on 10.8.2005, where all these illegalities were pointed out.
However, it has met with no response.
Hence, the petitioners were constrained to approach the Court.
11.
Mr. Dinesh Agnani, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the MTNL on advance notice contended that the petition ought not to be entertained.
He submitted that jurisdiction under Article 226 is discretionary and in the facts of the present case, the exercise of that jurisdiction would not be appropriate.
In support of this submission it was stated that the Scheme was closed and on 3062005 all the options were received.
The MTNL is in the process of finalising the options.
If the petitioners had and grievance, they ought to have represented to the MTNL at that stage and approached the Court for relief under those circumstances.
Having not done so, they cannot now seek to unsettle the actions of the MTNL, or ask for a mandamus which would be impermissible having regard to the peculiar nature of the Scheme.
It was also contended that the petition is belated in the circumstances of the case.
12.
Having heard learned Counsel and considered the averments in the petition, I am inclined to agree with the submission on behalf of the respondents.
There could be some merit in the submission of the petitioners about certain conditions.
Nevertheless two aspects have to be kept in mind in cases where employees approach the Court for reliefs.
First, a VRS is not a statutory entitlement; it is an offer as has been held by the Supreme Court.
Hence, the terms have to be viewed from a slightly different perspective.
Nevertheless, the employer, if it is public body, is under an obligation to follow principles of non-description and non-arbitrariness while formulating such schemes.
13.
The petitioners in these cases, are serving officials of the MTNL.
When the Scheme was formulated and indicated to them, they were fully aware of the eligibility conditions and of the other terms upon which the MTNL wished to accept or reject offers for voluntary retirement.
It is also clear that the VRS itself was in force for six weeks.
If they had any grievance, they should have formulated it at the earliest, by filing appropriate representation and thereafter approach the Court but they did not do so.
After three months of the closure of the scheme it is not now open for them to come forward and seeks reopening, as it were of the entire scheme which has been closed by assailing some of the conditions on the ground that they were ineligible or, otherwise, would not be entitled to exercise their options.
14.
On this score, I am of the view this is a not a fit case to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution as it would lead to serious consequences where a large section of employees whose options have been given and are under process, would be imperilled.
The Court under Article 226 exercises discretionary and equitable jurisdiction.
This has to be suitable to the circumstances of the case.
Delay and laches is one ground on which petitions are declined.
15.
Admittedly, the MTWL closed its scheme, and large sections of its employees exercised their choice in option for, or not opting the VRS, which was available upto a certain time.
The petitioners did not raise any grievance, when they purport to be aggrieved.
Adjudicating upon the merits of the contentions raised would lead to the Court issuing directions to undo the time period, and the conditions of VRS.
If the aggrieved person does not approach the Court and agitate his grievance with promptitute, but his petition is nevertheless entertained, the Court's decision would impact adversely on the decision making process as well as the rights of a whole section of employees.
In that sense, the issue here is not merely of delay on the part of one individual, but undoing something that attained finality - a course of action that is both imprudent and unwise, and therefore, best not taken by the Court.
16.
For the foregoing reasons, the petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.