Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J - All these appeals involve similar facts wherein similar issues arise for consideration.
Consequently, we propose to dispose of all these appeals by this common judgment and order.
2.
The respondents herein were engaged as daily wage labourers in the Hauz Rani Seed Farm and Nursery.
Apart from the appellant there are eight more such Seed Farms and Nurseries under the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi.
After their engagement as daily wage labourers some time in 1978 they were being paid wages as admissible under the extant Rules.
According to the appellant, all the respondents were engaged as daily wage labourers on casual and fluctuating daily need basis on exigency of work and that at the time of their engagement they did not undergo the procedure of recruitment of public employment.
3.
The aforesaid respondents filed a writ petition before the Supreme Court in the year 1986, which was registered as Writ Petition No. 367/1986.
In the said writ petition the following reliefs were sought for :  "(i) issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners with retrospective effect, i.e. from the date each petitioner completed 240 days continuous service in an year;  (ii) issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus to pay the salary and other allowances such as DA, HRA, bonus and other benefits as are being paid to the regular employees of the Delhi Administration; (iii) issue any other appropriate writ, order or direction which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper."
4.
The said writ petition containing the aforesaid reliefs was considered by Supreme Court and it passed the following order :  "In view of the judgment of this Court in HD Singh v. Reserve Bank of India & Ors., the services of the petitioners will be regularised as from the date of their original entry into services.
This order will be confined to those persons who were not age barred on the date of their entry into services.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly."
5.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order passed by the Supreme Court, the appellant passed an order on 1481987 offering the post of Labourer (Regular) to the respondents in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940 on purely ad hoc basis for a period of three months.
A copy of the aforesaid order issued through a memorandum dated 1481987 is placed on record.
In paragraph 3 thereof, it was mentioned that the appointee will not be entitled for any seniority or any claim for regularisation.
It was also stated that the services of the respondents would be regularised from the date of their original entry into service for which a reference is being made to the Government of India.
None of the aforesaid clauses in the terms and conditions of appointment against the post of Labourer (Regular) stipulate that the respondents would also be paid their back wages.
The aforesaid terms and conditions of appointment were accepted by the respondents and after accepting the same, they joined the aforesaid posts of Labourer (Regular) on ad hoc basis.
Subsequently they were given regular appointment.
The aforesaid memorandum was passed in view of the fact that at the relevant point of time there was no regular post as against which the respondents could be immediately appointed on regular basis.
The records disclose that thereafter process for creation of the posts was initiated and finally when posts were created, the respondents were given regular appointment Therefore, the order as passed stood fully and effectively complied with order dated 1321990.
6.
It is, however, to be mentioned at this stage that the said order dated 1321990 was passed after creating the posts and appointing the respondents against the said regular posts of Labourer in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940 on the same terms and conditions as per the memorandum dated 1481987.
It is also pointed out that when the original writ petition was filed before the Supreme Court there were altogether 12 petitioners.
It is also to be noted that the Supreme Court by its order dated 27101986 directed that the services of the petitioners therein would be regularised from the date of their original entry into service making it clear that the aforesaid order would be confined only to those persons who were not age barred on the date of their entry into service.
Out of the 12 petitioners, cases of four persons were found to be age-barred on the date of their entry into service and, therefore, their cases were omitted and were not considered for regularisation of their services.
Such order for regularisation giving effect to the order of the Supreme Court dated 27101986 was passed in case of eight petitioners only who are respondents herein.
It is also to be mentioned that as the order of the Supreme Court did not specifically state that the respondents should also be paid back wages, therefore, no such order for payment of back wages was passed by the appellant in the case of the respondents.
It is also pointed out that in respect of similarly situated persons, Supreme Court passed similar orders for regularisation of services of other employees similarly situated and in those cases although they were directed to be regularised in their service from the date of their initial appointment yet specifically it was ordered that no back wages would be paid.
Reference was made to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Shri Naidar & Anr. v Delhi Administration & Anr. (Writ Petition No. 9609-10 of 1983 D/d.
on 29th Septmber, 1988) and in the case of Rattan Lal & Ors. v. Lt.
Governor & Ors. (Writ Petition Nos. 98, 99, 216, 938, 940/1988 D/d.
6th March, 1990).
7.
After expiry of about five years, the respondents filed a petition before the Labour Court claiming regular pay scale and allowances from the date of their initial appointment as daily wage labourer in view of the fact that their services have been regularised from the said date and, therefore, it was claimed that they are entitled to full pay and allowances in the scale from the said date onwards.
The Labour Court after consideration of the said claim and the objection raised on behalf of the appellant herein allowed the said claim of the respondents on the ground that the Supreme Court had directed for regularisation of their services from the date of their initial appointment and, therefore, the respondents would be entitled to payment of back wages on the basis of the pay scale and directed that the difference in that regard shall be paid by the appellant to the respondents.
8.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid award passed by the learned Labour Court, the appellant preferred a writ petition before this Court, which was registered as CWP No. 3623/2003.
The learned Single Judge considered the award of the Tribunal and held that the Tribunal has construed that regularisation must be with the back wages payable as a consequence of regularisation.
The learned Single Judge held that cases of Rattan Lal & Ors. (supra) and Shri Naidar & Anr. (supra) are not applicable as in those orders payment of back wages as per regularisation were specifically ruled out whereas in the present cases the Supreme Court did not specifically rule out that upon regularisation consequent back wages should be denied.
Consequently it was held that back wages are payable on grant of regularisation from the date of initial appointment.
The said order is under challenge in these appeals.
9.
Counsel for the appellant has drawn our attention to the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid decisions titled Rattan Lal & Ors. (supra) and Shri Naidar & Anr. (supra) and also to some other decisions in support of her contention that the Supreme Court has not specifically ordered for payment of back wages and, therefore, the same should be construed as rejection of such prayer.
Said submission was based on the contention that when a prayer is made before a Court and no order in that regard is passed, such a prayer should be construed as rejected.
10.
Counsel for the respondents, however, has submitted that in the decisions of Rattan Lal & Ors. (supra) and Shri Naidar & Anr. (supra), the Supreme Court has specifically held that no back wages are required to be paid.
Referring to the same, therefore, the Counsel submitted that wherever specific order was passed for denial of back wages, the same need not be paid but where it is not so stated the presumption would be that the same should be paid by the appellant.
In support of his submission he has also relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in Jeet Singh and Others v. M.C.D.
and Others, 1986 (Supp.)
SCC 560; Surinder Singh and Another v. The Engineer-in-Chief, C.P.W.D.
and Others, AIR 1986 SC 584 and Jacob M Puthuparambil and Others v. Kerala Water Authority and Others, 1991(1) SCT 627 (SC) : (1991)1 SCC 28.
11.
The aforesaid submissions of the Counsel for the parties have been considered by us giving our in-depth consideration thereto.
In the writ petition filed before the Supreme Court no specific prayer was made in the said petition that the petitioners (respondents herein) should also be paid their back wages on the regular pay scale computing the same on the difference of the pay already paid from the date of their initial appointment on casual basis.
The Supreme Court while disposing of the writ petition filed by the respondents herein granted the relief to the respondents in view of the judgment of HD Singh v. Reserve Bank of India and Others, 29(1986) DLT 77 (SC) : (1985)4 SCC 201.
Although the case of HD Singh (supra) was a case of termination of service and applicability of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, which, however, was not a case of the present respondents, yet in view of the said judgment, the Supreme Court had ordered that the services of the respondents herein would be regularised from the date of their original entry into service.
The said order was, however, confined only to those persons who were not age-barred on the date of their entry into service.
12.
Therefore, a further exercise was required to be done by the appellant to find out as to out of 12 writ petitioners how many of them were age barred and the order of the Supreme Court for regularisation of the services was restricted only to those persons whose cases were not age-barred.
In the case of HD Singh (supra) an order was specifically passed by the Supreme Court that back wages shall be paid in their cases.
Although the Supreme Court disposed of the aforesaid writ petition in the light of the case of HD Singh (supra) yet it did not specifically state in the order that they shall be paid the back wages also computing the same on the basis of the pay scale and the difference thereof whereas in the case of HD Singh (supra) specific order for payment of back wages was passed by the Supreme Court.
In the case of similarly situated persons belonging to employees of similar firms i.e. Rattan Lal & Ors. (supra) and Shri Naidar & Anr. (supra), the Supreme Court has specifically stated that no such back wages are required to be paid to the said employees although a direction was issued in those cases also that their services should be regularised from the date of their original entry into service.
The respondents were given appointment as Labourer (Regular) in the year 1986.
They were formally regularised after creation of posts in 1990.
No order was passed either in 1986 or in 1990 that they should and would be paid the arrears of wages.
The respondents accepted the terms and conditions of appointment and never raised any dispute with regard to non-payment of arrear wages and allowed the period of limitation to claim such arrear wages to expire.
When for the first time such a claim was made by raising a dispute and getting a reference made to the Labour Court in the year 1995, the said reference was beyond the period of limitation to claim the said benefit and by the time the said reference was sought for period of limitation to claim such arrear wages had definitely expired.
But the fact remains that claim was made which was entertained and reference was made by the appropriate Government and the Labour Court also granted the claim, which was upheld by the learned Single Judge.
13.
Be that as it may, having gone through the records including the various judgments to which reference was made during the course of arguments by the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the considered opinion that since no specific order was passed by the Supreme Court in respect of payment of arrear wages computing the same on the basis of regular pay scale and difference thereof, the said contention if assumed to have been raised before the Supreme Court would be construed as rejected in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in State Bank of India v. Ram Chandra Dubey and Others, 2001(1) SCT 637 (SC) : VIII(2000) SLT 205 : (2001)1 SCC 73.
If it is construed that the same was not raised before the Supreme Court, the same could not have been raised before the learned Labour Court as the same was not raised in the initial petition itself and that also after expiry of the period of limitation.
In any view of the matter, the aforesaid claim was not justified and no such arrears/back wages could be paid to the respondents in view of the fact that the same was not specifically directed to be paid by the Supreme Court and also in view of the fact that in the case of similarly situated persons such a claim was rejected by the Supreme Court specifically.
In our considered opinion no such order for payment of back wages could also be made as the respondents accepted the other benefits without protest for not giving them the benefit of payment of back wages.
They are bound by the terms of their appointment which were accepted without any reservation and demur.
The decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Naidar & Anr. (supra) who are similarly situated persons and the aforesaid factors are the guiding principles which were overlooked by both the learned Single Judge as also by the learned Labour Court.
We, therefore, allow the appeal and set aside the judgments and orders of the learned Single Judge as also of the learned Labour Court.
The amount, which was directed to be deposited in this Court pursuant to the order of the learned Labour Court shall now be refunded back to the appellant along with the interest accrued thereon.
Appeal allowed.