JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of two writ petitions bearing No. 19150 of 2002 and 548 of 2003, as common question of law and facts are involved in both these cases.
Facts are taken from CWP No. 19150 of 2002.
2.
Subordinate Services Selection Board Punjab, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as "the Board") issued an advertisement dated 171996, for filling the posts of Lascars in the Department of Education Punjab along with a number of posts in various departments.
3.
The post of Lascar was originally a Class IV post which has now been designated as Class III post.
The screening test for the aforestated post was held on November 18, 2001 and that the result was declared on December 15, 2001.
A written test was held by the Board and that those who were successful and eligible were called for the interview held on December 20, 21 and 24, 2001.
The final result was declared on 26122001.
The names of all the petitioners had been recommended for appointment.
It has been averred by the petitioners that the respective letters of appointment of the petitioners had been duly prepared by allocating the place of posting and that in the meanwhile, CWP No. 1809 of 2002, had been filed before the Court by one Kulbir Singh.
However, while issuing notice of motion vide order dated 2912002, a Division Bench of this Court restrained the respondents from issuing the appointment letters to the selected candidates.
It had also been directed that the list of the successful candidates be furnished to the petitioner, who may then implead them as respondents in the petition.
Some of the successful candidates had also filed an application for being impleaded as a party to the said petition.
It was on July 17, 2002, the petition was disposed of on account of the statement made by the counsel for the State of Punjab that the petitioners were not being appointed.
The CM Application(s) filed in the aforestated petitions by some of the selected candidates was also disposed of with liberty to the applicants to seek the remedy in accordance with law.
4.
The present petition has been filed for seeking the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to issue appointment letters to the petitioners against the post of Lascars, for which they have been duly selected and that the letters of appointment were ready to be issued but were not issued because of the interim order granted by this Court.
5.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated December 2, 2002.
The Government has contested the petition by way of submitting detailed written statement.
The stand of the government is that the petitioners could not be offered the appointments, firstly on the ground that due to enforcement of Election Code of Conduct, which came into being on December 26, 2001, the process for issuing the appointments to the petitioners had to be stopped; secondly, CWP No. 1908 of 2002 i.e. the aforestated petition had been filed before this Court challenging the selection made by the Board and that this Court had passed the order Dated January 29, 2002, restraining the respondents from issuing the appointment letters to the selected candidates.
6.
However, it is the conceded position that the enforcement of the Election Code of Conduct came to an end on 25.2.2002 but due to the existence of the interim order by this Court, the appointments of the petitioners could not be made.
Apart from the above, another plea which has been set up is that the government vide communication dated May 10, 2002, had issued the instructions that the Cabinet Sub Committee on Fiscal Management in its meeting held on 2452002, under the chairmanship of the Chief Minster of Punjab, had taken a decision to impose a complete ban on the recruitment on the posts lying vacant and likely to fall vacant due to retirement or any other reasons.
Further, all such posts would be deemed to have been abolished forthwith.
Thus, any budgetary provision made for these vacant posts for the current year would also be considered as dropped.
Copy of this communication has been appended as Annexure R-2.
Apart from this, no other serious stand has been taken by the government.
The government filed an affidavit dated March 8, 2004 of Mr. Ashok Lohgari, Director (Cadet Corps) DPI (Colleges) Punjab, specifically stating that the guidance was asked from the government regarding recruitment of those Lascars who had been recommended by the Board for appointment and that the government has categorically observed that the action should be taken pursuant to the instructions of the government dated 10/1352002, copy Annexure R2.
Apart from this, the Director, Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab, had forwarded a proposal to the government of Punjab vide Memo dated 1132004, for reviving 114 posts of Lascars as the services of Lascars are essential for proper conduct of NCC camps.
In view of the aforestated affidavit, a Division Bench of this Court passed the following order on March 19, 2004 :  "Shri S.S. Behl has filed partially illegible affidavit of Ms. Nisha Sharda, Director, Punjab Instructions (Colleges) Punjab.
Having gone through the affidavit of Ms. Nisha Sharda, we direct the State Government to take appropriate decision on the issue of sanction of 114 posts to facilitate the appointment of the selected candidates as per their merit.
Needful shall be done postivie within four weeks from today.
Put up on April 19, 2004."
The aforesaid order was challenged by the State Government and that the operation of the order had been stayed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order passed in Special Leave Petition No. 8666 of 2004.
Consequently, the matter was adjourned accordingly.
7.
Subsequently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed the order dated 20112004, vide which four months time had been granted from that date to consider the proposal made by the department concerned and take such decision as it considers appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The Government had also filed CM No. 6948 of 2004, for seeking extension of time for another two months, after the election process is completed, for taking further necessary action in the matter.
Obviously, this application had virtually become infructuous.
The matter was adjourned from time to time.
In the meanwhile, a Division Bench of this Court had rendered the judgment in CWP No. 4701 of 2001, decided on September 23, 2004, holding that upon the recommendation made and the letters of appointment having been issued prior to the imposition of ban, would not be subject to the rigour of ban.
The government had been asked to take in view the aforestated decision accordingly.
Again time of one month was taken vide order dated April 11, 2005.
It was on May 19, 2005, the counsel for the respondents produced a photocopy of the letter dated May 19, 2005, indicating that the claim of the petitioners had been considered by the official committee and the same has been rejected.
On the subsequent dates, learned Assistant Advocate General had taken time to ascertain the status of the judgment rendered by this Court, as noticed above.
Despite the adjournments having been given, the respondents have not been able to take any decision nor have been able to indicate the effect of the status of the aforestated judgment.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book and also the affidavits filed from time to time by the concerned officials.
A Division Bench of this Court has categorically held that in case where the recommendation has been made and the letter of appointment has been issued, the imposition of ban by the government shall not stall the process of joining by such appointees.
The aforestated principle had been taken to a logical conclusion in CWP No. 4701 of 2003, Raj Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 2005(1) SCT 287 (P&H) decided in favour of the petitioner confirming and affirming the aforestated principle.
9.
In the case at hand, the petitioners had been duly recommended and the letters of appointments had been prepared to be issued by indicating the place of posting, but, the same could not be issued because of the interim order passed by this Court and further coming into force of Election Code of Conduct on December 26, 2001, which admittedly came to an end on 25.2.2005 and that the petition was disposed of vide order dated July 17, 2002.
The Government has taken the shelter of the ban imposed vide order dated 13.5.2002, copy Annexure R2.
10.
We have pondered over the matter and have considered the matter in totality and have also been apprised that another Division Bench of this Court has taken such similar view while rendering judgment in CWP No. 16338 of 2002, Mandeep Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, which has been allowed while following the dicta of this Court rendered in CWP No. 15640 of 2002, Paramvir Singh v. State of Punjab, 2003(3) SCT 509 (P&H), decided on 2952002.
It has been categorically held once the letter of appointment has been issued, the post cannot be said to be vacant which could come under the rigour or preview of letter of ban issued by the government.
11.
On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General has placed reliance upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in CWP No. 10344 of 2003 decided on May 3, 2005, vide which it has been categorically held that if the offer of appointment has not been made/issued in favour of the petitioner, the policy instructions dated 10/13.5.2005, would stand in the way and that the petition has been dismissed accordingly.
12.
In the instant case, we are of the considered opinion that the dicta of this Court rendered in re : Raj Kumari case (supra) is fully applicable as the petitioners had been duly recommended by the Board and the letters of appointment had also been prepared indicating the place of posting but the same could not be delivered to the petitioners because of the interim order passed by this Court and subsequently on account of the Election Code of Conduct issued by the Election Commission of India, which was subsequently withdrawn.
The actual factual delivery of the letters of appointment would not be in issue but the question in the present case is that the letters of appointment had been prepared but were not delivered because of the interim order passed by this Court, this would not mean that the posts (had ?)
remained vacant.
In view of the dicta of this Court, we hold that the letters of appointment though not actually factually delivered to the petitioners would not suffer the rigour of the ban dated 10/1352002, imposed by the government.
Consequently, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to issue the letters of appointment pursuant to the recommendations made by the Board within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order from any quarters.
Petition allowed.