JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The pleadings of the instant writ petition as well as the annexures appended thereto reveal that the respondent-workman was inducted into the service of the petitioner-management as a daily wage employee on 3041985 and that he continued to discharge his duties upto 3171988.
As a consequence of the termination of his services at the hands of the petitioner-management, the respondent-workman issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the "the Act") on 311993.
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the dispute raised by the respondent-workmen was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as the "the Labour Court").
The Labour Court vide its award dated 1772001 answered the reference in favour of the respondent-workman.
It is aforesaid award of the Labour Court dated 1772001 which has been impugned by the petitioner- management through the instant writ petition.
2.
While accepting the claim of the respondent-workman, the Labour Court recorded a finding of fact that the respondent-workman has rendered service in excess of 240 days in the 12 calendar months preceding his termination.
The Labour Court has also arrived at the conclusion that the mandatory provisions stipulated under Section 25-F of the Act had not been complied with.
It is, therefore, that the retrenchment of the respondent-workman was ordered to be set aside.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-management contests the instant finding at the hands of Labour Court by vehemently contending that the petitioner- management was able to establish that the respondent-workman had not rendered service for a period in excess of 240 days in the 12 calendar months preceding his retrenchment.
It is not possible for us to accept the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management.
In fact, Surinder Kumar MW1 who appeared as an official witness made the following statement during the course of his examination-in-chief :-  "The workman was employed with the management as daily wages worker.
He worked as such from 3041985 to 3171988 according to record produced by me.
He was employed for 89 days according to the need of work.
If there was no work, no extension was to be granted.
Sanction is given in budget of management in regard to employment."
During the course of his cross-examination he also acknowledged that after 89 days one day's break, was given in the employment of respondent-workman.
Had there been any break other than the aforesaid notional breaks the witness who appeared on behalf of the petitioner-management would have definitely pointed out the same.
On the basis of the statement of Surinder Kumar MW1, extracted hereinabove, we are satisfied that the Labour Court was fully justified in concluding that the respondent-workman had rendered service in excess of 240 days in the 12 calendar months preceding his retrenchment.
Since it is not a matter of dispute that neither the statutory notice nor any compensation in lieu thereof was granted to the respondent-workman at the time of retrenchment and it is also not disputed, that no retrenchment compensation was paid to him at the time when his services were dispensed with, we are satisfied that the retrenchment of the respondent-workman after 3171988 was in clear violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
4.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management is based on delay at the hands of the respondent-workman in initiating an industrial dispute.
In this behalf, it is submitted that though the services of the respondent-workman were terminated on 3171988, he had issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act only on 311993 i.e. after elapse of 4- 1/2 years from the date of his termination.
It is, therefore, submitted that the payment of 50% back wages to the respondent-workman was wholly uncalled for.
It is not possible for us to accept instant contention of learned counsel for the petitioner-management in view of the legal position declared by the Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd and another, 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : 1999(2) RSJ 407, wherein the Supreme Court concluded, that ordinarily the claim raised under the provisions of the Act should not be declined merely on account of delay.
In the aforesaid judgment it was, however, held that the Labour Court should mould the relief so as to take into consideration the delay in initiating the proceedings under the Act.
5.
In view of the above legal position, it is apparent that if an industrial dispute is raised belatedly, it is imperative for the Labour Court to mould the relief granted to the workman.
In so far as the impugned award of the Labour Court in the instant case is concerned, it is apparent that the respondent-workman has not been paid any wages whosoever till the date of issuance of the demand notice.
Even after the issuance of demand notice on 311993, he has been held to be entitled to 50% back wages only.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, we are satisfied that the Labour Court duly took into consideration the delay at the hands of the respondent-workman in initiating the industrial dispute under reference.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.