Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The petitioners, who are working on various posts, such as Borers, Mechanics, Head Mechanics, Head Blacksmiths, Electricians, Helpers, Fitters, Painters, Turners etc., in the various Depots of the Haryana Roadways, have filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, to claim parity in the pay-scales which have been granted to certain other categories of employees of the Haryana Roadways, on the grounds that in the pre-revised grades, the pay scales of the petitioners were either higher or identical to the pay-scales of those categories.
A synopsis of the submissions made by the petitioners in this regard in given hereunder :-  1.
In paragraph 2 of the petition it has been stated that Borers and Mechanics were drawing the same pay scale of Rs. 152-250 in the year 1969, but by mistake the pay scale of Borers was shown as 140-250 and this omission has affected subsequent revision in their respective pay-scales from time to time.
Ultimately, the Borers have been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 420-700, whereas the Mechanics have been granted the pay-scale of Rs. 480-760.
2.
In para 3 of the writ petition it has been stated that Fitters, Turners, Blacksmits, Borers, Mechanics, Electricians etc. as well as the Inspectors were in the pay-scale of Rs. 140-250 before 1.4.1979.
Whereas the pay-scale of Fitters etc. was revised to Rs. 420-700 with effect from 1.4.1979, but the pay-scale of the Inspectors was further revised to Rs. 525- 900 (Time Scale) 525-1050 (Selection Grade for 20% posts) w.e.f.
121981.
However, no revision in the pay-scale of Fitters, Mechanics, Electricians etc. was made.
3.
In para No. 4 it has been averred that Mechanics etc. and Inspectors were in the pay-scales of Rs. 152-250 and 140-250 before 1.4.1979, respectively.
Despite the revision of the pay scale of the Inspectors to Rs. 420-700 w.e.f.
1.4.1979 and further modified to 525-900 (Time Scale) 525-1050 (Selection Grade for 20% posts) w.e.f.
121981, there is no further revision in the pay scale of Mechanics w.e.f.
121981 though they were given the pay- scale of Rs. 480-700 w.e.f.
1.4.1979.
4.
In para 6 of the petition it has been averred that Head Mechanics and Chief Inspectors were in the pay-scales of Rs. 200-400 and 160-400 before 1.4.1979, respectively.
The pay-scales of both the categories were revised to Rs. 525- 1050 with effect from 1.4.1979.
Whereas the pay scale of the Chief Inspectors was further revised to Rs. 600-1100 + Rs. 30 Spl.
Pay with effect from 121981, but no such revision was made in the pay-scale of the Head Mechanics, which remained the same as was granted with effect from 1.4.1979.
Suchlike disparities in the pay-scales have been pointed out by the petitioners in further paragraphs of the writ petition.
It has been averred in the petition that the disparities in the pay scales of different categories is unjust and arbitrary, which has given rise to the anomalies in the pay-scales of the Workshop staff, which the petitioners belong to.
Consequently, a prayer has been made in the writ petition that the petitioners be granted the higher pay-scale, which has been granted to the other categories, who were drawing either identical or lower scale of pay prior to 111979 as compared to the pay-scales granted to the petitioners.
2.
On notice having been issued to the respondents, a detailed written statement has been filed in order to contest the writ petition.
In the written statement a plea has been taken that no comparison with the educational, technical qualifications as well as duties being performed by the petitioners with those of posts the pay-scales of which the petitioners have claimed, can be made.
It has been pleaded therein that the averments made in the writ petition regarding alleged discrimination and anomalies in the pay-scales are fallacious.
3.
It has been contended by Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioners, that the petitioners have been denied equal pay for equal work and the posts which were carrying either lower or identical pay-scales with those of the posts held by the petitioners prior to 1.4.1979 have arbitrarily been upgraded and no such up-gradation in the pay- scales of the posts being held by the petitioners has been made.
It has, thus, been contended that the action of the respondents in doing so is clearly discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It has further been contended that once parity between the posts had been granted by the State Government, the same could not be disturbed by granting higher pay-scales for the posts, the pay-scales of which were either identical or lower to the posts held by the petitioners respectively.
In support of his contention, the counsel has placed reliance on The Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation v. Union of India and others, 1991(2) Services Law Reporter 131; Suresh Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1996(4) SCT 70 (P&H) : 1997(1) Recent Services Judgments 189; Babu Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(5) SLR 353; Kulwant Rai Aggarwal and others v. The State of Punjab through Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab, Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh, 1994(3) SCT 381 (P&H) : 1994(3) Recent Services Judgments 107; and Surjeet Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments 94.
4.
While controverting the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, it has been contended by Mr. DS Nalwa, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, that unless it is shown that there is a discrimination amongst the same set of employees in the same establishment, the principle of `Equal Pay of Equal Work' cannot be enforced.
It has been contended that qualifications and duties of the posts held by the petitioners are entirely different from those of the posts the pay-scales of which the petitioners have claimed for themselves and no comparison can be made between them.
It has been contended that the job for determining pay-scales of different posts is of a specialised agency like Pay Commission etc. and the Courts ought not interfere in this field.
In support of his contention the learned Deputy Advocate General has placed reliance on Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewells Corporation and others v. GS Uppal and others, 2002(2) SCT 216 (P&H) : 2001(4) Recent Services Judgments 651 State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 19; State Bank of India v. MR Ganesh Babu, 2002(2) SCT 749 (SC) : 2002(3) Recent Services Judgments 163; and State of Haryana and another v. Tilak Raj and others, 2003(4) SCT 485 (SC) : 2003(4) RSJ 1.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the case-law cited by them.
6.
The only basis of the petitioners for laying claim for equal pay with that of a particular post is that earlier upto a specified date, i.e., 1.4.1979 or even prior to that, the scale of pay of the said post was either identical or lower to the post held by the respective petitioners.
For example, the Fitters, Mechanics etc. as well as the Inspectors were placed in the pay-scale of Rs. 140-250 before 1.4.1979 and the grade was revised to that of 420-700 with effect from 1.4.1979.
However, the pay-scale of the Inspectors was modified to 525-900 (Time Scale) and 525-1050 (Selection Grade for 20% posts) with effect from 121981, whereas the Fitters and Mechanics etc. continued to be placed in the same pay-scale of Rs. 420-700.
Similar comparisons have been made with regard to various other posts.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, a detailed picture with regard to the educational qualifications as well as the duties of Inspectors, Fitters and Mechanics has been depicted and it has been stated that the cadre of Fitters, Mechanics etc. is different from the cadre of Inspectors.
For the sake of ready reference the qualifications and the duties of the posts of Inspectors and the Fitters, Mechanics are reproduced hereunder :-  1.
Inspectors  Direct Recruitment By Promotion E.Q.
(i) Graduate (i) Matriculation with Hindi (ii) At least two years experience in Motor Road Transport in a Govt. or semi-Govt. or Public Undertaking (ii) Five Years experience as Sub-Inspector in Haryana Roadways.
Duties  (i) To check the buses and detect the fraud cases committed by the conductors with the officers and independently.
(ii) To watch the bus operation at bus stand and to check the buses in order to detect without ticket passengers.
2.
Fitters : EQ  Direct By Promotion (i) Matric with Hindi (i) Middle with Hindi (ii) ITI Certificate in Fitter/Technician Trade (ii) 3 Years experience as Asstt.
Fitter.
Duties :- To undertake repair of buses.
Duties of Mechanics :- To undertake repair of buses.
A perusal of the educational qualifications as well as the duties of Inspectors, Fitters and Mechanics would show that there is no parity in the education qualifications and duties of the Inspectors on the one side and the Fitters and Mechanics on the other.
The Inspectors are much more qualified and perform duties of higher responsibility as compared to the qualifications and duties of the Fitters and Mechanics etc.
Whereas the duties of Inspectors are to check the buses and detect frauds being committed by the conductors, the duties of the fitters and mechanics is only to repair buses.
The Inspectors are graduates (by direct recruitment).
On the other hand the Fitters and Mechanics are only Matric pass with ITI Certificate.
In para No. 2 of the written statement the respondents have mentioned the criterion when an anomaly in the scale of pay is said to have occurred.
The said criterion is reproduced hereunder for ready reference :-  (a) When the pay scales are revised by the Govt. through a general pay revision notification for all its employees and the revised scales are not prescribed in respect of some posts/departments on account of inadvertent omission.
(b) When the functional pay-scale prescribed for a promotion post is lower than the functional pay scale of the feeder post.
(c) Where there is a loss of pay in case of an employee on account of revision of pay-scales.
(d) Where on promotion, an employee draws lower emoluments than what he was drawing prior to his promotion.
(e) Where the pay of a senior employee of the cadre gets fixed at a lower stage as a consequence of pay revision qua a similarly situated junior employee.
7.
There is no dispute to the fact that the petitioners and the respective posts, the scales of which they have claimed, are not on the same cadre.
No inter se comparison or parity between the posts held by the petitioners and the respective posts, the pay-scales of which they have claimed.
In view of the criterion stipulated above, for bringing the case within the frame-work of `an anomaly' the petitioners are not covered at all.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on The employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation v. Union of India (supra); Suresh Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra); Rattan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others (supra); Kulwant Rai Aggarwal and others v. The State of Punjab (supra); Surjeet Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others (supra); and Suresh Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra).
In the Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation's case the doctrine of equal pay for equal work was applied by Hon'ble the Supreme Court on the ground that the employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation, who claimed parity in pay-scales, were holding the same posts as held by the corresponding employees of Cotton Corporation of India.
Thus, the facts of this case are entirely different from the facts appearing in the present case as herein the petitioners have claimed parity with the pay-scales of the employees with whom they have no equation either in respect of qualifications or in respect of the duties performed by them.
In Rattan Singh's case (supra) the petitioners were J.B.T.
teachers with specialization in Prabhakar and Giani subjects and they had claimed parity with the pay-scales of language teachers.
Their posts were equated for the grant of pay-scales and all the teachers were performing similar functions.
It was held therein by this Court that once the posts had been equated and the incumbents were performing similar functions, they cannot be treated unequally subsequently and there was no reason to provide two different scales of pay to the similarly situated persons.
However, in the present case, as already mentioned above, the petitioners are not performing the same or similar duties as of the posts, the pay scales of which they have claimed in the present writ petition.
Thus, the petitioners cannot get any benefit from this authority as the facts are altogether different in both the cases.
In Babu Ram's case (supra) the petitioners were Mortar Mates in P.W.D.
(B&R) Department and they claimed the pay-scales of Work Munshi in the Public Health Branch of P.W.D.
on the ground that both the posts were interchangeable.
Thus, the facts of that case are also not similar to the facts of the present case.
In Kulwant Rai Aggarwal's case (supra), the parity in the pay-scales was claimed by the English teachers, whose posts were treated at par with the Masters/Mistresses of the Education Department.
As the petitioners were performing the similar duties as performed by the Masters and Mistresses in the Education Department, they could not be unequally treated in the grant of pay-scales merely on the ground that they were working in the I.T.I.
Thus, the facts of this case can also not be made applicable to the facts of the present case.
In Surjeet Singh's case (supra) the petitioners therein were working in private institutions as Instructors/Demonstrators and they were equated by the Government with the Instructors/Demonstrators working in the Government Polytechnics.
Thereafter, the posts of Instructors/Demonstrators in Government Polytechnics were converted to the posts of Lecturers.
On this basis, the Instructors/Demonstrators working in Private Institutions were denied the higher scale of pay.
It was held by this Court that once pay parity had been granted by the State Government between the Instructors/Demonstrators working in Private Institutions and the Government Polytechnics, this parity could not be disturbed merely because the posts in the Government Polytechnics were converted to those of Lecturers.
In this way, the petitioners cannot get any benefit out of the ratio of this authority, as the facts therein are not similar to the facts appearing in the present case.
In the case Suresh Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra), the petitioners who were Press Daftries and were initially getting higher scale of pay as compared to the pay-scale drawn by the Office Daftries, were placed in the same cadre with effect from 1.4.1979.
However, with effect from 121981 the Office Daftries were placed in a higher scale of pay.
As both the posts were carrying similar responsibilities, it was held that no rational basis for differential treatment had been disclosed and, thus, the action of the respondents therein was set aside.
To sum up, the ratio of the authorities cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners, is not applicable to the facts appearing in the present case.
9.
On the other hand, in view of the case-law cited by the learned counsel for the respondents there is no merit in this writ petition, a brief reference is made hereunder :-  10, In GS Uppal's case (supra) it has been held by a Division Bench of this Court that "unless it is shown that there is a discrimination amongst the same set of employees by the same master in the same establishment, the principle of `equal pay for equal work' cannot be enforced."
In State of UP v. JP Chaurasia (supra) it was held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court as under :-  "The answer to the question whether two posts are equal or should carry equal pay depends upon several factors.
It does not just depend upon either the nature of work or volume of work done.
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equality of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it.
The Court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that was made with extraneous consideration."
11.
As per the facts appearing in the present case the petitioners have failed to establish that any extraneous consideration had worked in the minds of the respondents while upgrading the posts, which were initially either equal or lower in grade.
In view of the dictum of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the afore-quoted authority, no case to grant any equation in the pay-scales of the petitioners with the posts which were upgraded at a later stage, has been made out.
In the case reported as State Bank of India v. MR Ganesh Babu, 2002(3) RSJ 163 (supra), it has been held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that "differentiation in pay-scales of persons holding same posts and performing similar work on the basis of difference in the degree of responsibility reliability, confidentiality would be a valid differentiation.
The judgment of administrative authorities concerning the responsibilities which attach to the post, and the degree of reliability expected of an incumbent, would be a value judgment of the authorities concerned which, if arrived at bona fide, reasonably and rationally, was not open to interference by the Court."
In a very recent judgment reported as State of Haryana and another v. Tilak Raj and others, 2003(4) RSJ 1 (supra), it has been held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that "Equal pay for equal work is a concept which required for its applicability complete and wholesale identity between a group of employees claiming identical pay scales and the other group of employees who have already earned such pay scales."
As already mentioned above, there is no similarity, what to talk of complete identity, of the posts of the petitioners in the present case with the posts the pay scales of which they have claimed.
In view of the dictums of their Lordships of Hon'ble the Supreme Court as well as well as of the Division Bench of this Court, as mentioned above, I do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
It is, accordingly dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.