JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was inducted into the service of the Bhakra Beas Management Board as unskilled Mazdoor on 131983.
He continued to render service till 141984 when his services were dispensed with.
Dissatisfied with the order of his termination from employment, the petitioner issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), on 1151985.
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the dispute raised by the petitioner was referred for adjudication by the appropriate government, by notification dated 18121987.
The Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court), by an award dated 4121987, arrived at the conclusion that the retrenchment of the petitioner-workman was in clear violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
Be that as it may, the petitioner- workman was allowed reinstatement into service with effect from the date his services were terminated i.e. with effect from 141984 alongwith 50% back wages.
2.
Through the instant writ petition, the petitioner has impugned the action of the Labour Court in limiting the back wages to 50%.
Relying on the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Ltd and others, 1978 Labour and Industrial Cases, 1667, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that a workman, whose services have been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during his enforced idleness.
It is also pointed out that the Apex Court, while adjudicating upon the issue, observed that any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the decision rendered by a Full Bench of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1980 Labour and Industrial Cases, 13 (Pb.
& Hry.
)wherein the legal position recorded in M/s. Hindustan Tin Works' case (supra), was reiterated.
It is, therefore, the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Labour Court after having recorded a finding that the retrenchment of the petitioner-workman w.e.f.
141984 was in violation of the mandatory provisions of the Act, it is imperative for it to award full back wages to the petitioner- workman.
3.
Neither of the facts noticed above, nor the legal position based on the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, controverted in the pleadings.
Be that as it may, the pleadings of the case reveal, that the services of the petitioner were terminated on 141984 whereas the petitioner-workman issued a demand notice, impugning the action of the respondents in terminating his services, only on 1151985.
It is also acknowledged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was reinstated into service during the pendency of the proceedings before the Labour Court on 8121986.
It is, therefore, apparent that the claim of the petitioner for award of full back wages based on the judgments, referred to above, would be sustainable from 1151985 i.e. the date on which the petitioner challenged the action of the respondents in terminating his services till his reinduction into the employment of the respondents, i.e. 8121986.
4.
In view of the above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay full back wages to the petitioner-workman from 1151985 to 8121986.
Petition allowed.