Pratap Kr.
Ray, J - Heard the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
2.
In the instant case, it is the grievance of the petitioners that their candidatures have been denied for selection in the post of Head Teacher only on the ground of lacking training qualification as prescribed under Rule 18 of the rules relating to the Recruitment and Leave Rules, 1991 of primary teachers in West Bengal notified by the notification dated 22111991.
It is the case of the petitioners that though admittedly the petitioners are not qualified with Junior Basic Training or Primary Teachers Training, but in view of the qualification acquiring B.Ed.
degree and/or bachelor of training degree, which is Called B.Ed.
or BT as the case may be, the petitioners fulfilled the training qualification on the reflection of the judgment passed by M.H.S.
Ansari, J in the case of Smt. Kanchan Dhar (Rudra) v. State of West Bengal & Ors. passed in WP No. 2698(W) of 2002 whereby and whereunder His Lordship held that B.Ed.
qualifications also a training qualification for the candidates aspiring for the post of head teacher.
This application has been opposed by the concerned Primary School Council contending, inter alia, that under the specific recruitment rule Provision has been made about a particular training qualification, hence; eligibility qualification to be looked into on that angle.
3.
Having regard to the rival contention of the parties, the issue involved is whether the petitioners are eligible for consideration of their candidature for the post of head teacher on the basis of qualification of B.Ed./BT as applicable to the respective petitioners.
This Writ Court held not wait for long for a decision of this case, since, it is already res Integra by the judgment of the Apex Court.
In the judgment passed in the case PM Latha & Anr. v. State of Kerala & Ors., reported in 2003 AIR SC Weekly 1630 : 2003(3) SCC 541, the Apex Court considered this aspect.
In that case, qualification prescribed for appointment of a primary teacher was teacher's training certificate.
In short, it was termed as TTC, but the candidates intended to place the B.Ed.
qualification as equivalent or higher for the post concerned of primary teacher.
While adjudicating the issue, the Apex Court observed that the primary teachers training course and the bachelor of education course are completely different in respect of other syllabus and curriculum.
Primary Teachers Training Course has been framed and constituted for the students reading upto class I to IV, i.e. in the primary level.
Considering the mental development of the students of such primary level the training course and curriculum was framed level the training course and curriculum was framed so that the teacher qualified with such primary teachers training course could impart primary education properly considering the age factor of the students.
Whereas bachelor of education degree is required for the teachers working in the secondary and/or higher secondary level.
The students of Secondary and Higher Secondary level are quite matured students than the students of primary level.
The B.Ed.
degree course has been set up taking care of the mental maturity of the students studying in Classes V to X and/or V to XII as the case may be.
The Apex Court has considered this issue on the said angle and held that primary teachers training course when is prescribed for appointment of a primary teacher, the B.Ed.
degree cannot be said as a sufficient degree for the purpose of appointment as primary teacher.
The identical position is there in the present rule, namely Recruitment Rules of 1991.
Rule 18 of said rule reads thus :  "18.
Appointment of Head Teachers - The Council shall appoint head teachers from a panel of seniormost primary teachers possessing requisite qualification as laid down in sub-rules (a) and (b) of Rule 6 and who have obtained a Junior Basic Training Certificate/Primary Teacher's Training Certificate and shall appoint a head teacher in every Primary School within the jurisdiction of the Council."
4.
Under the rule when specific training qualifications have been prescribed, the recruitment would follow following that particular procedure and the statutory provision.
Nobody can make any infringement of such provision.
Nobody can make any infringement of such provision.
Furthermore, the said recruitment rule was the outcome of the power conferred by Sub- section (1) of Section 106 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973.
Section 106 has provided the power to frame rule for the purpose of appointment, recruitment and for other matters of the teachers and staff of primary level.
Hence, the notification no. 768-Edn.
(P) dated 221191 whereby the said recruitment rule was notified is a statutory rule.
A statutory rule cannot be countered and/or modified even by Any non-statutory circular.
The judgment as referred to by the learned Advocate for the petitioner passed by M.H.S.
Ansari, J in support of his case now to be looked into.
From the judgment, with due respect, it appears that the statutory provision of Rule 18 whereby by using the word "shall", a condition has been imposed about the eligibility of the head teacher as possessing of a junior basic training certificate or the primary teacher's training certificate, was not at all pressed for consideration by His Lordship.
Rule 18 has already been quoted.
Furthermore, under rule 19 for preparation of the panel, it appears that rule 19 to be followed after completion of merit assessment fulfilling the conditions as stipulated in rule 18.
A conjoint reading of rules 18 and 19 makes it clear before this Court that the mandatory condition of junior basic training certificate/primary teacher's training certificate cannot be waived as such condition was stipulated in the statutory regulation, which is the outcome of rule framing power of the State of West Bengal in terms of Section 106 of the Primary Education Act.
It is a settled law now that all appointments to be made following the statutory rules and regulations.
Nobody can select a candidate who is not qualified in terms of such statutory regulations.
The petitioners in this case have not challenged rule 18 as already referred.
So long rule 18 will remain in the Statute Book, nobody would be entitled to be empanelled in the list of head teacher of a primary school without having any basic training certificate/primary teacher's training certificate.
Furthermore, it appears head teacher of a primary school gets enhancement of salary to the extent of two increments than a primary teacher of primary school.
Furthermore, head teacher being the administrative head of the school enjoys an additional status in his service career.
Having regard to such, it is within the wisdom of the Legislatures to prescribe the qualification for the said post in question and this Court cannot interfere with such rules and regulations unless it is challenged on positive foundation for necessary declaration of the concerned rule as ultra vires.
In this writ application, the petitioners have not challenged anywhere that rule.
Hence, so long that rule remains, it will stare to the face of judiciary to pass any order in favour of the petitioners.
With due respect it appears that no argument was advanced before M.H.S.
Ansari, J so far as the effect and impact of rules 18 and 19 of the aforesaid recruitment and leave rules of Primary Teachers.
In view of such state of affairs, this Court cannot grant any relief to the writ petitioners following the judgment passed by M.H.S.
Ansari, J though it was a judgment of Co-ordinate Bench and this Bench, sitting in another Co-ordinate Bench though is bound to consider that judgment.
But applying the doctrine of "judgment per-incurium", since rule 18 was not at all argued by parties and considered in the judgment passed by M.H.S.
Ansari, J, this Court with due respect to His Lordship unable to accept the view of His Lordship as a binding unable to accept the view of His Lordship as a binding precedent.
It is a settled law now that judgment is a ratio on the point of law as it decides on the basis of proved facts or the facts assume to be proved.
Further it is a settled law that until and unless a relevant provision has not been applied and argued before the Court and in the judgment such applicability of provision has not been considered as the Court got no scope to address the same, the said judgment cannot be a binding judgment applying the doctrine of "judgment per-incurium".
Reliance may be placed to the judgments on the principle of "per-incurium" passed in the cases Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, reported in 1989(1) SCC 101 at page 110- 111, the Apex Court held to this effect : "a decision should be treated as given `perincurium' when it is given in ignorance of the terms of statute or of a rule having the force of statute".
In Salmond Jurisprudence, 12th Edition, edited by Prof. P.J Fitzgerad at page 153, doctrine of sub silentio' also has been explained to this effect : "a decision passes sub silentio in the technical sense that has come to attached to that phrase, when the particular point of law involved in the decision is not perceived the Court or present to its mind".
It has been also a settled law by the judgment passed in the case M/s. Goodyear India Ltd v. State of Haryana & Arm, reported in AIR 1990 SC 781 and Mittal Engineering Works (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, Meerut, reported in 1997(1) SCC 203 to this effect : "a decision is not an authority for what it had not decided or not a point, which has not been argued."
Furthermore, already there is a judgment passed by the Apex Court as already referred to whereby and whereunder it has been laid down that primary teacher's training course is completely different than B.Ed.
course.
Hence, this Court is of the view that the petitioners did not fulfill eligibility conditions of training course for empanelment of their names as head teacher.
Though I have held that the judgment passed by M.H.S.
Ansari, J is a judgment per incurium and not binding on me in view of the settled law in that field as already referred to, but following the judicial discipline this Court feels that this matter is required to be referred to a larger bench for a complete finality of the points as raised by the learned Advocate for the petitioners and as has been considered by M.H.S.
Ansari, J in the judgment as aforesaid.
My view is fortified in view of the Apex Court dictum passed in the case Dr. Vijay Laxmi Sadhu v. Jagdish, reported in JT (2001)1 SC 382 and Pradip Ch.
Pariya v. Pramod Chandra Patnaik, reported in 2002(1) SCC 1 that for judicial discipline and finality of an issue and consistency of the law, in the event of any disagreement with the judgment passed by and other Co-ordinate Bench, the other Co- ordinate Bench would refer the matter to a Larger Bench, I am bound to refer it to a Larger Bench.
5.
Considering all the aspects accordingly, I do hold that the petitioners have no legal right to pray for any writ of mandamus for their enlistment and/or empanelment as a head teacher of the primary school, but at the same time I am referring the matter to a Larger Bench for a decision in view of the conflict of views with M.H.S.
Ansari, J as already referred to.
6.
The Registry is directed to place the matter before the Hon'ble The Acting Chief Justice for His Lordship's decision for setting up a Larger Bench.
Order accordingly.