KP Sivasubramaniam, J - The petitioner is an erstwhile employee of the first respondent/Spinning Mills.
Aggrieved by the order of the second respondent/ Labour Court in ID No. 58 of 1992, he seeks for quashing the said award dated 921995 insofar as it declines to grant all the normal relief of reinstatement with back wages and continuity of service.
2.
According to the petitioner, he joined the service of the Mill on 181980 in the Winding Department and he was last employed as a spinner.
At the time of his dismissal from service, he was drawing a salary of Rs. 1,785/ per month.
He was dismissed from service on the basis of an alleged incident on 341991.
He was attending to the third shift and when he came to the Mill, he felt uneasy and experienced stomach pain and hence, he asked his maistry Ranganathan for leave and the maistry asked him to inform to the time office.
However, he was marked as absent in the time office register.
On the next day when he was reported for working and he was allowed to work as usual.
Three days later, he was issued with a suspension order stating that when he came to work on 341991, he had been in a drunken state and that he had behaved disrespectfully towards his superiors and with the security guard.
The petitioner contends that though he was alleged to have been found in a drunken state, he was not sent for any medical examination.
On 1041991, a show cause notice was issued for the alleged drunkenness while on duty and disrespectfully behaviour and for abusing the security guard.
The petitioner gave an explanation on 1841991 denying the charges.
A domestic enquiry was conducted and while the management had examined six witnesses, the petitioner had examined himself.
The enquiry officer found the petitioner guilty of the charges.
On 1351991, the second show cause notice was issued.
The petitioner contends that a copy of the report of the enquiry officer was not enclosed.
He gave his reply to the enquiry officer's report.
However, without furnishing a copy of the report, he was dismissed from service on 2751991.
The petitioner thereupon raised an industrial dispute and the Labour Court passed an award on 921995 holding that the charges have been established and ordered compensation of Rs. 30,000/-, after declining to grant normal relief of reinstatement with back wages and other consequential benefits.
Hence the above Writ Petition.
3.
In the counter filed by the respondent/management, it is stated that on 341991, the petitioner was expected to attend the third shift commencing at 1200 mid night.
He entered the Mill in an introxicated condition and the security personnel immediately informed the time office about the condition of the petitioner.
By then, the petitioner has entered the Department where the departmental maistry also found him in an intoxicated state.
He then came to the time office and when the shift supervisor and ASM asked the petitioner to leave the premises, the employee had abused of them and stated that he would come to work in any manner he liked and that he cannot be questioned about it.
While coming out of the Mill, he also threatened the security guard.
Therefore, the management felt that the conduct on the part of the worker constituted a grave misconduct and that such a conduct cannot be permitted in the establishment as it would lead to very serious consequences of disrupting discipline and safety to the life and property.
Thereafter, he did not turn up for work on 4th and 5th April, 1991.
When he came to work on 641991, he was served with an order of suspension pending further proceedings.
In the enquiry, seven witnesses were examined and the petitioner was also allowed to cross-examine the witnesses of the management.
On a properly conducted enquiry, the petitioner was found guilty of the charges and the explanation submitted by him for the second show cause notice was also found unsatisfactory.
With the result, the petitioner was rightly dismissed from service.
There was no scope for interference with the award of the Labour Court under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
4.
Mr. NGR Prasad appearing for the petitioner contends that there was a total non-compliance of the procedure envisaged under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and there was no discussion of the merits of the charges and evidence against the petitioner.
Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Fire Stone Case 1973 (1) SCC 813 in the said context.
Reference is also made to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in between Workmen, employed in Engine Valves Limited v. Engine Valves Limited, 1983 (2) Lab U 232 and reliance is placed on the observation that the Labour Court has to suo motu apply Section 11-A of the ID Act irrespective of whether a workman had pleaded for the relief or not.
The Division Bench has held that notwithstanding the finding of the validity of the enquiry, the Labour Court has to consider the evidence and find out as to whether the management has been actuated by any sinister motive or any unfair labour practice and whether the workman has been victimised for his activities in connection with any trade union.
5.
Learned counsel Mr. NGR Prasad contends that the workman in this case was an active officer bearer of the trade union and therefore, he has been a victim of vindicative action by the management.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also contends that the material evidence adduced by both sides have been ignored by the Labour Court and its finding that the petitioner had misbehaved is not sustainable.
In the context of the alleged misbehaviour of the petitioner and having been intoxicated, it is pertinent to note that no medical certificate had been produced by the management to prove that the employee was in an intoxicated condition.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent/management further contends that before the Labour Court the employee had not questioned the fairness of the enquiry by the enquiry officer.
As far as the requirements under Section 11-A of the ID Act is concerned, the Labour Court had independently considered the evidence and had recorded a positive finding that the petitioner had entered the factory in an intoxicated condition and had misbehaved with his superiors.
Therefore, there is no justification for the petitioner to raise any contention before this Court regarding the fairness of the enquiry.
In fact, the Labour Court had unduly favoured the employee by awarding a compensation of Rs. 30,000/- even after finding that the employee was guilty of severe misconduct of mis-behaviour and indiscipline and violent behaviour towards his superiors.
Therefore, there was no justification for interference with the award of the Labour Court.
8-9.
Learned counsel for the respondent/management contends that there was absolutely no cross-examination of the witnesses of the management by the petitioner.
The employee also did not go into the witness box to substantiate his claims.
Learned counsel also relied on the following judgments in support of his various contentions :  (i) In UP State Road Transport Corporation v. Subhash Chandra Sharma, (2000) 3 SCC 324, the Supr9eme Court held that the power of Labour Court to give relief under Section 11-A of the ID Act did not extend to grant any relief where the punishment of removal was not shockingly "disproportionate."
(ii) In Thinunangalam Co-operative Urban Bank Ltd v. Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Madurai, (1992) 2 LLJ 886 (Mad.
), the learned single Judge of this Court had to deal with a delinquent who was charged with consuming liquor and misbehaviour.
Appellate Authority relied on the minor discrepancies relating to the evidence for setting aside the order of dismissal.
The learned Judge held that while re-assessment was permissible, the re-assessment should be on proper basis and that the delinquency was a serious misconduct resulting in lowering the reputation of the employer/bank and that even a past good record of the employee would not minimise the gravity of the offence.
(iii) In BGovindarajulu v. Management of K.P.V.
Shaik Mohamed Rowther and Co. (P) Ltd., 1996 (2) Lab LJ 593, the Division Bench dealt with an award of the Tribunal holding that the misconduct of the workman was due to his drinking habit and that he needs the sympathy of the Court to rehablitate him.
The Division Bench held that such an approach of the Tribunal was wholly perverse and uncalled for and unwarranted and that the workman was not entitled to any sympathy.
In the said judgment, the Division Bench confirmed the judgment of the learned single Judge in the Writ Petition reported in 1996 (2) LJ 111 (Between the Management of KPV Shaik Mohammed Rowther and Co (P) Ltd. and P Govindarajulu).
In his judgment, the learned single Judge had also held that such a finding and direction by the Tribunal was wholly perverse and cannot be sustained by any legal principle.
(iv) In New Sherrock Mills and Maheshbhai T Rao., 1997 (1) Lab LJ 1212, where the employee was found guilty of unruly behaviour of entering into the office of the Deputy Manager and threatening that the Mill officers would not be safe outside the mill and that he did not care if he had to go to jail for murder of officers.
He was consequently discharged from service.
The Labour Court after finding that the domestic enquiry was fair and proper and also that there was no discrimination, however, interfered with the punishment and directed reinstatement in serviced The Supreme Court held that the punishment was not shocking or disproportionate and therefore, the interference by the Labour Court was not proper.
10.
On the issue as to whether the enquiry was fair and proper and whether there was any violation of principles of natural justice, though the learned counsel for the petitioner raised several contentions, I am unable to entertain the said contentions in view of the positive statement made in the aware of the Labour Court that the petitioner did not raise the issue of fairness or otherwise of the enquiry.
The said positive statement has been made at least three times in the order (paragraphs 5, 11 and 14).
It is also pertinent to note that in the affidavit in support of the writ petition also, the petitioner has not raised any contention disputing the said observation by the Labour Court.
Therefore, now, it is not open to the petitioner to raise any contention contrary to the said observation.
Even otherwise, the Labour Court in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the order had dealt with the process of enquiry and had given adequate reasons to hold that the domestic enquiry was fair and proper.
11.
I am unable to sustain the contention that the Labour Court has not independently assessed the evidence Court.
The Labour Court had discussed the evidence in detail and held that the there was no motive for any of the witnesses to have deposed a against the delinquent and that the witnesses have clearly stated in their evidence regarding the behaviour of the delinquent and that even though the maistry had asked him to go back to his house, the delinquent had refused to do so and on the contrary he went ahead and abused the higher officials.
Such a discussion and finding thereon is sufficient to hold that the Labour Court was satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence.
The petitioner has also not bothered to give evidence before the Labour Court either regarding the domestic enquiry or regarding the facts and circumstances.
12.
In the above back ground, though I do not feel that this is a case in which this Court should consider the evidence, yet there is one aspect of the evidence on which much stress had been made by the learned counsel for the employee, sufficient enough to pursuade me to reassess the evidence namely the contention that the employee had actually asked only for leave as he was sick but was declined by the management and that if only the management had granted leave, there would not have been any cause for the alleged occurrence.
In this context, Mr. NGR Prasad, relies mainly on the evidence of Ranganathan, the maistry and SP Shanmugam, ASM.
They have stated that the delinquent had asked for leave but the request was declined.
In the cross-examination, Ranganathan had stated that the delinquent gave a leave letter to him by stating that he was not doing well and after seeing that he was in drunken state and was not in a condition to carry out any work, he asked him to leave the place.
To a further question, as to whether the witness had directed him to meet the Supervisors, the witness had stated that he had only asked the delinquent to leave the factory as he was intoxicated and then had informed the Supervisor about the incident.
Likewise, SP Shanmugam was questioned in the cross-examination as to whether the delinquent had requested for leave as he was suffering from diarrhea.
The witness had stated that the delinquent had requested for leave at the time office and as the delinquent was found drunk, he had refused to grant leave.
13.
On a deeper analysis of the facts and circumstances relating to the said issue, I am inclined to hold that the said fact does not in any manner help the petitioner or to ignore the conduct of the delinquent.
14.
The evidence clearly indicates that the request for leave was not spontaneous and that it was not the purpose for which he had actually come to the premises.
All the witnesses have uniformly and categorically spoken to the fact that the delinquent had entered the premises at 1150 pm.
in a drunken state and the security guard had given the information to the time office.
But the delinquent when he returned back at 1215 pm had found fault with the security guard for having complained about him and threatened the security guard before he left the premises.
The said evidence of Paramasivani, security guard is confirmed by Muthuvel, another security guard.
There is no suggestion to both the witnesses as to whether the delinquent had come there only to apply for leave.
The maistry in his evidence had stated that the delinquent had come to the Winding Department to discharge his duties and as he was found badly drunken and it was felt that allowing him to work would result in danger to himself physically and to the property.
Therefore, he was not allowed to work and he had complained about the behaviour of the petitioner to Babulal (Supervisor), Shanmugam (ASM).
This evidence of the maistry is confirmed by Kumaravel.
Babulal, the Supervisor had stated that at 1200 `O'clock when he and ASM were in the Spinning Department, the shift clerk had told the ASM about the condition in which the petitioner had reported to duty and that the maistry had also come and complained about the delinquent.
Therefore, he proceeded towards the time office.
They found the petitioner in an intoxicated condition and the ASM questioned him as to how he could come to duty in a drunken state.
The petitioner had abused the ASM and stated that he would come to work in any manner as he would like and had told him that he had come to work.
In spite of repeated advise by the ASM, the delinquent continued to remain there and after some time, left the place towards the main gate.
While he was going out, he threatened the security guard for having complained against him.
In the cross-examination of Babulal, there was no suggestion to the witness that the delinquent had come there only to request for leave.
The evidence or Rajendran, the Time Keeper also confirms the evidence of both witnesses and there is no suggestion to him that the delinquent had requested for the leave.
15.
In the above back ground of the facts, it is irresistible to conclude that the request for leave was not spontaneous and was belated.
On the other hand, he had positively expressed his desire only to join duty and it was only after he was prevented from discharging his work and directed to leave the premises, he picked up quarrel with every one and abused his superiors and only thereafter had asked for the grant of leave.
If the purpose of coming to the mills was only to apply for leave, it would have been the most crucial defence for him and he would have raised the defence at the first instance itself.
In his communication dated 18.4.1981 to the charge memo, he has not stated anything about his suffering from diarrhea or his request for leave.
Further, if he was really suffering from diarrhea, it cannot be normally expected that he would have himself gone to the mills all the way from his house instead of sending one of his family members or neighbours with a leave letter.
It is obvious that he has gone to the mills only for the shift duty and as he was not allowed to do any work as a result of his intoxicated condition and rude behaviour, and thereafter only he had made the request for leave, which was declined because of his behaviour.
The evidence of the witnesses, co-employees and the two security guards are cogent and point towards the rude behaviour of the delinquent.
It is also relevant to note that while he had given evidence, in the cross-examination, a suggestion was put to him that on 1741991, on the request of the delinquent, the office bearers of the union had met the Executive Director and they had expressed regret for the petitioner's misconduct.
The delinquent had answered that the General Secretary had contacted him after meeting the Director and that he did not know what the General Secretary had informed the Executive Director.
It is significant that he did not deny the fact that the union had expressed regrets.
His further feigning ignorance of the conversation between the union leaders and the Executive Director is also too artificial for acceptance.
16.
Therefore, I am inclined to conclude that the evidence regarding the petitioner having requested for leave does not help the employee in any manner considering the seriousness of the delinquency.
17.
Absence of medical certificate (intoxication) was also commented upon.
That cannot always be fatal to the enquiry considering the overwhelming evidence by as many as seven witnesses and the background of the peculiar facts in which the delinquent was dealt with.
The essence of the charge is unruly and disrespectful behaviour and the fact of his being intoxicated is only a lesser misconduct.
The management could not be expected to catch hold of him immediately and treat him like a criminal by taking him to the police or to the hospital only for the sake of obtaining a certificate.
18.
For the aforesaid reasons, while considering the nature of the proved charges, the petitioner should be satisfied with the grant of Rs. 30,000/- as compensation and there are no grounds for interference.
The Writ Petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.