Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By this application the petitioners have prayed for a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to do their duty in accordance with law by admitting them in Uttarbanga Teachers' Training Institute for primary teachers' training for the sessions 2003-04.
The petitioners prayer for mandatory order of injunction asking the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 admit the petitioners provisionally appear to have been prayed for at the ad-interim stage, several directions were given by Justice Brain Ghosh but no such mandatory order appears to have been passed at that stage.
Even on the date of final hearing of this matter, this relief could not be granted.
However, the grievance of the writ petitioners is directed against the selection of the candidates including the respondent Nos. 9, 10, 11 and 12.
2.
According to the writ petitioners the entire selection process is illegal and wrongful as such admission of the candidates already done is void and illegal.
The petitioners' further claim is that had there been proper assessment of their performance they would have been selected and got admission.
Now, question is whether the selection of the candidates is bad in law or not, if so what relief can be granted to the petitioner at this stage, in tae event the writ petition succeeds.
3.
Mr. Kashi Kanta Moitra learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner contends that the selection committee was to be formed in terms of the administrative circular formulating guidelines, being Annexure R-1 to the affidavit in opposition.
According to this guidelines there should be four members in the Selection Committee namely Chairman of the District Primary School council, President of the Committee, (ii) District Inspector of Schools of the concerned district, Member Secretary, (iii) Principal of the Primary Teachers' Training Institute, Member and (iv) Karmadhakshya Siksha Sthayee Samity, Zilla Parishad (Malda).
He contends that the above administrative circular does not bear any date.
Subsequently it transpired that this circular containing guideline was superseded by another circular dated 17th June 2003, which is annexed in the Supplementary Affidavit in opposition of the respondent Nos. 7 and 8.
Under the provision of the second mentioned circular the members of the Committee would be five consisting of Chairman of the District Primary School Council or his or her representative, District Inspector of Schools (PE) of the concerned district or his or her representative (Member Secretary) Karmadhakshya Siksha Sthayee Samity Zilla Parishad (Member), the Secretary of the institution or his or her representative (Member) and Principal/Lecturer in charge of the Primary Teachers' Training Institute concerned.
4.
Mr. Moitra says that all the members of the said Selection Committee were not present on the date of interview.
Admittedly, Karmadhakshya was not present as he has stated in his affidavit that he had some other preoccupation.
According to him the said Karmadhakshya could not represent on behalf of Zilla Parishad as he was at the material time was not Karmadhakshya because the Zilla Parishad was dissolved consequent upon the fresh election.
In essence, under the law no Karmadhakshya was there.
The selection procedure is incurably invalid and illegal as no individual score sheet has been prepared.
Allocation of the marks to the candidates was done discriminatingly.
It will appear from the panel that the same was signed by four members and thereafter it was placed before Chairman of the Admission Committee.
Some person other than members purported to have approved the same.
It is not explained who was the person approved.
In the guidelines nowhere it is mentioned that panel is required to be approved by Chairman of the Admission Committee.
Formation of Admission Committee is also unknown in the guidelines.
According to him the entire selection process has not been done in accordance with the published norms and guidelines.
He has seriously attacked against the provision for allocation of marks for extra curricular activities.
5.
He submits that assessment of the performance of the petitioners and allocation of marks to them is unbelievable.
The selected candidates despite having lesser marks in Madhyamik examination than most of the petitioners were awarded full marks in Viva voce test, whereas the petitioners have been awarded 1 or 2 marks out of the five marks.
The marks awarded for extra curricular activities is without any basis, as no record has been produced despite order of the Court to show that there has been valid certificate for co-curricular activities.
6.
Even going by the assessment-recorded in select list it will appear that one candidate namely Arpita Haldar being the petitioner No. 5 should have been selected as by mistake the aggregate marks in the selection test has been shown less than what she should have been awarded actually.
Therefore, as a matter of course she should have been admitted.
In fact it has been admitted in the affidavit in opposition that there was mistake.
If the Court finds selection process is bad and illegal, the same shall be cancelled notwithstanding the fact of the Candidates having been admitted, as no illegality cannot be supported on any score.
This has been decided by the Supreme Court in various cases.
7.
Mr. Moitra has relied on the following decisions of the Supreme Court in support of entire submission.
:  8.
AIR 1974 SC 1755, 1986 Supreme Court Cases (L & S) 49 = 1985 Supp SCC 432, (1967) 3 AER 434 and 1984 LIC 415.
9.
Mr. Ashoke Dey learned Senior Advocate opposing the writ petition on behalf of the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 submits that West Bengal Board of Primary Education granted provisional recognition under the terms and conditions as mentioned in Annexure R-1 and R-2 of the affidavit in opposition.
The selection procedure has been laid down in the circular containing stipulation, dated 17th June 2003 issued by the aforesaid Board.
In terms of this guidelines there must be a committee consisting of five members namely the Chairman of the Committee, District Inspector of Schools (PE) or her representative would be Member Secretary, Karmadhakshya of the concerned Zilla Parishad or his or his or her representative as Member, the secretary of the institution or his or her representative as Member and Principal/Lecturer in charge of the PTTI as Member.
The Selection Committee was duly constituted and interview was held on 21st, 22nd and 23rd June 2003.
After interview taken they duly selected eligible candidate placing them in the list according to their performance.
The candidates were admitted strictly following ranks position.
10.
He submits that Sm.
Arpita Haldar by mistake was not selected for admission and she should be given a chance in the Session 2004-05.
Except this one there is no other infirmity and/or illegality.
The petitioners and each of them participated in the selection process and having found unsuccessful (except Arpita) they have challenged this selection process, they are estopped from challenging this.
He contends that it is true the panel was not signed by all the five members of the Committee but in absence of one member entire panel is not invalid and vitiated.
In support of this contention he has relied on a decision of this Court reported in (1995) 2 CHN 1 (Ashoke Kumar Jana v. District Inspector of Schools & Ors.).
11.
Sri Sushil Kumar Singha erstwhile Karmadhakshyas who was one of the members did not sign the merit list because he could not be present owing to his other pre-occupation.
However, he subsequently accepted the correctness and validity of this panel.
His further contention is that if Sushil Kumar Singha is excluded still then the panel is signed by the majority of the members and in absence of any rules or regulations or any provision fixing a quorum the presence of the majority is suffice.
He has relied on decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1972 SC 1812 in this context.
He submits that the formation of Selection Committee is not made pursuant to any statutory provision but under guidelines issued by the West Bengal Board of Primary Education and the same has got no statutory force.
He has referred to a decision of this Court reported in (1995) CHN 1.
Moreover they cannot complaint about the formation of Selection Committee after having appeared before them.
He has relied on the following decisions on this point: -  (1996) 3 SCC 587, AIR 1998 SC 331, 1995 (Supp.)
1 SCC 179.
12.
He contends further that this Court has no power of judicial review over the decision of the suitability of the candidates.
He has sought reliance on the following decisions :-  AIR 1995 SC 1088, 1994 (supp) 2 SCC 532.
13.
I have considered the respective contentions of the learned counsels and examined the materials.
I am of the view that the relief as sought for in the writ petition as on today cannot be granted, since the subject matter relates to the admission to the teachers training course for the primary teachers for the session 2003-04.
The session was to commence from the month of August 2003, this petition was moved on 26th September 2003 and on that date no interim order was passed and as such candidates who had been admitted by that time have been completed their course.
Moreover, the session is over.
However, since the matter has been heard on affidavits the Court will examine the selection process from the records which are made available to this Court, and if it is found that the selection process was illegal and invalid, Court if necessary will mould relief suitably without affecting and/or disturbing the fate of the candidates who have completed their course of study.
The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners, of course, has asked that if Court finds while selecting candidates, illegal procedure has been adopted, the Court will certainly set aside the entire thing.
The decisions in support of this contention are of no assistance on the factual aspect of this matter as far as grant of this relief is concerned, because the candidates, who after completion of the course have been declared qualified, shall be irretrievably prejudiced.
Eventually grossest injustice would be meted out of or they would be condemned unheard.
They are not incompetent as far as their educational qualification is concerned, their vulnerability if at all is caused owing to improper selection.
They are bona fide candidates and have done nothing wrong, even if the Court find the selection process is illegal.
It is not a case of administrative chaos, because the trainess are no longer in the institution and they have gone out after completion of their studies spending out one complete year.
Accordingly the decisions cited by Mr. Moitra in this regard are not at all helpful, it would have been, had this writ petition been heard immediate after the selection process was undertaken.
However, for this reason the petitioner would not be remediless and the Court will try to find out some solution provided of course writ petition succeeds.
14.
Now it is admitted position that one of the writ petitioners namely Arpita was wrongly excluded from the select- list.
It seems to me on careful perusal of the panel, she had been victim to erroneous computation of the marks she secured in respect of our disciplines.
Mr. Dey learned Senior Counsel appearing for the college authority in no uncertain terms had admitted this fact and has agreed to accommodate by admitting her in the following session's training.
Therefore, this aspect has to be dealt with separately.
Arpita in spite of having been successful in achieving desired minimum qualified marks she was deprived of admission and as a result whereof she has lost one valuable year.
So, in my view she is entitled to compensation or damages.
For sheer negligence of the selection committee and/or college authority, she is now lagging behind by one year.
If she could complete her course of studies along with those candidates who were selected, she might have got appointment as a primary teacher.
So this loss of one year can very well be compensated with the payment of 12 months' salary of a primary teacher.
The fresher primary teacher is now getting salary not less than a sum of Rs. 5,000/- per month so she is entitled to get an aggregate sum of Rs. 60,000/- as damages.
Over and above she shall be admitted in next available sessions as a matter of course without any selection test.
The aforesaid amount shall be paid to her by the college authority within the period of one month from the date of communication of this order.
The aforesaid relief has been granted going by the admission and/or concession made by the learned counsel on behalf of the college respondent about her wrongful exclusion.
15.
Now the allegations of illegality and invalidity in the selection process are to be examined.
Mr. Moitra says that the lawfully constituted committee did not hold interview of the candidates.
From the records I find that selection committee was required to be constituted initially with the members numbering four, thereafter under subsequent circular with 5 members.
One of the members was supposed to be Karmadhakshya, Siksha Sthayee Samity, Zilla Parishad.
Impression was given that the said member duly participated in the selection process, but from records it reveals that another thing that there has been illegal inclusion of one member who could not have been member otherwise.
In the former case absence of one member does not obviously vitiate the selection process, but in later case legally there cannot be any formation and/or constitution of selection committee.
This has exactly happened in this case.
The writ petitioner in another affidavit dated 16th March 2004 has annexed a certificate of Sabhadhipati of newly formed Zilla Parishad, which shows that Karmadhyakhas of all Sthayee Samity had been elected on 29th November, 2003.
The published norms provided for inclusion of Karmadhakshya as member in the selection committee as holder of the office not as a person.
On the date of interview the office of the Karmadhakshya was vacant as the samity stood dissolved.
It is settled position of the law that when a thing is to be done under the law in one particular way this has to be done in that way or not at all.
I accordingly hold accepting the argument of Mr. Moitra that no validity constituted selection committee held the interview.
16.
As far as the allegations of the assessment of the petitioner's performance in the selection process is concerned I think this cannot be judged by the writ court or for that matter by the Court of law, for one cannot presume that the petitioners would automatically do better result in the selection test because of their having better result in their respective Madhayamik examination than those who have been selected.
Non- production of the separate score sheet is of no consequence and effect as nothing will be established from score sheets that petitioners have done better than any other candidates.
The allegations are vague and further that there is no particular nor there is any record as to number and nature of the questions put to them in the Viva voce test and answers they had given.
In the Viva voce test no such record is maintained and the system of examination is that the selectors always put questions orally and reply to also given orally.
It is impossible to find whether assessment of selector is unfair or not.
17.
Mr. Moitra's next contention against inclusion of and/or allocation of marks in the extra curricular activities, I think the candidates cannot complain about the subject or topics to be included in the selection test.
It is the exclusive right and domain of the institution concerned.
The petitioners and each of them have participated in this process and some of the petitioners did produce their extra curricular certificate and as it appears from the panel annexed to the affidavit that those who produced the acceptable certificate, were allotted their due marks.
In fact Arpita has been awarded marks as against extra curricular certificate in the panel.
18.
As I have already held that the selection committee was not duly formed, selection process and consequently selection was invalid.
But I shall not set aside the admission, observing those candidates were admitted without valid and lawful selection process, merely based on their educational qualification.
The remaining petitioners have academic result than those who have been admitted.
I therefore, do not find any reason to deny their right of admission, when admission in essence, appears to have been given based on qualification.
I direct the college authority to admit the rest of the petitioners in the next available academic session without any test, if they or any of them choose(s) to apply.
19.
Thus the writ petition is disposed of without any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.