Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - The selection process as embodied in the Information Booklet, 2004 published by the West Bengal University of Health Sciences, the respondent No1 herein, for selection of the students for admission in DM/M.Ch.
Courses (3-Year), is under challenge in this writ petition.
2.
The petitioner No.1 who is working as Senior DMO (Cardiology) in BR Singh Hospital was sponsored for appearing in the entrance examination for DM (Cardiology) by the concerned railway authorities.
3.
The petitioner no.2 who is posted as an Assistant Professor in the department of Medicine in Medical College, Calcutta was sponsored by the Principal of the said Medical College for appearing in the entrance examination for DM (Endocrinology).
4.
The petitioner No. 3 who is the Medical Officer of SSKM Hospital, Calcutta was sponsored by the Director of Institute of Post Graduate, Medical Education and Research, Calcutta for appearing in the said entrance examination of DM (Cardiology).
5.
All the three writ petitioners who are in service in their respective posts as aforesaid, expected that their knowledge and experience would be tested by the University concerned in the selection test in the particular subject in respect of which they applied for admission in the respective courses.
The petitioners claimed that their expections in this regard are not absolutely baseless and unreasonable as the said system and/or practice had all-throughout been followed by the University of Calcutta for selection of candidates for admission in the said courses, viz., DM and M.Ch.
even upto the last year.
But, unfortunately he prevalent system of selection has been changed by the newly set up University without notifying such proposed charges in the Information Booklet containing the Rules for admission to different post-graduate medical/dental/ayurveda degree and diploma courses issued by the West Bengal University of Health Sciences.
6.
Thus, the main grievance of the writ petitioners is against the abrupt change of the style of setting up question papers for selection of the candidates for admission to the said post- doctoral courses by a newly set up University, viz., the West Bengal University of Health Sciences.
Apart from such abrupt change of pattern and/or style in setting up the question papers for the purpose of selection of candidates for admission in the aforesaid post doctoral courses, the selection process itself as contained in the said Information Booklet has also been challenged in this writ petition.
7.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, submitted that this University was set up very recently under the West Bengal University of Health Sciences Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act).
After establishment of the said University, the selection for admission of the students in the said post doctoral courses was taken up by the said University for the first time this year.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further submitted that under the DM course there are various disciplines and/or subjects such as neurology, cardiology, gastro-enterology, endocrinology and nephrology.
Similarly, under M.Ch.
courses there are various disciplines and/or subjects such as cardiothoracic surgery, plastic surgery, genito- urinary surgery, neuro surgery and paediatric surgery.
8.
It is contended by Mr. Bhattacharjee that under the extant Admission Rules, a candidate seeking admission to DM/M.Ch.
courses is entitled to apply for admission only in one of the said courses.
Once an application is made by a candidate seeking admission to any one of the said course, his eligibility will be tested in terms of Rule 23 of the extant Rules which is as follows :  "23.
Different courses and eligibility qualifications are as follows:  a. DM in Neurology, Cardiology, Medical Gastroenterology, Nephrology Eligibility qualification- MD General Medicine/Paediatric Medicine.
b. M.Ch.
in Cardiothoracic Surgery, urology, Neurosurgery, Paediatric surgery, Plastic surgery Eligibility qualification - MS General Surgery  c. DM In Endocrinology  Eligibility qualification - MD General Medicine/Paediatric Medicine/ Biochemistry."
It was further contended by Mr. Bhattacharjee that once a candidate is found to be eligible he/she can participate in the selection process as laid down in Rule 3 of the extant Rules which is as follows :-  "3.
Selection Process  31 The selection of candidates for admission to DM/ MCh Courses will be done on the basis the marks obtained in the written test and academic career, as on the last date of submission application.
32 Distribution of marks will be as follows: Written Examination - 80% total 240 marks) Academic Career-20% (total 60 marks)  33 The question paper for the written test shall be set in English and shall contain 80 single response type Multiple Choice Questions for respective courses.
34 ............  Mr. Bhattacharjee has pointed out that abrupt change of style and/or manner of setting up the question papers in the written examination has been made by the newly set up University to assess the merit of the candidates seeking admission in the said course in terms of the said selection process.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further pointed out that distribution of marks for academic career has also been newly introduced in the present Rules.
According to Mr. Bhattacharjee assessment of past academic career of the candidates for selection for admission to the said courses is also absolutely unnecessary when his/her merit is tested by the written test.
9.
It is contended by Mr. Bhattacharjee that previously the selection of candidates for the admission to the aforesaid courses was conducted by the University of Calcutta.
The said University all through out followed the practice of setting up separate question papers relevant to different subjected and/or disciplines under the said course in the written examination.
Thus, the students who were seeking admission, say in Cardiology in DM course, were required to answer the questions on Cardiology itself.
Similarly, a student who was seeking admission in Nephrology was required to answer the question on Nephrology itself.
So on and so forth.
Thus, under the prevalent practice for admission in the respective courses under the University of Calcutta, a student seeking admission in a particular discipline under DM/M.Ch., was not required to answer any question on any other subject and/or discipline in the respective courses.
According to Mr. Bhattacharjee, the said selection process was a very scientific one as by the said process the knowledge of the respective students seeking admission in a highly super- speciality course can be tested properly in a particular subject in which he is seeking admission.
10.
Mr. Bhattacharjee pointed out that this system of written examination for assessing credential of the students has been abruptly changed by the newly set up University this year only by introducing a single question paper containing questions covering all the subjects, which are required to be answered by all the students seeking admission under the DM course irrespective of the subject and/or discipline in which admission was sought for by the appearing candidate.
Similarly, another set of question paper containing questions covering different subjects on surgery was also given to the students seeking admission in M Ch.
course irrespective of the subject and/or discipline in which they were seeking admission.
11.
Mr. Bhattacharjee submitted that the introduction of this change in the pattern and/or system of examination in the written test is absolutely unscientific, as the knowledge of the students in a particular subject in which he/she is seeking admission cannot be tested and/or assessed properly in such an examination.
12.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further submitted that this long standing age-old prevalent system which has so long been followed by the University of Calcutta is rather more scientific way of assessing the merit of the students seeking admission to a highly super-speciality course.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further pointed out that the said system was not only followed by the University of Calcutta but also is still being followed in majority of the Universities for the selection of candidates for admission to the said course in India.
13.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further submitted that even the introduction of one system of written test had not been notified by the said newly set up University prior to the examination.
As such, the students sincerely and genuinely believed that similar type of test will be taken this year also by the newly set up University.
According to Mr. Bhattacharjee, since charge was sought to be introduced for the first time this year, it was the duty of the said University to indicate such possible change in the Information Booklet itself so that the students could have prepared themselves accordingly for the said examination.
14.
Mr. Bhattacharjee by referring to the various provisions of the Rules, as contained in the said Information Booklet published by the West Bengal University of Health Sciences, tried to impress upon this Court by submitting that the courses under DM/M.Ch.
mean different disciplines and/or subjects under the DM/M.Ch.
degree.
According to Mr. Bhattacharjee, the DM and M.Ch.
is the degree while the different subjects mentioned therein are the courses under the said degree.
Mr.. Bhattacharjee contended that under the Rule 26 of the extant Rules a candidate seeking admission to DM/M.Ch., is entitled to apply for only in one of the 'said courses meaning thereby that candidate can only apply for anyone of the various disciplines under DM/M.Ch.
According to Mr. Bhattacharjee, under the extant Rule no one can apply for more than one discipline under any of the said courses, viz., DM/M.Ch.
Thus, Mr. Bhattacharjee submitted that if that be so, then it is really a futile exercise on the part of the said University to assess the knowledge of a candidate in a subject other than the subject in which he is seeking admission in a super-speciality course.
15.
Thus, in substance, Mr. Bhattacharjee submitted that not only the introduction of the new system for testing the merit of the students in written test is unscientific but also contrary to the provisions contained in the extant Rules itself and as such the petitioners prayed for cancellation for the examination which was held for the purpose of selection of candidates for admission to the respective courses on 23rd May, 2004 for DM and M.Ch.
courses by the respondent No. l. The petitioners also prayed for issuance of direction upon the authorities concerned for holding further examination of the students afresh by following the prevalent system which had so long been followed by the University of Calcutta and which is still being followed by various other Universities in India.
16.
Mr. Ashok Dey, the learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the respondent University, refuted the submission of Mr. Bhattacharjee, on various grounds including the ground of maintainability of the said application.
17.
Mr. Dey by referring to section 20 of the said Act submitted that holding of selection test is entirely within the domain of the Academic Council.
Mr. Dey further submitted that the examination Rules were formulated by the remembers of the said Academic Council consisting of the Vice- Chancellor, three Pro-Vice-Chancellors, the Controller of Examinations, all Principals or Directors or Dean of all the Medical, Dental, Nursing, Pharmacy, Homoeopathic, Ayurvedic Unani teaching institutions in the State of West Bengal, two distinguished teachers nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Government of West Bengal, a representative from each (undergraduate and post-graduate) discipline not below the rank of Associate Professor, to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, the Director of Medical Education, West Bengal and a nominee of the University Grants Commission.
18.
Thus, when the Academic Council consisting of so many responsible persons having specialised knowledge in the particular field selected and/or adopted a particular mode of selection of candidates for admission in the aforesaid courses, the Court should not interfere in the process of such selection in such a superspeciality course at the instance of the petitioners, two of whom are unsuccessful candidates and the rest though found place in the merit list at the bottom, but ultimately failed to get admission in the said course.
19.
Mr. Dey very seriously contended by reling upon decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Om Parkash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla reported in 1986 (supp) SCC 285, that after participating in the selection process, the petitioners cannot maintain this writ petition.
By referring to paragraph 24 of the said decision, Mr. Dey submitted that if the examination is cancelled at the instance of such unsuccessful petitioners, the academic career of the selected candidates will be affected causing great hardship to them.
As such, according to Mr. Dey, no interference should have been made in this regard, as the application itself is not maintainable.
20.
Mr. Dey also referred to another decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Madan Lal v. State of J & K reported in (1995) 3 SCC 486 wherein it was laid down that after being unsuccessful in Viva voce test, the participants in the said test has no locus to impugn the selection process on the ground of unfairness of interview process or defect in the constitution of the selection committee.
21.
Mr. Dey ultimately by relying upon another decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Sukumar Pain reported in AIR 1966 SC 1206 prayed for rejection of this writ petition by contending that the petitioners have no vested right which can be enforced in the writ jurisdiction of this Court for challenging the procedure of selection for admission to the concerned course.
22.
Thus, Mr. Dey prayed for rejection of this writ petition as the same is not maintainable in law.
23.
After hearing the learned Advocate of the parties and after considering the materials on record, it appears to this Court that challenge which has been thrown in this writ petition is only limited to the question as to whether there has been any deviation in the style of setting up the question paper in the selection test, from the norms published by the University or not.
24.
It further appears to this Court that the Rules which have been framed by the University for admission of students in the said course, have not been challenged by the petitioners in this petition as ultra vires the Constitution.
Accordingly, this Court feels it absolutely unnecessary to consider the said part of the submission, which was advanced by the learned Advocate for the petitioners.
Rather, this Court restricts its consideration to the dispute with regard to the challenge which was thrown in this writ petition, as indicated above.
25.
There are two courses, viz., DM and M.Ch.
in respect of which selection process was initiated.
Under the said two courses there are various disciplines.
The Regulation framed for the selection process, provides that a candidate can apply for admission only in respect of one of the said course.
Thus, a candidate can apply either for DM course or for M.Ch.
course and not for both.
As per the admission Rules, two sets of question paper were set up.
One set of question paper was set up for the students seeking admission in any of the disciplines under DM course and the other set question paper was set up for the students seeking admission in any of the disciplines under M.Ch.
course.
26.
Thus, the students seeking admission to DM course is required to answer the question not only in respect of the particular discipline in respect of which he had applied for but also is required to answer the questions which were set up, in respect of the other disciplines of the particular course.
This particular system was introduced by the University only for the purpose of selecting super-special students in a super-speciality course.
27.
Needless to mention here that the minimum academic eligible qualification for DM course is MD Similarly, the minimum academic eligible qualification for MChcourse is MS General Surgery.
Thus, the students who were seeking admission in DM or M.Ch.
course cannot feel any inconvenience in answering the questions which were set up from various disciplines/subjects which the petitioners studied at the MD and/or MS level.
28.
Rule 33 under the heading `Selection Process' provides that question paper for the written test shall be set up in English and shall contain 80 single response type multiple choice questions for respective courses.
Following the said Rules two different sets of question papers were set up; one question paper was set up for the D M. course and the other question paper was set up for the M.Ch.
course.
Undisputedly, separate question paper for different disciplines under a particular course has not been set up by the authority concerned, as the authority concerned thought it fit that selection of super-special candidates can only be made in such a super-speciality courses only through the selection process which was introduced by the University concerned in the aforesaid manner.
29.
I find that when an expert body, viz., the Academic Council consisting of so many responsible personalities, viz., Vice-Chancellor, three Pro-Vice- Chancellors, the Controller of Examinations, all Principals or Directors or Dean of all the Medical, Dental, Nursing, Pharmacy, Homoeopathic, Ayurvedic Unani teaching institutions in the State of West Bengal, two distinguished teachers nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Government of West Bengal, a representative from each (under graduate and post-graduate) discipline not below the rank of Associate Professor, to be nominated by the Vice- Chancellor, the Director of Medical Education, West Bengal and a nominee of the University Grants Commission, adopted a particular selection procedure, this Court does not think it fit to interfere with the selection process for selection of candidates in such a super-partiality course.
30.
That apart, this Court feels that a participant in the selection process cannot dictate the Academic Council to adopt a particular mode of selection in deviation from the procedure laid down by the said Council for the said selection.
This Court feels that it is entirely within the wisdom of the Academic Council to prescribe the procedure for selection of candidates for admission in the respective courses.
31.
I do not find any substance in the contention of the petitioners to the effect that preference has been given to the freshers than the in-service candidates, as the freshers who just studied all the subjects under various disciplines in their MD/MS courses, can easily answer the questions set up from various disciplines in the particular course while the in-service candidates who acquired eligible qualification long ago, lost acquaintance with the other disciplines excepting the discipline in respect of which they were engaged due to their service for such a long time.
32.
DM and M.Ch.
courses are the super-speciality courses.
The degree which is conferred upon the students in the said courses is the highest degree in the State in the particular medical science.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Preeti Srivastava v. State of M.P. reported in (1999) 7 SCC 120 has held that admission to super- speciality course is to be done strictly on the basis of merit.
In the instant case it appears to this Court that a uniform selection process has been prescribed for selection of candidates both for in-service candidates and the freshers.
A common set of question paper was prepared both for in-service candidates as well as for the freshers.
As such, there has been no violation of the principles of equality so far as the adoption of selection procedure for admission to the respective courses is concerned.
33.
Thus, simply because the in-service candidates who have lost contact with the other disciplines are unable to complete with the freshers in the particular procedure adopted by the University for selection of candidates for admission in the respective courses, the selection process cannot be set aside.
In this regard reliance may be made on the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of Dr. Preeti Srivastava v. State of M.P. reported in (1999) 7 SCC 120 and in the case of AIMS Students' Union v. AIMS reported in (2002) 1 SCC 428, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that admission to superspeciality course is to be done strictly on the basis of merit and as such the in-service candidates are expected to update themselves to compete with the general candidates.
34.
I do not find any substance in the submission of the petitioners to the effect that the procedure which has been adopted by the University for selection of candidates is unscientific one, as the students who were seeking admission in a particular discipline are required to answer question not only in respect of a particular discipline in respect of which he had applied for but also in respect of the other disciplines in respect of which he had not applied for at all.
In my view, in a super-speciality course only the super- special students should get admission and the super-special students can be selected by the process which has been adopted by the University concerned.
Since the different organs of the human body are connected with each other, it is expected that a super-special student having intensive knowledge in all the disciplines/subjects should be selected for admission in the super-speciality course, i.e., DM and M Ch.
courses in which highest degree in medical science is conferred upon the successful students.
In my view, such a student can be picked up only through the process which has been adopted by the newly set up University.
35.
That apart, a student who is seeking admission in a particular discipline under DM or M Ch.
course cannot feel any inconvenience in answering the questions covering all the disciplines under a particular course, as they studied ail the disciplines in the MD or MS course which is the minimum requisite qualification for admission to DM or M.Ch.
course.
Simply because the traditional method of selection process prevalent in Calcutta University as well as in some other Universities has not been followed by the newly set up University, the selection process adopted by the newly set up University cannot be set aside.
36.
The submission of Mr. Bhattacharjee to the effect that the introduction of distribution of marks for the past academic career of the candidate is unnecessary for the purpose of selection of the candidate for admission, cannot be swallowed as for picking up super-special candidate, past academic performance of the candidate is required to be considered.
37.
I also feel that the ultimate selection through counseling is a scientific method of selection of candidate for admission as through the said process a candidate who deserves selection in a particular discipline under a particular course can be selected for admission in the particular discipline in which he/she deserves admission though he/she had not opted for the same.
The possibility of elimination in the selection process merely because of wrong exercise of option by the candidate concerned, can be avoided by the counseling process.
As such, I do not find anything wrong in the introduction of counseling for selection of candidate for admission in the said courses.
38.
That apart, the selection for admission has already been completed and the selected candidates had also been admitted in the respective courses and as such this Court does not think if fit to interfere with the selection process at the instance of the unsuccessful candidates, as any interference in the selection process at this stage will affect the academic career of the selected candidates in the midst of their academic session.
39.
Before parting with, I must mention that the petitioners, though did not refer to any decision at the time of making submission, but a host of decisions have been referred to by the petitioners in their written argument but since those decisions had not been cited at the time of making submission before this Court and since the respondents did not get any opportunity to deal with those decisions in course of their submission, I do not find it necessary to deal with those decisions herein.
40.
Accordingly, I do not find any substance in this writ petition.
This writ petition, thus, stands rejected.
41.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties, as expeditiously as possible upon compliance with the requisite formalities.
Petition dismissed.