SL Jain, J - Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 971998, passed by IXth Additional District Judge, Bhopal in CS No. 89-A/97, the appellant MPEB (hereinafter referred to as the `Board') through its Secretary has filed this appeal challenging the correctness, propriety and validity of the same.
2.
The brief resume of the facts required to be stated for disposal of this appeal is as follows :-  Respondent Pramod Kumar Mahajan who was Supervisor in MPEB and was dismissed from service vide order No. 2433 dated 1681976, filed a suit claiming that the said order is null and vid and he is in continuous service from the date of the order and that the is also entitled to all the promotional benefits, arrears and pay etc. according to the rules applicable to him.
He is also entitled to interest @ 18% per annum on the amount of arrears and salary etc.  3.
Plaintiff/respondent alleged in the plaint that he was appointed as supervisor in the Board on 1641971 by the Chief Engineer of the Board and since then, he had been assiduously and honestly discharging his duties till 1681976 on which date he was dismissed by the Superintending Engineer of the Board who was lower in the rank than the appointing authority.
At the material time, the plaintiff was drawing a salary at the rate of Rs. 753200 per month.
The defendant/Board had adopted the MP Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1996 (Hereinafter referred to as the `Rules') and the same were made applicable to the employees of the Board.
4.
The plaintiff also averred that he was charge-sheeted vide memo dated 6.4.1976 during the course of his employment.
The list of witnesses and list of documents which were required to be supplied to him in terms of the Rules were not supplied to him.
The charge-sheet was issued by the Superintending Engineer, Bhopal Circle.
On 451976, the plaintiff submitted an application to the authorities stating that the charge-sheet is incomplete and he may be given copy of the list of the witnesses and list of documents which are likely to be used against him during the course of inquiry.
In this application, the plaintiff/respondent also requested that as an inquiry by the police authorities is pending, he may be granted some time to submit his written statement but he was not supplied with the list of witnesses and list of documents and no further time was granted.
He submitted his written statement on 17.5.1976, but the same was not taken on record by the inquiry officer.
5.
The plaintiff also pleaded that he was not given any intimation in respect of inquiry and the inquiry proceeded ex parte against him.
The inquiry officer completed the inquiry on 2651976 and recorded his findings on 22.6.1976.
The inquiry was also fixed on 1951976, 21.5.1976, 2551976 and 2651976 without his knowledge as no intimation of these dates was given to him.
6.
The plaintiff also averred that after the conclusion of the inquiry, the inquiry officer recorded perverse finding against him.
A show-cause notice dated 1551976 was served on him, reply of which was submitted on 281976 but without considering the reply, the plaintiff was dismissed from service on 1681976.
7.
Being aggrieved by the order of dismissal, the plaintiff filed a petition before the Labour Court bearing case No. 196/MPIR/76 but as the same was not maintainable, he withdrew the same and filed the present suit.
8.
Appellant/Board filed a detailed written statement submitting that the claim of the respondent is frivolous and based on incorrect facts.
The appellant defendant pleaded that the services of the plaintiff were dismissed by the competent authority after a proper inquiry in accordance with the Rules.
Intimations of dates of inquiry were given to the respondent.
The respondent tried to seek adjournments on flimsy grounds.
He was also informed and thereby warned that on his failure to appear, the inquiry shall proceed ex parte.
As the respondent did not appear despite notice, the inquiry proceeded ex parte against him.
It was also put forth by the appellant that the findings of the inquiry officer are correct and based on legal evidence.
9.
It was also the case of the appellant/Board that the Labour Court dismissed the claim of the plaintiff after recording the evidence and the present suit is, therefore, barred by the principle of res judicata as envisaged in Section 11 of the CPC and the Board cannot be waxed twice for the same cause of action.
The appellant/defendant prayed for the dismissal of the suit.
10.
Learned Additional District Judge framed as many as 13 issues.
Plaintiff examined himself as a witness.
Defendant/Board examined the inquiry officer SS Murthy and Superintending Engineer DK Diwan who appeared as a witness before the inquiry officer.
Both the parties also relied on the documentary evidence.
11.
The trial Court by the impugned judgment, decreed the plaintiff suit and set aside the order of dismissal.
Backwages from the date of dismissal till the date of reinstatement were also granted with interest @ 12% per annum.
12.
I have heard learned counsel for both the parties and perused the record.
13.
Shri ML Jaiswal, learned Sr.
Counsel with Shri Mohd.
Asif, Counsel for the appellant submitted that the Court below failed to correctly appreciate the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the appellant/Board which clearly showed that the respondent was dismissed from service after proper inquiry.
He also submitted that since the claim of the plaintiff/respondent filed before the Labour Court was withdrawn by him without leave to file a fresh suit, the present suit is barred under the provisions of Order 23 Rule 3 CPC.
He also contended that the suit was barred by limitation.
The trial Court could not have granted the relief of backwages as the same was claimed by an amendment after the limitation.
The trial Court committed grave error in allowing the amendment.
14.
Per contra, Shri NS Kale, learned Sr.
Counsel with Shri Abhijeet Bhaumik counsel appearing for the respondent has supported the impugned judgment and decree and contended that in view of the evidence on record, it has been fully established that no proper opportunity of hearing was given to the respondent and the Rules and principles of natural justice have been protruded in every step.
15.
Learned counsel for the appellant first submitted that the relief of promotional benefits, arrears of pay etc. is barred by limitation.
A party cannot be allowed by amendment to set up a new case or a new cause of action particularly when a suit on a new case or cause of action is barred by limitation.
Apparently, on 2221994 the claim for promotional benefits, arrears of salary etc. was barred by limitation.
The trial Court could not have allowed an amendment to introduce a new relief to the prejudice of the right acquired by the other party by lapse of time.
Initially the suit of the plaintiff was for a relief that the order of dismissal dated 1681976 is a nullity and a declaration was sought to the effect that plaintiff is in continuous service with effect from the date of his termination.
16.
As against this, the learned counsel for the respondent in support of his contention relied on AK Gupta v. Damodar Valley Corporation, AIR 1967 SC 96 and submitted that the amendment did not introduce a new case.
It was nothing more than a different approach to the same facts.
Where the amendment sought amounted to different approach to the same facts, the trial Court committed no error in allowing the amendment even after the lapse of time.
17.
In the present case, in fact, the relief, of promotional benefits and relief of salary was consequential to the main relief of declaring order of dismissal as null and void.
There was no attempt by the proposed amendment to introduce a new cause of action or to claim a new relief.
In such a case, the amendment could have been allowed even after expiry of the statutory period of limitation.
An amendment can be allowed even after the period of limitation if it does not constitute a new cause of action or a new case.
The object of rules of procedure is to decide the rights of the parties and not to punish them for their mistakes.
In Estralla Rubber v. Dass Estate (P) Ltd., (2001) 8 SCC 97 it has been held that delay on its own is not a ground for the rejection of the application.
18.
The proposed amendment in fact, was to elaborate the relief.
The amendments sought were necessary to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
It cannot be said that allowing the amendment caused irretrievable prejudices to the defendants.
The relief of promotional benefits and arrears of pay is in fact, a consequential relief.
Once, the Court finds that appellant is entitled to reinstatement, the Court can grant the relief of arrears of salary in the interest of justice even without seeking specific relief in the plaint.
The Court, while deciding the prayer for amendment, is not expected to adopt hypertechnical approach.
19.
Applying the aforesaid principles in the case in hand, I have no hesitation to state that the order of the trial Court allowing the amendment is perfectly legal.
20.
Learned counsel for the appellant next contended that the plaintiff initially filed the petition under MP Industrial Relations Act but the same was withdrawn without seeking the permission of the Labour Court.
Referring to the provisions of Order 23, Rule 1 sub-rule (4) CPC, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that when the plaintiff withdrew from a suit without the permission referred to in rule 3, he should be precluded from filing a fresh suit with respect to the same subject matter.
21.
He further submitted that it is true that the provisions of Order 23 Rule 1 CPC in terms do not apply to the proceedings before the Labour Court but the principles of the provisions do apply to such proceedings because the ban for filing a fresh suit is based on public policy, therefore, principles his contention, the learned counsel relied on Upadhyay and Co v. State of UP, AIR 1999 SC 509.
22.
It is true that having once withdrawn the petition without seeking permission to file a fresh petition would have barred the filing of a fresh petition before the Labour Court itself on the basis of public policy but withdrawal of petition from the Labour Court would not bar other remedies like a suit or petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The remedy under the Industrial Relations Act would be deemed, lied to have been abandoned by the plaintiff but the same did not bar the filing of the civil suit.
23.
Learned counsel for the appellant next contended that the relief of reinstatement and backwages was available only under MP Industrial Relations Act and the same could not have been granted by Civil Court.
The provisions of Industrial Relations Act impliedly exclude the jurisdiction of Civil Court with regard to such reliefs as may be claimed in Labour Court.
MP Industrial relations Act not only recognizes right of a worker for reinstatement and a backwages if the order of termination or dismissal is not in accordance with the law but also provides a detailed provision and machinery for getting this relief.
Therefore, there is an apparent exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to grant such relief.
In support of his contention, learned counsel relied on Jitendra Nath Biswas v. M/s.
Empire of India and Ceylone Tea Co, AIR 1990 SC 255.
24.
Per contra learned counsel for the appellant relying on Kishore Vishwas v. State of Tripura and another submitted that Civil Suit against dismissal from service is maintainable under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act.
25.
Learned counsel for the appellant invited my attention to Clause 13 of Section 2 of MP Industrial Disputes Act, 1960 which defines `employee' and submitted that the term employee does not include any person who being employed in supervisory capacity draws wages exceeding Rs. 160000 per menses.
In this case, plaintiff has admitted in his statement before the trial Court that his salary on the date of dismissal was Rs. 53200.
Thus, his salary did not exceed Rs. 1,60000 and he was included in the definition `employee' and Labour Court alone had jurisdiction.
26.
The contention cannot be accepted.
Sub-Clause (4) of Clause 13 of Section 2 of Industrial Relations Act has been amended by Act No. 48/98 which has come into force from 2611982.
Since the order of termination in this case was passed on 1681976, the amendment of Act No. 41/98 will not apply in this case.
Prior to amendment in the definition of employee only those employees who were employed in supervisory capacity and drawing wages exceeding Rs. 50000 were excluded.
The appellant admittedly on the date of his termination was getting a salary of Rs. 53200 was excluded from the above definition.
Therefore, he could not have filed his claim under MP Industrial Relations Act.
As the Labour Court had no jurisdiction the plaintiff withdrew his petition filed before the Labour Court and filed a Civil Suit.
Under the circumstances there was an apparent exclusion of the jurisdiction of Labour Court to grant the relief and only the Civil Court had the jurisdiction as it can try all the suits of civil nature.
27.
Learned counsel for the respondent vehemently argued that the respondent could not participate in the departmental inquiry because the information of different dates of hearing was not given to the respondent.
28.
The respondent, in his evidence, has not stated that the information of the different dates of evidence was not given to him.
The only grievance which he put in paragraph 3 of his statement is that the information was received by him late.
The witness has not explained as to on what date the information was received by him.
The witness has also admitted that the venue of inquiry was fixed at different places like Bhopal, Sehore and Bairasia.
He could not participate in the inquiry because a very short notice was given to him.
He has not explained as to on what date the notice was received by him and in what date the inquiry was fixed for evidence.
In paragraph 7 of his statement the witness has admitted that after the charge-sheet he participated in sitting at Bhopal.
On that date the evidence of the witnesses was not recorded in his presence.
He admits that, he did not request the Inquiry Officer that the evidence be recorded in his presence.
He has admitted that subsequently, he learnt that 7 to 8 witnesses have been examined but he did not ask for the copies of statements of those witnesses the reason for which as stated by the respondent was that he was not knowing that after the preliminary inquiry also the evidence of witnesses are recorded, therefore, he did not request for the copies of statements recorded after the charge-sheet.
29.
The allegation of the respondent that the information of different dates of evidence was not given to him does not appear to be acceptable.
The document, Ex.D-3-C reveals that by this letter the respondent was informed that he did not attend the inquiry on 21576.
He was also informed that the inquiry was adjourned to 25576 and information was sent to him.
The Divisional Engineer, Vidisha also confirmed that advice was given to him (respondent).
This letter also contains that the postal copy in confirmation of telegram was sent to him advising him to remain present on 26th at Sehore.
The letter further contains that he did not attend the inquiry at Sehore on 26576.
On 27th of May, an application for adjournment was received but the same was not considered.
He was advised to attend the inquiry on 31576 at 1030 am at Bairasia.
The respondent does not say that this letter was not received by him.
30.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that this letter, Ex.D-3-C contains C/o address of Divisional Engineer, therefore, it was the duty of the appellant to prove the Divisional Engineer delivered this letter to the respondent.
31.
The contention cannot be accepted.
In fact, the letter was addressed to respondent himself.
Simply because C/o address was there, it does not mean that the letter was not delivered to the respondent himself.
In his evidence before the trial Court the respondent did not say that this letter was not received by him.
On the contrary, his averment was that this document was received late without giving details as to when the document was received.
Similarly, Ex. D-6-C demonstrates that a telegram was sent to the respondent to appear for inquiry at Sehore office on 31576.
The respondent has not stated that such telegram or copy of Ex. D-6-C was not received by him.
When a communication is sent on proper address, it is presumed that it was received in due course of time.
32.
Much stress was placed by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that as per document Ex. D-3, the respondent was asked to attend the inquiry on 3151976, at Bairasia whereas by telegram Ex.D-6-C, he was asked to appear on 31st May, 1976 at Sehore Office.
33.
It is not a case of the plaintiff that because of two different informations, he was confused.
His only version is that the notices were received late without giving details as to on what date they were received.
Therefore, in view of the different documents available on record, it cannot- be said that the plaintiff was not having notice of different dates of inquiry.
34.
Learned counsel heavily relied on Rule 30 of the Rules wherein it is stated that the notices must be served by the registered post.
35.
It is true that in this case, the notices of different dates were not sent to the respondent by registered post but requirement of sending the notice by registered post is only a procedural requirement.
In case of procedural provision, which is not of specific character unless prejudice is caused by non-Compliance no interference of Court is called for.
Substantial compliance of such provisions is enough.
36.
Procedural provision even if uses word `shall' the same may be construed as directory if no prejudice is caused (See PT Rajan v. T.P.N.
Sahir, (2003)8 SCC 498).
In the absence of provision for consequences in case of non-compliance with the requirement prescribed would indicate directive nature despite use of word `shall'.
37.
Rule 30 above cannot be held to be mandatory in the sense that noncompliance with it leads to nullification of the inquiry.
When the plaintiff could not establish that notices were not received by him merely because they were not sent by registered post would not vitiate inquiry.
Oral evidence produced by the parties and document filed by them establishes beyond doubt that the plaintiff/respondent was having the knowledge of the dates ofinquiry.
38.
Learned counsel for the respondent also submitted that original documents have not been filed in the Court.
Most of the original documents filed in the Court were exhibited and after retaining their copies they were returned.
Even otherwise in a departmental inquiry provisions of Evidence Act do not apply strictly.
The delinquent by his own action forfeited his right to cross examine the witnesses.
From the evidence of DK Divan (DW-1), it is clear that when his statements were recorded, respondent was present before the inquiry officer.
SS Murthy (DW-2) has also stated that when the evidence of DK Diwan was recorded respondent was present.
39.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the statements which were recorded during inquiry do not bear any endorsement to the effect that opportunity of cross examination was given but the delinquent and not avail the same.
When the statements of witnesses were recorded in his presence, he could have request for giving opportunity to cross examine the witnesses.
40.
Learned counsel for the appellant next contended that the departmental inquiry against the respondent was held in accordance with (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 which are the relevant rules and also in accordance with the principles of natural justice and no rule of fairness was flouted.
Sufficient opportunity of hearing was given to the respondent.
The respondent himself did not participate and abandoned the inquiry.
41.
As against this, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the list of witnesses and list of documents were not supplied to the respondent.
42.
The respondent/plaintiff who was examined as PW-1 has stated that the charge-sheet Ex.P-4 was given to him along with the Memo of Articles, Ex.P-5, but the list of witnesses and list of documents were not given to him.
He requested the authorities to give him the list of witnesses and list of documents vide Ex.P-6.
43.
On perusal of document Ex.P-6 1 find that in this document the respondent/plaintiff had not stated that the list of documents and list of witnesses were not supplied to him.
On the contrary, in the memo, Ex.P-4, addressed to the respondent by Superintending Engineer, Bhopal, it has been specifically mentioned that the list of documents as well as list of witnesses on the basis of which the charges and imputation are proposed to be sustained, are also sent herewith.
Receipt of Ex.P-4 is not denied by the respondent.
44.
If these documents would not have been received by the respondent, he would have immediately informed the authorities that such documents have not been received.
In any case, he would have certainly mentioned this fact at least in Ex.P-6.
The respondent/plaintiff himself has admitted that he did not state in Ex.P-6 that copy of list of witnesses was not supplied to him.
He also admits that he did not make any application to the authorities that list of documents and list of witnesses may be made available to him A flimsy explanation has been given by the plaintiff for not mentioning this fact in Ex.P-6 that he was not knowing that such list should be given to the delinquent.
Therefore, the finding of the learned trial Judge that copy of list of witnesses and list of documents were not supplied to the respondent/plaintiff is without any basis and the learned trial Judge committed a manifest error in recording such finding.
45.
All official acts are deem to be regularly performed.
When document, Ex.P-4 contains the fact that the list of documents as well as list of witnesses is enclosed herewith and in the bottom of the letter also the list of enclosures has been given which includes list of witnesses and list of documents, in the absence of strong evidence in rebuttal, it could not have been said that these documents were not supplied  46.
The learned trial Court placed emphasis on the fact that inquiry officer SS Murthy has admitted that he did not provide the copy of the list of documents.
When the copies were supplied by the disciplinary authority and delinquent officer never said that such copies were not received, merely because they were not supplied by the inquiry officer it cannot be said that the same were not already supplied.
The finding of the trial Court in this respect cannot be sustained.
47.
Object of the rule ad-audinedum is to ensure that there should be no failure of justice.
Where public interest requires curtailing of the rule, the Court should balance public interest with the requirement of natural justice.
When no prejudice has been caused to the respondent, no interference with the inquiry proceedings and consequential order of the removal of respondent is called for.
48.
Much stress was placed by learned counsel for the respondent on the fact that the copy of the statements of witnesses recorded during preliminary inquiry were not supplied to the respondent.
49.
This was the main ground, on the basis of which the learned trial Judge decreed the suit.
But the preliminary report and the statement on which the same is based is used only to decide and assess whether it would be necessary to take any disciplinary action against delinquent officer.
The same does not form any foundation for passing the order of dismissal of the employee.
50.
Document Ex.D-7 also reveals that on the request of the respondent, copies of the statements of the witnesses were supplied to him.
The respondent himself having every opportunity did not participate in the inquiry and it cannot be said that some real prejudice was caused to the delinquent.
51.
In the present case, it cannot be said that in conducting the inquiry or framing of the charges or arriving at the decision, the authorities concerned acted in violation of the principle of natural justice.
When the respondent himself did not participate in the inquiry merely because the evidence of some of the witnesses were not recorded in his presence, it cannot be said that the authorities concerned acted in violation of principle of natural justice.
52.
The inquiry officer is not bound by the strict rules of law of evidence and when the public servant declined to take part in the proceedings and failed to remain present, it was open to the inquiry officer to proceed on the material which were placed before him.
It is not in the competence of the Civil Court to sit in the judgment over the decision of the inquiry authority who is competent by law to dismiss public servant, provided, there had been fair and full inquiry before the inquiry officer.
Inquiry officer afforded to the delinquent every opportunity to remain present and to cross examine the witnesses but because of the conduct of the respondent in not participating in the inquiry, the witnesses could not be examined in his presence.
The inquiry officer was justified in proceeding to act upon the material placed before him.
53.
On the facts of this case, it cannot be said that in conducting the inquiry, the authorities concerned acted in violation of principle of natural justice.
No mala fide or prejudice on the part of the inquiry officer can be inferred.
The finding of the trial Court recorded in Para 18 of the judgment that the list of witnesses and list of documents were not supplied to the delinquent is contrary to the facts stated in para 16 of the judgment.
54.
No other point was raised by the parties before me for consideration.
55.
For the reasons stated above, the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court cannot be allowed to stand.
56.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed.
Judgment and decree passed by the trial Court is set aside.
This suit of the plaintiff/respondent for declaring the order of dismissal as void and for backwages is dismissed.
Appeal allowed.