Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The first petitioner is the secretary of the managing committee of Dhurba Adiswar Junior High School, while the second petitioner is the teacher-in-charge thereof.
They are aggrieved by the order of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education dated April 16, 2001 rejecting the request of the school for upgrading it to a X-class high school.
2.
There is no dispute that sometime in 1952 the school was recognised by the authority as a 2-class junior high school.
There is also no dispute that subsequently in 1965 it was upgraded to a 4-class junior high school.
The dispute is regarding its upgradation to a X-class high school.
3.
While from time to time the school claimed that classes IX and X had actually been started in early part of the seventies, the authorities found little to accept the claim, since the district level inspecting team did not submit report corroborating the claims made by the school.
4.
The district level inspecting team submitted report indicating certain deficiencies in infrastructure, and also regarding existence of other high schools within the radius of nine kilometers; the last such report is dated December 23, 1997.
Considering the report the state government declined to recommend the upgradation.
As a result, the board rejected the request for upgradation.
5.
Advocates for the parties have argued by referring me to several authorities, and the circulars and provisions of law regarding grant of recognition by the board.
Since I find that questions which require adjudication are essentially connected with questions of fact, I believe that I shall not be thought of disrespectful to the authorities, if I do not specifically deal with them.
6.
I am of the view that unless the school possessed requisite infrastructure for running classes IX and X, it cannot seek upgradation.
This is the principal ground on which the board has rejected the request for upgradation.
I agree with advocates for the parties that if the school removes the deficiencies regarding infrastructure, then its request for upgradation should be reconsidered by both the state government and the board.
7.
I am also of the view that since the higher classes were to be run by the managing committee of the recognised school with their own resources and with the help of the existing approved staff (working in the 4-class junior high school), too much importance should not have been given by the authorities to the incongruities, if any, regarding engagement of unapproved staff, as claimed by the school.
8.
I am told that from the year 1997 the school has been regularly sending students for the secondary examination of the board, through a nearby recognised high school (Malaya High School).
If this is, true, then, in my view, the state government and the board must reconsider the question of upgrading the school in the interests of the students of the school.
9.
I am unable to appreciate the several technical objections raised by the state government and the board for the purpose of rejecting the request for upgradation.
In my view, the state government would do real justice to the students of the school by remaining alive to the reality, instead of dwelling on technicalities, when the school seeking upgradation has been sending students for taking the secondary examination of the board from as back as 1997.
10.
Needless to say that obligation of the state to ensure requisite facilities for imparting education to children of the country is an avowed one, and its discharge is not to be dodged by using shields of technicalities.
Needless to say that obligation of the state to ensure requisite facilities for imparting education to children of the country is an avowed one, and its discharge is not to be dodged by using shields of technicalities.
11.
To say that because of existence of other schools about five kilometers away or that for failure to submit application in prescribed form seeking prior permission to start the higher classes, upgradation should not be granted, though the need for the upgradation is writ large, in my view, is nothing short of saying that reality must give way to image.
12.
I hope and believe that keeping in view the need of all round- upliftment of the children, in the context of the socio-economic condition of the locality where the school is located, both the state government and the board would rise to the occasion of reconsidering the case of its upgradation by giving a pragmatic approach to the existing problem, and not be giving too much of importance to technicalities and minor deficiencies.
13.
For these reasons I dispose of the writ petition by the following orders.
14.
After removing the deficiencies indicated by the authorities regarding infrastructure, the school would be free to make a fresh application for upgradation of the school.
15.
Once the application is received, the state government and the board shall ensure that the requisite inspection is made by the district level inspecting team and the necessary report is submitted by it to all the authorities concerned within eight weeks from the date of receipt of the application.
16.
If the school removes the deficiencies regarding infrastructure, then the state government shall reconsider the question of recommending its upgradation.
17.
If the inspecting team finds that any person works in the school as organizing teaching or non-teaching staff for the higher classes, then the state government would be free to consider whether such organizing staff would have any right to get approval of his appointment, and it would be free to give appropriate decision for the purpose according to law.
18.
The state government shall send its views to the board either recommending or declining to recommend, if there are lawful reasons (to be disclosed in detail and communicated to the school), within six weeks from the date of receipt of the report from the inspecting team.
19.
The board shall then give the final decision within six weeks from the date of receipt of the views from the state government.
Needless to say that the decision shall be a reasoned one, and it shall be communicated to the school without any delay whatsoever  20.
There will be no order for costs in the writ petition.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Order accordingly.