Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By the first mentioned writ petition the petitioner has challenged the chargesheet dated 24th June, 1981 and the report of the Enquiry Officer in the sequel thereto, dated 2nd April, 1994 and the order of termination from the service dated 28th April, 1994.
The second mentioned writ petition of the petitioner is for granting benefit of the career advancement scheme by fitting him in proper pay scale on completion of 20 years and 26 years of satisfactory services.
Obviously the second mentioned writ petition was filed during pendency of the first mentioned writ petition.
By my order dated 13th February, 2004 1 decided that first mentioned writ petition was to be adjudicated and decided first, and thereafter the second mentioned writ petition will be considered for hearing.
On that date I observed that in the event order of termination is sustained question of granting benefit as prayed for by the second writ petition could not arise.
2.
The short fact of the case which led to filing of the instant writ petition, is required to be recorded for proper appreciation of the case.
The petitioner was appointed as a Medical Officer by the respondent No. 1 Corporation in or about November 19, 1971.
On 20th May, 1981 while the petitioner was discharging his duty as a Medical Officer of Ultadanga dispensary of the respondent No.1 there was raid by the internal vigilance.
On 23rd May, 1981 the petitioner was put under suspension in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings which might be initiated against him.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted which is challenged here, alleging his misconduct of committing theft of medicines from the said Ultadanga dispensary on 20th May, 1981 at 11.30 A.M.; secondly, the petitioner used to leave dispensary much before the scheduled hour of departure and on 20th May, 1981 he was found to leave dispensary at 11.30 A.M. and thus he exhibited his lack of devotion to duty ; thirdly, the petitioner kept blank at some portions of the pages of Patients Register for the year 1981-82, entering only the serial numbers of cases but omitting to enter into the column relating to name, sex, age and treatment of the patient and the medicine issued.
Thus, he exhibited lack of devotion to duty in violation of paragraphs 274 and 281 of Health Manual; fourthly the petitioner used to keep some parts of the pages of the Patients Register blank with the ulterior motive of showing false issue of medicine and thus displayed lack of integrity unbecoming of civic servant.
3.
The petitioner refuted the said charges.
He denied each and every major charge.
However, in his statement of reply he explained reason for his early departure from the dispensary on that date.
So it is an admitted position on the date of raid on 20th May, 1981 he was found leaving dispensary earlier than scheduled time.
During this period the duty hours of the petitioner was 6 O'clock in the morning till 1 O'clock in the afternoon.
4.
The Corporation not being satisfied with the explanation decided to hold an enquiry appointed an Officer.
While enquiry Was in progress the order of suspension was revoked on 23rd May, 1984 and then he resumed his duty in the same post.
Sometimes, in 1984 the Enquiry Officer completed the proceedings and submitted a report.
This report was challenged by the petitioner filing a writ petition being C.O.
No. 11253 (W) of 1984.
On 30th November, 1992 the said writ petition was disposed of by this Court setting aside the earlier report of the Enquiry Officer and directing amongst others to complete the enquiry proceedings by fresh hearing but on the basis of the evidence already on record and allowing the petitioner to adduce defence evidence both documentary and oral.
It was further directed by the earlier order of this Court that after taking such defence evidence and giving proper opportunity of examination and cross-examination of the defence witnesses, the enquiry authority will hear argument to both the sides on the basis of the evidence already on record as well as evidence that may be adduced by the petitioner.
5.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order fresh hearing was taken by the Enquiry Officer and he found in his own way that petitioner is guilty of misappropriation of medicine partly of the second charge, third and fourth charges.
6.
Based on the aforesaid enquiry report while accepting the same.
the impugned order of termination was passed and served upon the petitioner.
7.
In the enquiry report the Officer found that petitioner is guilty for committing misconduct by misappropriation of certain medicines from Ultadanga dispensary of the Corporation for personal gain, while the charges levelled against him in the chargesheet, of committing theft of certain medicines.
The respondent No. 3 being the disciplinary and punishing authority has also accepted the findings of committing misconduct of misappropriation equating with charge of theft in relation to charge No. 1.
It is an admitted position that before issuance of the impugned order of termination dated 28th April, 1994 no opportunity was given though under the Rules relating to disciplinary proceedings, second show cause notice is required to be issued enabling the petitioner to make a defence against the tentatively proposed punishment.
On 31st May, 1985 as it appears in the impugned order of termination Deputy Municipal Commissioner of the respondent No. 1 sent the impugned order to the petitioner inviting to submit his reply as to why he would not be subjected to above.
penalty and with it a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer dated 2nd April, 1994 was forwarded.
8.
I think in this situation it would be ideal to quote relevant text of order of the respondent No. 3 :  ".....I accept the findings of the Enquiry Officer and also find him guilty in respect of the charges Nos. 1, 3 and 4.
After having perused all the documents and records, I impose the following punishments :  (1) The services of the delinquent Mr. Dasgupta, Medical Officer be terminated with immediate effect ;  (2) The period of suspension, if any, spent by the delinquent should be treated as punishment and the salary deducted should not be released to him as a measure of punishment ;  (3) Termination benefits of the delinquent may be decided as per existing service rules of the C.M.C."
From plain reading of the aforesaid impugned order of punishment it is thus clear that it was a final order and nothing was left for further decision.
Notwithstanding above, the Deputy Municipal Commissioner almost one year later treated the same as being proposed punishment and asked the petitioner to give a reply.
Petitioner did not give such reply, as rightly contended by Mr. Moitra.
9.
During pendency of the writ petition another order of termination which is described to be a final one by Mr. Aloke Ghosh treating the earlier order as being a provisional one, was served.
On what basis this order was passed is not understood by the Court.
This order, however, is also challenged by the petitioner by filing a supplementary affidavit.
10.
Mr. Kashi Kanta Moitra, Learned Senior Counsel, contends while questioning seriously the report of the Enquiry Officer that there is apparent incoherency as the Enquiry Officer has found the petitioner of allege, misconduct for misappropriation of medicines whereas the charge was for committing theft.
The petitioner proceeded on responding to allegation in the chargesheet and made out a defence against the charge of theft, as such he had no occasion to meet the new charge and findings thereon, made out by the Enquiry Officer himself not by disciplinary authority.
There is a considerable difference between two charges viz. theft and misappropriation.
On that ground report of the Enquiry Officer should be set aside so far as the first charge is concerned.
Even assuming the charge of misappropriation is sustainable the Enquiry Officer came to fact finding without any evidence whatsoever.
Despite repeated requests being made the documentary evidence being the basis of the findings, viz. Exhibits A, B, C being Patients Register and Medicine Register were not produced before Enquiry Officer.
Obviously he has no occasion to see the same.
11.
As far as the findings of the charges numbers 3 and 4 are concerned the same are based on conjecture.
The Disciplinary Authority by the finding impugned order, and even by the second has blindly accepted the findings without making any attempt to consider far less to apply his mind to what the petitioner contended before the Enquiry Officer.
12.
He urges that without issuing any second show cause notice, consequently breaching the Rules of natural justice penalty has been imposed.
This is not possible under the law as it has been laid down in series of decisions of Supreme Court one of which is relied on AIR 1964 SC 1612.
The petitioner did not get the copy of the enquiry report before the impugned order of termination was imposed.
First impugned order of termination must be set aside straight away as it is apparent from the document itself that no opportunity of being heard was given before imposition of punishment.
The Deputy Municipal Commissioner being an incompetent person cannot treat, even by necessary implication, the first order of dismissal being tentative one.
Question of showing cause and/or giving reply to the Deputy Municipal Commissioner does not and cannot arise.
He contends that findings based on no evidence is judicially reviewable and the same cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
In support of his contention he has sought assistance of the Supreme Court decisions viz. 1985 (3) SCC 378, AIR 1964 SC 364.
13.
Mr. Aloke Ghosh, Learned Counsel for the Corporation authority contends that the petitioner was given full opportunity of hearing in terms of the order of this Court previously passed.
The department produced evidence both documentary as well as oral of witnesses.
The petitioner cross-examined each and every witness produced by the department.
Similarly, he brought his witnesses and produced his documentary evidence.
So, it cannot be said that there is any breach of principle of natural justice.
After analyzing the evidence the Enquiry Officer has found him guilty for committing misconduct.
There is no procedural lapses while conducting the enquiry proceedings.
Unless it was found by the Court that enquiry proceedings is vitiated with procedural lapse, the fact finding can not be interfered with.
This Court while exercising power of judicial review will not examine sufficiency or adequacy of the evidence, nor discrepancies in the evidences here and there, as it is not the case of appeal.
Moreover, the petitioner would have preferred departmental appeal against the impugned order.
In support of his submission as above he has relied on the following decisions of the Supreme Court viz. 1997 (5) SCC 129, 1995 (6) SCC 749, AIR 1999 SC 3579.
He further submits that it is true before passing of the first impugned order of punishment no chance was given to the petitioner to make representation.
But this defect has been subsequently cured as the earlier impugned order of punishment was not implemented and subsequent order of punishment was passed.
Thus, this exercise is nothing but an irregular adoption of procedure.
The petitioner is not prejudiced at all as he had opportunity to make representation.
He did not do so.
Unless he records his protest, mere lapses in scrupulous following of the procedural form does not vitiates the entire proceeding.
He has in this connection, referred to the following judgments of the Supreme Court reported in 2001 (6) SCC 392, 1998 (4) SCC 310.
14.
He contends that the Court will not see the form of the charge or the fact finding report of the Enquiry Officer, rather substance of the same.
In this case in the chargesheet misconduct of theft was mentioned though, but on enquiry it was found that it was a case of dishonest misappropriation of the Corporation property so this charge can legitimately be altered.
As such basically there is no difference in nature of misconduct, since proved.
He further submits that the meaning of misappropriation according to Black Law Dictionary (6th Edition) is not substantially different from the meaning of theft.
In this connection he has drawn attention of this Court to a Supreme Court judgment reported in 2004 AIR SCW 5256 (Management of Krishnakali Tea Estates v. Akhil Bharatiya Chah Mazdoor Sangh & Anr.)  15.
Thus, the punishment imposed by the appropriate authority is justified and commensurate and/or proportionate to the misconduct committed by the petitioner.
Writ petition should be dismissed.
16.
As far as the second writ petition is concerned he contends that in view of the order of termination which has its origin in a chargesheet of 1981 and further on that date he not having fulfilled the requisite years of service, is not entitled to benefit of career advancement.
Naturally the second writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
17.
I have heard submissions of the Learned Counsels and examined the records of this case.
The points for decision in this case are as follows :  (1) Whether the order of punishment has been inflicted upon the petitioner in due process of law or not?
(2) Whether the report of the Enquiry Officer and his finding based on material available before him, is sustainable under the law ?
While taking up the first point I have seen the impugned order of termination dated 28th April, 1994 passed by the respondent No. 3.
It appears therefrom that the respondent No. 3 has absolutely relied on the report of the Enquiry Officer who, in his turn, has found the petitioner is guilty of committing misappropriation of certain medicines.
From the impugned order of punishment I do not find his finding and decision is a tentative one.
Admittedly before issuance of this order no notice (second show cause) was served upon the petitioner.
This fact is clearly substantiated by an endorsement of the Deputy Municipal Commissioner made on 3rd May, 1995 in the same very order of termination.
The language of the impugned order of termination is very clear and it is final and conclusive and there has been no scope for taking any further decision.
While passing the order of punishment on one hand and asking the petitioner through the Deputy Municipal Commissioner on the other hand, for making representation as to why the aforesaid order of punishment should not be awarded, the authority concerned has played mockery in taking punitive action.
This impugned order is out and out, manifestation of the closed and determined mind to terminate the petitioner's services as early as possible blatantly disregarding the procedural safeguard.
The Deputy Municipal Commissioner has no jurisdiction to invite the representation of the petitioner, as he is not the punishing authority.
In this respect this impugned order of termination on the procedural aspect does not stand to the scrutiny of law.
Mr. Moitra has rightly contended that this order should be set aside as the petitioner is denied opportunity of being heard before he is inflicted with extreme punishment.
The law in this situation is firmly well-settled for which recapitulation of the judicial precedent is hardly necessary.
Mr. Moitra has relied on large number of decisions.
But all these decisions may not be appropriate in one particular point.
I find in this regard the decision of the Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1984 (1) CLJ 379, has lucidly laid down what should be done after Enquiry Officer submits his report and disciplinary authority accepts the same.
The Division Bench of this Court, however, in this case has followed the earlier decision of the Supreme Court rendered in case of The State of Assam & Anr. v. Bimal Kumar Pandit, reported in AIR 1963 SC 1612.
It is better to reproduce the observation of the Supreme Court before I quote the observation of this Court, in paragraph 6 therein, which is as follows :  ".....When the enquiry is over and the enquiring officer submits his report, the dismissing-authority has to consider the report and decide whether it agrees with the conclusions of the report or not.
If the findings in the report are against the public officer and the dismissing authority agrees with the said findings, a stage is reached for giving another opportunity to the public officer to show why disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
In issuing the second notice, the dismissing authority naturally has to come to a tentative or provisional conclusion about the guilt of the public officer as well as about the punishment which would meet the requirement of justice in his case, and it is only after reaching conclusions in both these matters provisionally that the dismissing authority issues the second notice."
The Division Bench of this Court has recorded their observation in paragraph 4 is as follows :  "....At the second show cause notice it is incumbent on the part of the appointing authority to keep an open mind and come to a tentative or provisional finding about the guilt is finally proved.
Unless that is so the second show cause notice is contained in Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India becomes nugatory."
Though the Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India in this case is not applicable as the petitioner is not the civil servant, however, it is an admitted position that the same procedure as envisaged in the aforesaid Article, is also adopted and followed in the Service Rules of the petitioner.
Accordingly, I think the ratio laid down in the aforesaid two decisions is squarely applicable here.
18.
What is the object of issuing second show cause or for that matter inviting further representation from the delinquent ?
The object of the disciplinary authority is to see that basing on proved and true misconduct the employee is punished, as punishment of an employee really affects civil right if not right to livelihood.
Thus, the first step is to set-up an enquiry which will be conducted by as far as possible, a third person who with his unbiased and independent mind will report observing all principle of natural justice as to the real state of affairs relating to conduct of the delinquent in course of his employment.
This is not all and to keep a further safeguard second stage is provided.
At the first stage as the disciplinary authority gets the report and the evidence, he must go through the report of his own and at that stage it is the report alone which he will read and will take a decision whether he will accept such report or not.
If he decides not to accept a report given in favour of the delinquent employee, he/she must record reasons for not agreeing with the enquiry officer and to come to his/her own findings on the basis of evidence available on record.
This decision will of course be tentative and provisional; meaning thereby keeping his/her mind flexible, if situation so arises, he/she may change his mind on receipt of further representation and/or pursuation.
His state of mind should be if not must be, such that he will be amenable to reason and further be prepared to reverse his own finding if he gets something stronger material which he might have omitted to consider from the record.
19.
He thereafter issue further notice together with the report of the enquiry officer and his tentative finding inviting further representation from the employee concerned.
It is possible that at the stage of enquiry he might have been denied his reasonable opportunity of being heard in various ways and for which he had no scope to get remedial measure at that stage, for unlike the judicial proceedings a delinquent has no opportunity to get any interlocutory relief.
He can question everything at the final stage before the disciplinary authority.
It is true of course, that a delinquent may approach Court but that is in a very limited sphere as in the public law field unless an employee is a State with the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India a litigant cannot approach the Writ Court.
20.
On receipt of representation the disciplinary authority will then examine everything in the light of the questions and representation made by the delinquent fairly and objectively.
He must address all the points raised by the delinquent and while negativing his point he must disclose the reasons as to why his point of views is rejected.
This must be spelt out in the order itself in express terms not by necessary implication.
The principle of natural justice has got many a facets one of which is that the employee must be informed of the reasons as to why his representation is rejected.
21.
In this case, I do not find second stage of considering the petitioner's representation, did even arise, simply because no representation was invited.
Mr. Aloke Ghosh learned Advocate has tried to cover the situation contending that the writ petitioner could have made representation as he has received a copy of the enquiry report otherwise.
I am unable to accept this contention as question of making representation only arise when there is a lawful invitation for making the same.
One cannot straightway make a representation against any action unless he is asked lawfully.
On this ground I do not hesitate to set aside the impugned order of punishment.
22.
In course of hearing of this matter another order of punishment was issued by the subsequent Commissioner.
I wonder how this can be done when final order was passed previously.
Final order cannot be passed by the same authority twice over again.
I have examined the second order of punishment of the subsequent Commissioner.
I find it is passed in such a arbitrary and closed mind that it is worse than the first one.
23.
Mr. Aloke Ghosh has cited several decisions on this point viz. 2001 (6) SCC 392 and 1998 (4) SCC 315 and the same are wholly inapplicable on the facts and circumstances of this case.
In these cases there was no procedure for issuance of second show cause notice meaning thereby this procedural safeguard was not provided in the Service Rules in the cases laid before the Apex Court.
In this case, the procedural safeguard has been prescribed with the issuance of second show cause notice by the Rules.
24.
Mr. Aloke Ghose has taken point of alternative remedy as the statute provides for appeal against the order of punishment.
I do not think it is a case where the appeal should be efficacious remedy.
It is settled position of law, where there is allegation of breach of principle of natural justice the Writ Court will not shut its larger doors on the face of the litigants because of some other smaller ones are available to have an access to the justice delivery system.
As such this contention is overruled.
25.
I would have remanded this matter to the disciplinary authority to take a fresh decision on receipt of the representation of the writ petition with the issuance of second show cause notice as by this time two previous Commissioners have gone away and new incumbent has taken chair but I will not do so because the report of the Enquiry Officer itself is questioned within the parameter governing exercise of jurisdiction in the public law field.
In this context I feel it expedient to examine the report of the Enquiry Officer.
Mr. Aloke Ghosh has rightly reminded me of the limitation in examining the report in the public law field.
For this, he has cited the decisions as quoted earlier by me.
At the same time there are large number of decisions where it is said that if the report of the Enquiry Officer is based on no evidence and further where the delinquent is proceeded with one set of charges and is found guilty of committing misconduct of different set of charges then Writ Court will rather shall as matter of duty, examine this aspect.
Upon plain looking at the report of the enquiry officer I find that he has found the petitioner guilty of committing misconduct of misappropriation of some medicines, whereas the charges levelled against him is for theft of medicines.
The terminology of theft and misappropriation have not been defined specifically in the service conduct rules of the petitioner or elsewhere except in Indian Penal Code as far as theft is concerned.
Therefore, the expression of word theft as mentioned in the Indian Penal Code is to be reproduced as I find the mind-set of the employer was to charge the petitioner with misconduct of theft as it is mentioned therein.
Section 378 of IPC provides: "Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession, of any person without person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft."
26.
In the Indian Penal Code there is no definition of misappropriation.
Therefore, meaning given in the dictionary should be taken note of.
Misappropriation is defined in the Black Law's Dictionary (6th Edition).
The word `misappropriation' is meant as follows :  "The unauthorized, improper or unlawful use of funds or other property for the purpose other than that of which intended."
Therefore, it is clear from the aforesaid meaning and expression of the two words the same are not synonymous rather it contemplates two different acts and misdeeds.
27.
Logically, therefore, the Enquiry Officer has not enquired into the alleged misconduct of theft for which he was appointed, rather he has proceeded and further reported some other alleged misconduct for which he was not asked to enquire.
He has no jurisdiction to see beyond what he is asked as he gets authority in terms of his appointment to enquire into the charges levelled against him in the chargesheet and he cannot travel beyond the same.
The Enquiry Officer is not the disciplinary authority.
So, he cannot do whatever he likes.
In this process he has acted as an agent of disciplinary authority forgetting his independent role.
Moreover, from the report of the enquiry, I find Enquiry Officer has found him guilty of committing misappropriation without having relevant documents being Exhibits A, B, and C. The writ petitioner has taken specific point that these exhibits were neither produced before the Enquiry Officer nor offered to be inspected and/or considered by the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer though being a party to this writ petition, has not filed any affidavit denying his allegations.
Affidavit-inopposition filed by the respondent Corporation rather shows that it is specifically admitted that those exhibits were not looked into, but added that the same did not vitiate the proceedings.
I fail to understand how the findings of misappropriation can be arrived at without the Patients Register and Medicine Register for the said record detailed accounts of drawal of medicine from the store and use and dispensation of the same to the patients.
This fact cannot be proved by oral evidence.
It can only be done by the documentary evidence alone not otherwise.
28.
As such the findings of the Enquiry Officer of misappropriation is based on no evidence and more so the same was arrived at in gross violation of principle of natural justice.
Now, I have to come to the question of alleged misconduct of theft as petitioner was charged.
The allegation, no doubt, is very serious for any employee of a responsible position, here is a doctor.
In this case how misconduct of theft can be levelled on the given fact is not comprehended by me.
The petitioner being the Medical Officer is lawful custodian of stocks of medicine.
So, if he has brought out medicine from his own custody and takes in his bag how the theft can be said to have been committed.
In the Service Rules there is no provision mentioned that all the time medicines are to be kept in almirah in office.
It is not unusual for a doctor to keep some medicine with him to meet emergent situation.
All that he has to do is to properly account for use and utilization of the medicines taken out from store.
This accounting can only be checked and verified from the relevant Registers.
Unfortunately the same are not produced before the Enquiry Officer through he made the same exhibits, he did not examine nor kept in his custody.
29.
On the facts and circumstances as discussed above, I feel that the petitioner cannot even be charged with the misconduct of theft.
So this charge fails.
The petitioner was unnecessarily proceeded with this charge.
The second charge levelled against the petitioner, in my view, is too minor to visit with extreme punishment.
The Enquiry Officer found him that on the particular date he left early medical unit.
I do not find any defect nor infirmity in the same.
But this could be dealt with by the disciplinary authority with lesser punishment and not with the order of dismissal as this course of action is disproportionate to alleged misconduct for it is not the charge of regular or habitual lapses.
The two other charges relating to keeping some part of the pages of the Patients Register blank are also not substantiated as the registers themselves were not produced before the enquiry officer.
30.
Accordingly, I hold that the order of punishment on the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer and the charge of theft is not sustainable in law.
So, the same are set aside.
The petitioner shall get full benefits with reinstatement, if he has retired then notionally.
In view of these findings the second writ petition also succeeds as I do not find any difficulty to give the petitioner same benefit of career advancement scheme which has been available to other employees, if he has completed the requisite years of services.
The petitioner is entitled to get the costs of both the applications and the same is assessed at Rs. 50001/- to be paid by the respondent to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.