Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - The petitioner was a Government employee.
While in service, an official accommodation was given to the petitioner for his residence in a Government quarter at Block HQ of Durgapur Faridpur at Sagarbhanga B.D.O.
Colony, Durgapur-11.
2.
Admittedly the petitioner retired from service on superannuation with effect from 31st August 2003.
3.
After his retirement, the petitioner submitted a representation before the concerned authority for allowing him to stay in the quarter.
The said representation was submitted by the petitioner on 30th September 2003.
The petitioner also through his Advocate's later dated 5th October 2004 gave a proposal to the Government for sale of the said quarter to him at a reasonable price.
4.
In spite of receiving of the said representation as well as the proposal for purchase, as aforesaid, the concerned authorities did not take any step for consideration of the petitioner's said representation and/or the proposal for purchase.
On the contrary, keeping those representation and/or the proposal for purchase unattended, the concerned Block Development Officer sent a notice under Memo No. 811 dated 5th November 2004 to the petitioner, whereby the petitioner was directed to vacate the quarter within seven days from the date of receipt of the said notice.
5.
Immediately thereafter, the petitioner has moved this writ petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus for commanding the respondents to give ownership of the flat in question to the petitioner after receiving nominal consideration money upon setting aside the impugned orders, whereby the petitioner was directed to vacate the said quarter.
Certain other incidental reliefs have also been prayed for in the said writ petition.
6.
It is contended by the petitioner that due to shifting of Durgapur Faridpur Block from Sagarbhanga area to Laudah following amalgamation of Sagarbhanga area with the Durgapur Municipal Corporation, the said quarters at Sagarbhanga are no longer required to be retained by the Government for-use of the same as official accommodation for its employees.
7.
The petitioner further contended that due to lack of repairs, the said flats are now in dilapidated condition.
Since the Government does not require those flats for its use any more, the petitioner submitted the said proposal for purchase of the said quarter allotted to him while in service, so that the petitioner can reside therein after making it habitable by causing necessary repairs in the said quarter.
8.
The petitioner further claimed that the petitioner is homeless and he has no other property for his residence.
Under these circumstances the petitioner moved this writ petition challenging the impugned notice, whereby the petitioner was called upon to vacate the said quarter pending consideration of the petitioner's proposal for purchase of the said flat by the Government.
9.
It appears from the record that when this application was moved initially on 9th November 2004 certain interim orders were passed by this Court on the basis of the submission made by way of concession by the learned Advocate for the State respondent to the effect that the State Government had taken a policy to sell out the Government flats, as the Government was not in a position to maintain those quarters properly in view of the fact that the costs for maintenance of the quarter is higher than its rental.
10.
By taking note of such submission, this Court passed an interim order directing the Chief Secretary of Government of West Bengal to hear the petitioner and other interested parties, as would be considered by him fit and proper and to take a decision on the prayer of the petitioner regarding his proposal for purchase of the said quarter from the State Government within two months from the date of communication of the order.
The concerned authority was also directed to pass a reasoned decision and to communicate the same to the petitioner within two weeks from the date of taking such decision.
11.
The respondents were also directed not to disturb the possession of the petitioner in respect of the quarter in question till four weeks from the date of communication of the decision by the Chief Secretary subject to acceptance of the risk factor of living therein by the petitioner himself.
The Chief Secretary was also directed to consider the issue in the angle of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, whereby right to shelter now has become emanated as fundamental right in terms of the judgment of the Apex Court passed in the case of M/s Shantistar Builders v. Narayan Khimlal Totame, reported in AIR 1990 SC 630.
The point that the petitioner has no other alternative residence to reside was also required to be taken into consideration by the said Chief Secretary from the said aforesaid constitutional angle.
12.
Pursuant to the said interim order passed by this Court, the Chief Secretary of the State of West Bengal after hearing the petitioner considered the petitioner's proposal for purchase of the said quarter in the light of the observation made by this Court in the interim order dated 9th November 2004, as aforesaid.
The decision taken by the Chief Secretary to the State of West Bengal has also been communicated to the petitioner along with his letter dated 18th February 2005 being annexure `P-3' to the application for extension of interim order filed by the petitioner herein.
13.
It is indicated in the said order that the Panchayat and Rural Development Department has not taken any policy decision to sell out the said flat or to dispose of the property.
On the contrary, the department has incurred an amount of Rs. 3, 57,168/- for repairing of the flats.
It is also indicated therein that the State Government in no case has taken a policy decision to sell out the Government accommodation constructed exclusively for the purpose of residence of the Government employees.
It further appears from the said order that such quarters are located in remote areas, where serving Government employees find it difficult to arrange suitable accommodation on their own.
It is categorically stated therein that there is no contemplation of the Government in the Panchayat and Rural Development to dispose of the property by sale or otherwise.
14.
Hence, the Government refused to accept the proposal for purchase by the petitioner.
Furthermore, since there is no provision to offer accommodation to any pensioner in any Government accommodation, the petitioner was called upon to vacate the flat after four weeks from the date of the order.
15.
Just on the verge of the expiry of the term of the interim order passed by this Court, the petitioner has taken out an application for extension of the said interim order on the ground that the consideration which was made by the Chief Secretary to the State of West Bengal was not in the light of the observation made in the interim order passed by this Court.
16.
Heard the Learned Advocates of the parties considered the materials on record.
17.
Admittedly, the Government accommodation was given to the petitioner for his residence while he was in service.
It is also an admitted fact that the petitioner retired from service on superannuation with effect from 31st August 2003.
18.
A Government employee can retain his quarter during the continuation of his service.
After his retirement, the allotees of such Government quarter has no right to retain the said quarter in his possession.
If a Government employee even after his retirement is allowed to retain the Government quarter in his possession, no accommodation can be provided to his successor, as a result of which the successor will be in difficulty to accommodate himself in his place of work which is situated in a remote village where other accommodation is very scarce.
19.
Accordingly, the retired Government employee cannot be encouraged to retain such official quarters in his possession after his retirement.
20.
It appears from the order passed by the Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal that the Government has never decided to sell and/or dispose of the said flats.
Rather, the Government has spent a lot of money towards its repair.
When there is no proposal for sale and/or disposal of the said quarters from the side of the Government, the petitioner being a retired employee of the Government cannot compel the Government to sell the quarter to him which was allotted to him while he was in service.
If the Government who is the owner of the said flats does not accept the petitioner's proposal to sell the flat to him, the Court also cannot compel the Government to sell the said quarter to the petitioner simply because of the fact that the petitioner is homeless  21.
Since the petitioner's proposal for purchase of the.
said flat has not been accepted by the State Government, the said proposal did not mature into a contract between the parties.
Accordingly, this Court is helpless to issue any direction upon the State Government to sell the said quarter to the petitioner, as prayed for in the writ petition.
22.
On overall consideration of materials on record, it appears to this Court that the petitioner has no legally enforceable right, which can be enforced by this Court by issuance of a writ of mandamus, as prayed for in this writ petition.
23.
Accordingly, this Court finds that this writ petition does not deserve any merit for consideration.
Thus, the writ petition stands rejected.
24.
The petitioner is directed to vacate the said quarter and to give vacant and peaceful possession thereof to the authority concerned positively within four weeks from date.
The petitioner is directed to pay the damages for such wrongful use and occupation of the said quarter for the period of his overstay, at the rate to be calculated by the authority concerned in this regard.
25.
This writ petition thus stands dismissed without however any order as to costs.
26.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the parties, as expeditiously as possible, upon compliance with the necessary formalities in this regard.
Petition dismissed.