SS Nijjar, J - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the award dated 2112003 (Annexure P-1) and the order of rumination dated 321983 passed by the Director, Health Services Punjab (respondent No. 2).
The petitioner also prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing respondents No. 2 and 3 to reinstate her in service and to regularise her services.
2.
The petitioner claims that she was appointed as Sweeper, Class IV employee in the Employees State Insurance Hospital Phagwara vide appointment latter No. 381 dated 251992 for a period of 89 days upto July 31, 1992.
Her services were extended twice thereafter vide orders No. 839 dated 381992 and No. 1421 continue to work till February 2, 1993.
Her services were illegally and abruptly terminated by Sr. Medical Officer, Incharge, Local ESIM Hospital, Phagwara (respondent No. 3), without giving any notice and without holding any enquiry.
She, therefore, claims to have worked for a total period of 266 days from 451992 to 321993.
She served a demand notice and the industrial dispute was referred sunder Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court in the following terms :-  Whether the termination the services of Smt. Rita Thapar, workman is justified and in order an if not to what relief is she entitled ?
Before the Labour Court, parties led their evidence.
The Labour Court framed the following issues :- "I.
Whether the termination of services of the workman is justified and in order ?
2.
Relief."
3.
On Issue No. 1, the Labour Court has held that it was not necessary for the respondents to comply with Section 27-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as the case of the Management is covered within the exception of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
4.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It is submitted that the award of the Labour Court does not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record.
The petitioner was only appointed as daily paid Safai Sewak for 89 days on contract basis and not as a Class IV employee.
No notice for termination was required as per terms of contract of appointment.
Furthermore, the case of the petitioner was considered for regularisation as she had appeared before the Selection Board at the Office of Civil Surgeon, Kapurthala on 30121993.
She was, however, not selected for regular appointment.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
It is not disputed before us, nor was it disputed before the Labour Court that the petitioner had completed 266 working days within a calendar year prior to the date on which her services had been terminated.
It is also not disputed that Section 5-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was not complied with.
It is also not disputed that her services had been terminated without complying with the rules of natural justice.
No departmental enquiry was held against her.
In fact, the Labour Court in its award has observed as follows :  "6.......
However, keeping in view the fact that for the post of Sweepers no specific qualification is required and the work of the present workman was found satisfactory, it is desirable that in case of future vacancy for the post of Sweeper, the case of the workman should be considered sympathetically if she applies for the same.
This issue is accordingly decided in favour of the respondent and against the workman."
The aforesaid observations make it abundantly clear that her services were not even terminated on the ground that her work was unsatisfactory.
Giving of repeated appointments for 89 days has been held to be unfair labour practice on a number of occasions by this Court.
It has been held that giving of such repeated appointments for 89 days would tend to show that the intention of the Management is to prevent the workman from completing 240 working days.
This is done by the Management to deny the workman the protection of the Industrial Disputes Act.
We find support for this view of ours from the judgment rendered by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Virendra Chawla v. The Chandigarh Administration and another, 1984(1) SLR 453 and the judgment of the learned Single Judge of this Court rendered in the case of The Ferozepur Central Cooperative Bank Ltd Ferozepur v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1985(2) SLR 437.
In view of the law laid down in the aforesaid judgments, we have no hesitation in holding that the services of the petitioner had been illegally terminated.
The label of contract appointment cannot be permitted to be so misused as to deny the protection of beneficent labour legislaton to the poor Class IV employee.
In our opinion, the Labour Court was unduly influenced by the fact that the petitioner had been subsequently interviewed for regular appointment and she had failed to get selected.
The Labour Court in its award observed that no specific qualifications are required for the post of Sweeper.
It has also been observed that the work of the petitioner was satisfactory.
The Labour Court even expressed the desire that in case of future vacancy, her case be considered sympathetically, if she applies for the same.
The petitioner had already applied and her claim had been rejected on 31121993.
At that time, she had been out of job for 10 months since her services had been illegally terminated on 321993.
We are unable to understand as to how the respondents would show sympathy to the petitioner when her claim for fresh selection had already been rejected by them.
We are of the considered opinion that the services of the petitioner were illegally terminated.
6.
In view of the above, we set aside the award dated 2112003 (Annexure P-1) and the order of termination dated 321993 passed by the Director, Health Services, Punjab (respondent No. 2) and direct that she be reinstated into service.
In normal circumstances, the petitioner would be entitled to full back-wages from the date her services had been illegally terminated.
However, the petitioner had not even made a statement that she has not been gainfully employed throughout the period since her services were illegally terminated.
In such circumstances, we hold that the petitioner shall not be entitled to any arrears of backwages.
She will, however, be entitled to count the period between 321993 till she is reinstated as period spent on duty for all other consequential benefits such as notional fixation of pay, seniority and as part of the qualifying period of retiral benefits.
No costs.
Disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.