JS Narang, J - The petitioner was posted as Sub-Divisional Officer in the Department of Irrigation, Government of Punjab at Ladda Sub Division, District Sangrur.
He was responsible for the affairs of the Sub Division under his control.
The officer above him in the hierarchy was the Executive Engineer, namely Sohan Lal Sidhu.
This officer was in fact regularly posted as Executive Engineer of Mansa Division but was holding additional charge of Sangrur Division.
An amount of Rs. 86,02,484/- had been withdrawn from the treasury for making payment to the contractor as also incurring other miscellaneous expenditures.
The amount so withdrawn was kept in the chest of the office.
This fact was also in the knowledge of the Executive Engineer controlling the Division.
Allegedly, the petitioner was not on duty on 3152004, because of some personal problems.
It has been further alleged that the Executive Engineer withdrew the money from the chest and filed a complaint against the petitioner with the Vigilance Bureau.
Resultantly, an FIR dated June 9, 2004, was registered against the petitioner.
He was placed under suspension on June 17, 2004, with effect from 3152004.
It is also the case of the petitioner that he had not been paid subsistence allowance for over a year.
However, the same has been paid recently.
The petitioner surrendered before the Court on 22122004 and on that date he was admitted to bail by the Court.
The petitioner was charged under the Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code for embezzlement of Rs. 96,04,984/-.
2.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted departmentally on 2332004, and was required to submit the reply to the charges contained therein.
It has been alleged that the petitioner requested that the disciplinary proceedings be not proceeded with in view of the matter pending before the criminal Court.
The request was rejected vide order dated May 27, 2005, again a representation date June 12, 2005, was made by the petitioner making averments that the simultaneous progress in both the proceedings would cause serious prejudice to his right of defence.
However, no relief in this regard has been granted.
An Inquiry Officer has been appointed vide order dated July 21, 2005.
3.
The petitioner has filed the present petition invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order dated May 27, 2005, copy Annexure P-5, vide which the request of the petitioner for staying the departmental proceedings has been rejected as also for quashing the charge-sheet dated October 7, 2004, copy Annexure P-3.
Further, issuance of a writ of mandamus has been prayed for directing the respondents to debar the enquiry against the petitioner in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in re : Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd, 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC) : 1999(2) SLR 338, a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in re : Sukhjit Singh Khaira v. State of Punjab and others, 2005(1) SCT 50 (P&H) : 2005(1) RSJ 382.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at length and have also perused the paper-book as also the orders impugned before us.
5.
We are of the considered opinion that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief as claimed.
The departmental proceedings and criminal proceedings are absolutely separate and distinct.
It has been indicated in the order dated May 27, 2005, impugned before us that under the departmental rules, the criminal case and the departmental proceedings are two different aspects and can run concurrently.
Resultantly, the request for staying the departmental proceedings has been declined.
6.
It has been categorically observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that departmental proceedings and proceedings under a criminal case can proceed simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though separately.
However, if the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case is of a grave nature, which involves complicated questions of law and fact, in such cases it would be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal case.
Whether the nature of the charge in a criminal case is "grave", "complicated" and is a question of fact and law, would depend upon the nature of the offence, the nature of the case launched against the delinquent official on the basis of the evidence and material collected against him during investigation or reflected in the charge-sheet.
As a matter of rule or as a matter of precedent, the departmental proceedings should not be stayed so as to unduly delay such proceedings.
It has been further held that in case it is found that the proceedings in the criminal case are being unduly delayed, the departmental proceedings even if they have been stayed on account of pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to be concluded at an early date.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to spell out the gravity of the charge before the criminal Court which would involve complicated questions of law and fact, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the relief claimed.
In Sukhjit Singh Khaira's case, the facts were entirely different.
There was no statutory bar that the two proceedings could not go on simultaneously and that the proceedings before the disciplinary authority already stood concluded and punishment had been imposed upon the basis of the enquiry itself.
The acquittal of the appellant, earned later on from the criminal Court had no affect whatsoever upon the conclusions arrived at in the enquiry resulting into the punishment.
The case law cited above is not at all applicable to the facts of this case.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.