MM Kumar, J - On 582005, this Court has passed the following order :  "The grievance made by the petitioner in the instant petition filed under Sections 10 and 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 is that the directions issued by the Division Bench of this Court on 1031997 and 19121997 while disposing of CWP No. 487 of 1997 have not been complied with.
It would be apposite to observe that during the course of discussion, the Division Bench has in categorical terms concluded that the only source of recruitment prescribed in the Haryana Irrigation Department Signallers (Group `C') Rules, 1985 (for brevity the `1985 Rules') is by way of direct recruitment.
The Division Bench did not appreciate the action of the departmental authorities which had made ad hoc arrangement by promoting departmental employees.
In the meanwhile, the process of regular recruitment by way of direct appointment had been initiated by the departmental authorities.
It is in this context that the Division Bench issued followed detailed directions : "... it would be in the larger public interest to direct the Subordinate Services Selection Board to make regular recruitment against all the existing regular posts of Apprentice Signallers with a further direction to the competent authority to make regular appointments on the recommendations of the Subordinate Service Selection Board.
Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of with the following directions : (i) The Irrigation Department should send a requisition within one month from today to the Subordinate Services Selection Board indicating the availability of the exact number of the posts of Apprentice Signallers which are required to be filled by the regular selection.
(ii) Within one month of the receipt of the requisition, the Subordinate Services Selection Board should advertise/publish all the posts.
(iii) Within three months of the receipt of the applications, the Board shall select suitable candidates and forward the list of selected candidates to the competent authority.
(iv) Within one month of the receipt of the select list, the competent authority shall, after character verification etc. appoint the suitable candidates.
(v) All those, who were given ad hoc appointments prior to the filing of the writ petition and who may have continued in service in that capacity till the availability of regularly selected persons must necessarily be replaced by regularly selected persons.
Such ad hoc appointees shall not be entitled to be heard and they shall have no right to continue in service in preference to regularly selected persons.
(vi) The official respondents are restrained from making any other ad hoc appointment till the Subordinate Services Selection Board sends the list of selected candidates."
(emphasis added) 2.
The petitioner again filed a writ petition namely CWP No. 18238 of 1999 wherein it was observed by another Division Bench that the State Government has already initiated the process of reversion/termination of persons who were appointed as Signallers in violation of Rule 9(c) of the 1985 Rules.
The aforementioned action was considered apparently as compliance with the directions issued by the Division Bench of this Court on 1031997 and 19121997.
The petition was dismissed as infructuous because action in terms of the directions earlier issued by the Division Bench in 1997 was already in progress.
It was still directed by the Division Bench that the process of implementation of the directions issued by the earlier Division Bench while disposing of CWP No. 487 of 1997 was to be carried in letter and spirit by the respondents expeditiously but not later than six months from the date certified copy of the order was made available.
The order was passed on 272002.
3.
The respondents passed orders of reversion of some of those who were promoted.
Those orders were challenged on the ground that opportunity of hearing was not granted to them.
Those writ petitions were CWP Nos. 5147 of 2003, 4231 of 2003, 2254 of 2003 and 4885 of 2003.
In those cases, this Court had issued directions ex parte and without issuing notice to State Government that the petitioners were required to be heard before passing the order of their reversion.
The State without raising any objection to those orders or moving any application bringing to the notice of the respective Benches the earlier directions issued by this Court on 19121997 while disposing of CWP No. 487 of 1997 proceeded to comply with the orders and issued show-cause notices to those who were to be reverted.
It is appropriate to mention that in CWP No. 487 of 1997 comprehensive directions were issued after hearing the State of Haryana and other concerned specifically declining the prayer of grant of hearing (as already reproduced above), yet the respondents proceeded to issue show-cause notices to those persons and then passed orders on 9122004.
One copy of the order passed in the case of Inder Singh has been placed on record.
The same is taken on record and is marked "A".
The operative part of such an order in Inder Singh's case read as under :  "In view of the directions in 1997 the department has made regular appointments of 26 Apprentice Signallers as stated in foregoing paras in the year 1997.
It is not out of place to mention here that those persons who have been appointed/promoted as apprentice Signallers have been further regularized by the competent authority in the Irrigation Department.
And now those persons have more than 8 to 15 years regular service and performing their duties efficiently some of the persons have been crossed the age for regular appointment through Subordinate Service Selection Board.
It is also stated that Sh. Inder Singh has earned about 10 years regular service as Apprentice Signaller and Signaller and there is no fault of him for his appointment beyond the rules and otherwise.
It is also admitted Shri Inder Singh Signaller was not informed by the department regarding the appointments of Apprentice Signallers through Subordinate Service Selection Board.
Had he been informed he would have applied for regular selection through Subordinate Service Selection Board as Apprentice Signaller."
(emphasis added) From the perusal of the aforementioned para it is clearly made out that the directions and observations made by two Division Benches of this Court in CWP No. 4871 of 1997 and 18238 of 1999 along with other writ petitions have been deliberately flouted by respondents inasmuch as it was specifically observed that there is no rule in 1985 Rules to make appointment by promotion and all those appointments were in violation of Rule 9(c) of the 1985 Rules.
Rule of law is hallmark of any democratic set up which require that law as laid down by Courts must be respected by all and sundry.
The respondents do not seem to think on those lines and have proceeded to legitimise the claim of those who were appointed in contravention of 1985 Rules as has already been opined by this Court on 19121997 (CWP No. 487 of 1987).
The conduct of the respondents is prima facie contumacious and smacks of mala fide.
It is admitted fact that the State has contested the litigation before two Division Benches.
In my opinion, the State was under legal obligation to move appropriate application before the respective Benches which have passed order requiring the grant of opportunity of hearing bringing to the notice of this Court that already directions have been issued after contest and no opportunity was required to be given.
Be that as it may.
However, the State preferred to adopt its own procedure which probably suited their own style of functioning.
The result is complete circumventing of directions issued by this Court on 19121997 and 272002 by two Division Benches of this Court while disposing of CWP Nos. 4871 of 1997 and 18238 of 1999 along with other writ petitions.
In view of the above, the respondents are directed to be present in person in the Court on the next date of hearing i.e. 29.8.2005 to explain their conduct of circumventing the directions of this Court.
Copy of the order be given dasti on payment of usual charges."
4.
When the matter came up for hearing on 29.8.2005, Shri Pardeep Kumar, Respondent No. 1 was not present.
Accordingly, bailable warrants were issued with one surety of the like amount against him to enable him to appear today i.e. 692005.
However, other two respondents namely Shri JS Ahlawat, respondent No. 2 and Sushil Sarwan, respondent No. 3 have put in appearance and had filed their reply.
Respondent No. 1 on account of non-appearance was found prima facie guilty of civil contempt as envisaged by Section 2(b) of the Act.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and taking into account that respondents have shown sincere regrets and have tendered unconditional apology at the outset I am of the view that lenient view needs to be taken.
It has further been undertaken by respondent No. 2 Shri JS Ahlawat that the vacancy which has been caused by the withdrawal of the offending order dated 17122004 would be advertised and the process of selection shall be completed within a period of four months.
I find that by the afore-mentioned undertaking the contempt has also purged.
Therefore, I accept the unconditional apology offered by the respondents and it is expected them to be careful in future by not repreating the same conduct.
6.
Respondent No. 1 has also shown remorse and has tendered unconditional apology at the outset which is accepted.
In view of the above, nothing remains for adjudication in the instant proceedings.
Rule discharged.
Order accordingly.