Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions being CWP No. 9791 of 2004 and CWP No. 9792 of 2004 as common questions of law and similar facts are involved.
2.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are being borrowed from CWP No. 9791 of 2004.
3.
Sheikh Subhani, respondent No. 1 was appointed as a Civilian Clerk in Golden Arrow Gas Agency at Ferozepur Cantt with effect from April 26, 1984 for a period of three months.
He was originally put on probation.
After the probation period, the case of the petitioner and other persons so appointed were to be reviewed for permanent absorption.
Claiming that after completion of the probation period, he would be deemed to have acquired permanency in view of Part-I, Sr. No. 17(f) of Standard Operating Procedure and also placing reliance upon a judgment of Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 12687 of 2001 (Canteen Management Committee and another v. CAT and another) decided on August 23, 2003.
It was claimed by the aforesaid Sheikh Subhani that he would be deemed to be permanent employee of the management.
On July 3, 1998, he was served with the termination notice.
A civil suit was filed by him.
An interim order was passed by the Civil Court staying the termination.
The civil suit filed by Sheikh Subhani was dismissed on August 30, 2001.
It was held that he had failed to produce any evidence to prove his case.
The learned trial Court did not record any finding on other issues.
After the conclusion of the proceedings in the civil suit, the termination notice dated January 29, 2003 was again issued to Sheikh Subhani.
It was stated in the notice that his services were no longer required with effect from January 30, 2003.
Upon receipt of the aforesaid notice, an original application was filed by Sheikh Subhani before the Central Administrative Tribunal (for short, `the Tribunal').
The claim was made to quash the aforesaid show-cause notice.
It was pleaded that in view of the length of the service, his services could not be terminated.
It was further claimed that persons junior to him were continuing in various other canteens.
4.
The claim made by Sheikh Subhani was contested by the authorities.
It was pleaded that on the conclusion of the proceedings in the civil Court, Sheikh Subhani had no right to continue and no protection was available to him in any manner.
5.
Vide order dated April 27, 2004, the learned Tribunal held that the termination of services of the original applicant was unjustified, illegal and arbitrary and further that the aforesaid original applicant had acquired status of permanent employee as on January 4, 2001.
Accordingly, the termination orders dated January 29, 2003 were set aside.
6.
The aforesaid order dated April 27, 2004 has been impugned by the petitioner through the present petition.
7.
We have heard Shri Mukesh Kaushik, the learned Central Govt.
Standing Counsel appearing for the petitioners and Shri R.S.
Longia, the learned counsel appearing for the private respondent and with their assistance have also gone through the records of the case.
8.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the observations made by the learned Tribunal that the original applicants had acquired permanent status as on January 4, 2001 was totally contrary to the record, inasmuch as, the service of the original applicants have been terminated way back in July 1998 after giving them three months notice.
Thereafter the original applicants have continued to remain in service on account of the interim order passed by the Civil Court.
On that basis, it is maintained that once the civil suit filed by the applicants is dismissed then order of termination dated January 29, 2003 was merely a consequential order of the original order of the termination passed on July 3, 1998.
It has further been stressed that continuance of the original applicants on the strength of the interim orders passed by the civil Court, could not confer upon them status of being permanent employees.
9.
It is not in dispute that the new rules came into operation with effect from January 4, 2001, therefore, it would be relevant to examine the status of the original applicants as on the date.
If the employees had acquired permanency on the aforesaid date i.e. on the date when the new rules came into force, then of course the order of the Tribunal would be absolutely justified but if the aforesaid employees had continued merely on the strength of interim orders passed by the civil Court, then no legal status could be conferred upon the said employee merely because of their continuation.
It is not in dispute that the services of the original applicants had been terminated way back in July 1998 after giving them three months notice.
On the aforesaid orders being passed, the original applicants approached the civil Court by filing civil suits.
An interim order was passed by the civil Court staying their termination.
Thereafter the aforesaid original applicants continued in their employment on the strength of the aforesaid interim orders.
It is well settled that no party can claim a better status merely on the strength of interim directions passed by the Courts.
The rights of the parties are to be seen independent of the interim orders passed by the Court.
It is also not in dispute that the civil suits filed by the original applicants were dismissed.
After having lost in the civil Court, the employees could not be heard to claim that because of the passing of the interim order they had acquired any better status.
10.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we allow the present writ petition and quash the orders dated April 27, 2004 (Annexure P-3) passed by the learned Tribunal.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.