SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 15847-CAT and 16723-CAT of 2004 as the questions of law involved in both the writ petitions are same.
2.
CWP No. 15847-CAT/2004 has been filed by Union of India and CWP No. 16723- CAT of 2004 has been filed by Union Public Service Commission.
The petitioners have filed the writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the order dated 1592004 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh in OA No. 617-PB of 2004.
3.
The factual position is not controverted.
Initially Sukhmohinder Singh, who is respondent No. 1 in CWP No. 15847-CAT/2004 and respondent No. 5 in CWP No. 16723-CAT/2004, joined the Punjab Police as Assistant Sub-Inspector in the year 1968.
He was promoted as Sub Inspector on 2681972 and as Inspector on 30.8.1981.
He was subsequently promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police in the State of Punjab on 27.1.1988.
He was confirmed on the aforesaid post on 2621990.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Superintendent of Police in his own rank in December, 1991 and was promoted on ad hoc basis in 1994.
He was eligible to be considered for promotion to the Indian Police Service in the category of confirmed State Police Officer having the designation of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
By letter dated 2432001, in accordance with the relevant rules, the Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs determined the year-wise vacancies for the years 1999, 2000 and 2001 as 4, 3 and nil respectively.
The Selection Committee meeting for preparation of the year-wise list for the year 1999-2000 for promotion of the State Police Officers to IPS Cadre of Punjab was held on 2512002.
A select list had been prepared for the year 1999 and the name of respondent-Sukhmohinder Singh was included at Sr. No. 3 thereof.
He was also included in the select list for the year 2000.
His name was at Sr. No. 1 against the four vacancies for the year 1999 and three vacancies for the year 2000.
Overall assessment of Sukhmohinder Singh was shown as "Very Good."
However, at the time of the meeting, the State Government informed the Select Committee that criminal proceedings were pending against Sukhmohinder Singh.
At that time, Sukhmohinder Singh was posted as Assistant Inspector General of Police.
He had already been issued the necessary integrity certificate.
4.
In the year 1994 Criminal Case-RC2(S)/1994 had been registered at the instance of CBI, under Sections 120-B, 342 and 365 of the IPC, but without mentioning the name of any particular Officer.
On the basis of investigation, names of SS Saini, the then SSP, Ludhiana, Sukhmohidner Singh and two Inspectors of Police were included.
The challan was presented in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate on 172000.
The case was remitted to the Sessions Judge who in turn, assigned the case to the Additional District and Sessions Judge.
Till the filing of the OA on 288200, no charge had been framed against respondent No. 1 in the aforesaid Criminal Case.
On the basis of the aforesaid Criminal case, the entry of Sukhmohinder Singh in the select list was made provisional.
Sukhmohinder Singh challenged the aforesaid action of the petitioners by filing the amended OA No. 617/PB/2004.
Against the aforesaid action of the petitioners, Sukhmohinder Singh filed a representation to the Government of India on 29112002.
This representation was filed by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the decision was communicated to Sukhmohinder Singh on 1332002.
He also made a detailed representation to the Chief Minister, Punjab through proper channel on 562004, but no decision had been taken.
He was due to retire on 3092004.
He, therefore, filed the amended OA No. 617/PB/2004 on 2282004 claiming a direction to the respondents to consider his claim without reference to the pendency of the criminal case and for appointment to IPS on the basis of his name having been included in the Punjab Police Service Officer for the year 1999-2000.
A detailed written statement was filed by the petitioners.
After considering the pleadings and the legal submissions of the counsel for the parties, the Tribunal has held that Sukhmohinder Singh be given benefit of being placed in the select panel of the year 1999-2000 with all consequential benefits against the vacancies available for those years, without taking into consideration the pendency of the criminal case against him which was registered on 1841992.
The Tribunal has further held that such promotion to IPS shall remain subject to conclusion of the criminal case and the promotion made on provisional basis can be cancelled in case he is convicted in the case.
The petitioners have also been given opportunity to take back the benefits earned by Sukhmohinder Singh on account of additional promotion to IPS.
The petitioners were given liberty to take an undertaking in writing from Sukhmohidner Singh for return of all such financial benefits, if any, in case of cancellation of his promotion in view of the orders of the Tribunal.
The order of the Tribunal was passed on 1592004.
Sukhmohinder Singh was due to retire on 3092004.
The petitioners were, therefore, directed to issue the necessary Notification within a reasonable period which should not exceed 30 days.
It is this order and direction which are sought to be challenged by the Union of India and Union Public Service Commission.
5.
Mrs. Days Chaudhary, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in CWP No. 15847-CAT/2004 submits that the name of Sukhmohinder Singh had been made provisional reference to Regulations 5(4) and 5(5).
Learned counsel further submits that the name of Sukhmohinder Singh was included in the select list at Sr. No. 1.
His name had been included in the list provisionally subject to his clearance in the criminal proceedings pending against him.
The recommendations of the Select Committee dated 2512002 were approved by the Union Public Service Commission on 442002.
Thereafter, appointments of all the Officers, included in the select lists of 1999 and 2000 unconditionally were made vide Government of India Notification dated 942002.
In the Notification it was clearly mentioned that in terms of Regulation 7(4) of the 1955 Regulation, the validity period of select list of 1999-2000 was 60 days from the date of their approval by the UPSC i.e. 60 days from 442000.
Since by that time, recommendation of Sukhmohinder Singh was not made unconditional by the UPSC during the validity period of the select list, he could not be appointed to the IPS.
Learned counsel further submits that there is no provision under the 1955 Regulations for appointment of a person who is only provisionally included in the select list.
For this proposition, learned counsel made a reference to Regulation 9(1).
Learned counsel further submits that the Tribunal has wrongly relied on the order issued by the Government of India contained in OM No. 22011/4/91-stt.
(A) dated 14.9.92.
The aforesaid Notification has been issued under Central Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
Under Rule 3 of the aforesaid Rules, it is categorically provided that the provisions of the rule shall not apply to any member of the All India Services.
Learned counsel also tried to distinguish the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Chaman Lal Goyal, 1995(2) SCT 343 (SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 18, as, according to the learned counsel, the principle laid down in that judgment deals with departmental enquiry proceedings and that too, in the State of Punjab.
In any event, she submitted that the directions issued by the Tribunal could not have been issued in the absence of the affected persons who would have been appointed to the IPS Cadre as per the result of the recommendation of the UPSC dated 442004.
6.
Mr. Ajay Lamba, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in CWP No. 16723-CAT/2004 submits that the select list lapsed on 31122002 under Regulation 7(4).
After that, the list could not have been challenged.
The OA was filed on 1972004 and was decided on 1592004.
According to the learned counsel, the action of the UPSC in making the selection of Sukhmohinder Singh as provisional was in accordance with the Ist Proviso to Regulation 5(5).
The charge-sheet had already been drawn and filed in the Court of competent jurisdiction on 172000.
Name of Sukhmohinder Singh could only be made conditional by the UPSC if the State Government had forwarded the proposal to that effect in terms of Second Proviso to Regulation 7(4).
This was also not done within the time stipulated in the Regulation.
In view of the above, the OA itself was not maintainable.
Learned counsel also submits that there is no provision under the 1955 Regulations for appointment of an officer against whom criminal proceedings are still pending.
The order of the Tribunal is clearly contrary to regulation 5(5) of the 1955 Regulations.
Learned counsel also submits that such an appointment would not only be contrary to the Regulations, but it would also be against public interest and public policy.
Learned counsel further submits that equity had no rule to play in the circumstances of this case and the Tribunal has wrongly granted the relief terming it as equitable.
Learned counsel also emphasised that the ratio of the law laid down in Chaman Lal Goyal's case (supra) would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
7.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel appearing for the private respondent (Sukhmohinder Singh), however, submits that the Tribunal had not committed any error of law or jurisdiction.
It is a well known principle of law that criminal proceedings are only said to be commenced when the charges are framed by the Criminal Court.
In departmental proceedings, the same is said to have commenced when the charge-sheet is served.
He submits that the name of Sukhmohinder Singh was not even mentioned in the FIR.
The police report was produced in the Court on 172000.
Even till now, no charge has been framed.
He relies on Proviso to Regulation 7(3) of 1955 Regulations.
Since the charge has not been framed till date, the petitioners had no jurisdiction to treat the inclusion of the name of Sukhmohinder Singh in the select list as provisional.
Learned counsel relies on Union of India etc. etc. v. KV Jankiraman etc. etc., 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : 1991(5) SLR 602, in support of the submission that criminal proceedings are only said to be initiated when the charges are framed by the Court of competent jurisdiction.
On the date when the claim of Sukhmohinder Singh was considered for inclusion in the select list, no progress had been made in the criminal case at all.
Learned counsel also relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in CWP No. 20187 of 2001 (Abdul Razzak v. State of Haryana and another decided on 9122004).
Juniors to Sukhmohinder Singh having been appointed to IPS w.e.f.
1189 and w.e.f.
112000, Sukhmohinder Singh, according to the learned counsel, was clearly entitled to the same relief.
Learned counsel further submits that the Tribunal has correctly relied on the ratio of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal Goyal's case (supra).
Lastly, it is submitted by the learned counsel that the present writ petitions are an abuse of the process of the Court as the Tribunal has already protected the interest of the petitioners in that they have been given liberty to cancel any or all of the benefits which have been given to Sukhmohinder Singh in case he is convicted in the aforesaid criminal case.
8.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
For the better appreciation of the submissions, it would be necessary to reproduce the relevant provisions of the 1955 Regulations as under :-  "5.
Preparation of a list of Suitable Officers :- xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx" 5(5) The list shall be prepared by including the required number of names first from amongst the officers finally classified as "Outstanding" then from amongst those similarly classified as "Very Good" and thereafter from amongst those similarly classified as "Good" and the order of names inter se within each category shall be in the order of their seniority in the State Police Service : Provided that the name of an officer so included in the list shall be treated as provisional if the State Government withholds the integrity certificate in respect of such an officer or any proceedings, departmental or criminal, are pending against him or anything adverse against him which renders him unsuitable for appointment to the service has come to the notice of the State Government : Provided further while preparing yearwise select list for more than one year pursuant to the 2nd proviso to sub-regulation (1), the officer included provisionally in any the select list so prepared shall be considered for inclusion on the select list of subsequent year in addition to the normal consideration zone and in case he is found fit for inclusion in the suitability list for that year on a provisional basis such inclusion shall be in addition to the normal size of the select list determined by the Central Government for such year.
EXPLANATION I : The proceedings shall be treated as pending only if a charge- sheet has actually been issued to the Officer or filed in a Court as the case may be.
EXPLANATION II : The adverse thing which came to the notice of the State Government rendering him unsuitable for appointment to the service shall be treated as having come to the notice of the State only if the details of the same have been communicated to the Central Government and the Central Government is satisfied that the details furnished by the State Government have a bearing on the suitability of the officer and investigation thereof is essential.
7.
Select List : xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx" 7(4) The select list shall remain in force till the 31st day of December of the year in which the meeting of the Selection Committee was held with a view to prepare the list under sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 5 or upto 60 days from the date of approval of the Select List by the Commission under sub- regulation (1) or as the case may be finally approved under sub- regulation (2) whichever is later : Provided that where the select list is prepared for more than one year pursuant to the second proviso to sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 5, the Select Lists shall remain in force till the 31st day of December of the year in which the meeting was held to prepare such lists or upto 60 days from the date of approval of the Select Lists by the Commission under this regulation, whichever is later : Provided that where the State Government has forwarded the proposal to declare a provisionally included officer in the select list as "Unconditional" to the Commisison during the period when the Select List was in force, the Commission shall decide the matter within a period of ninety days or before the date of meeting of the next Selection Committee, whichever is earlier and if the Commission declares the inclusion of the provisionally included officer in the Select List as unconditional and final, the appointment of the concerned officer shall be considered by the Central Government under Regulation 9 and such appointment shall not be invalid merely for the reason that it was made after the Select List ceased to be in force.
9.
Appointments to the Service from the Select List:- (1) Appointment of a member of the State Police Service, who has expressed his willingness to be appointed to the service shall be made by the Central Government in the order in which the names of the members of the State Police Service appear in the Select List for the time being in force during the period when the Select List remains in force : Provided that the appointment of Members of the State Police Service shall be made in accordance with the agreement arrived at under Clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the Recruitment Rules in the order in which the names of the members of the State Police Service occur in the relevant parts of the Select List for the time being in force.
Provided further that the appointment of an officer, whose name has been included or deemed to be included in the Select List provisionally under Proviso to sub-regulation (5) of Regulation 5 or under the proviso to sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 7 as the case may be shall be made within sixty days after the name is made unconditional by the Commission in terms of the second proviso to sub- regulation (4) of Regulation 7."
A perusal of the aforesaid Rules shows that a criteria has been prescribed for the classification of the Officers placed in the select list in the category of "Outstanding", "Very Good" and "Good".
The name of an Officer included in the list shall be treated as provisional if the State Government withholds the Integrity Certificate or any proceedings departmental or criminal are pending against him.
They can be made provisional if there is anything adverse against him which renders him unsuitable for appointments in the service that may have come to the notice of the State Government.
The Officer included provisionally in the Select List shall be considered for inclusion in the Select List of the subsequent year.
Inclusion in the Select List of the subsequent year shall be in addition to the normal size of the select list determined by the Central Government for such year.
Explanation I of Regulation 5(5) makes it clear that the proceedings shall be treated as pending only if a charge-sheet has actually been issued to the Officer or filed in a Court as the case may be.
Explanation II provides that anything adverse to the Officer shall only be treated to have come to the notice of the State, if the details of the same have been communicated to the Central Government and the Central Government is satisfied that the details furnished by the State Government have a bearing on the suitability of the officer and investigation thereof is essential.
We are of the considered opinion that a bare perusal of the Explanation I to Regulation 5(5) makes it abundantly clear that criminal proceedings could only be held to be pending against the Officer if the charge has been framed by the trial Court.
In the present case, undoubtedly, the charge has not been framed.
This Officer has been suffering from the uncertainties of the criminal trial since the registration of the case in the year 1994.
In such circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that the observations made by the Tribunal cannot be said to be without any basis.
The Tribunal has, in our opinion, rightly relied upon the observations of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal Goyal's case (supra).
The Tribunal has relied on the following observations of the Supreme Court :-  "13.
Applying the balancing process, we are of the opinion that the quashing of charges and of the order appointing enquiry officer was not warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is more appropriate and in the interest of justice as well as in the enquiry which had proceeded to a large extent be allowed to be completed.
At the same time, it is directed that the respondent should be considered forthwith for promotion without reference to and without taking into consideration the charges or the pendency of the said enquiry and if he is found fit for promotion, he should be promoted immediately.
(Emphasis supplied).
This direction is made in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case though we are aware that the Rules and practice normally followed in such cases may be different.
The promotion so made, if any, pending the enquiry shall, however, be subject to review after the conclusion of the enquiry and in the light of the findings in the enquiry.
(Emphasis supplied).
It is also directed that the enquiry against the respondent shall be concluded within eight months from today.
The respondent shall co-operate in concluding the enquiry.
It is obvious that if the respondent does not so co-operate, it shall be open to the enquiry officer to proceed ex parte.
If the enquiry is not concluded and final orders are not passed within the aforesaid period, the enquiry shall be deemed to have dropped."
9.
We are of the considered opinion that the claim of the petitioner could not be rejected even without applying the aforesaid observations made by the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal Goyal's case (supra).
Explanation I to Regulation 5 makes it abundantly clear that the criminal proceedings cannot be said to be pending unless the charge-sheet is actually filed in Court.
As noticed earlier, the charge-sheet in the present case has not been filed till date.
Therefore, in our opinion, the respondents had illegally treated the inclusion of the name of Sukhmohinder Singh as provisional.
The petitioners have even been given liberty to cancel the promotion in case of subsequent conviction of Sukhmohinder Singh.
A similar situation was considered by the Supreme Court in the case KV Jankiraman (supra).
In the aforesaid case, a Full Bench of the Tribunal has held that it is only when a charge-memo in a disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a criminal prosecution is issued to the employee that it can be said that the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is initiated against the employee.
The sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only after the charge-memo/charge-sheet is issued.
The pendency of preliminary investigation prior to that stage will not be sufficient to enable the authorities to adopt the sealed cover procedure.
The Supreme Court approved the aforesaid finding of the Tribunal.
It was sought to be argued before the Supreme Court that when there are serious allegations and it takes time to collect necessary evidence to prepare and issue charge- memo/charge-sheet, it would not be in the interest of the purity of administration to reward the employee with a promotion, increment etc.
The Supreme Court was not at all impressed with the aforesaid arguments.
It was observed that the acceptance of this contention would result in injustice to the employees in many cases.
The submission was rejected with the following observations :-  "16....... As has been the experience so far, the preliminary investigations take an inordinately long time and particularly when they are initiated at the instance of the interested persons, they are kept pending deliberately.
Many times they never result in the issue of any charge- memo/charge-sheet.
If the allegations are serious and the authorities are keen in investigating them, ordinarily it should not take much time to collect the relevant evidence and finalise the charges ......." The aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court are squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case where the case was registered in 1994 and till date the charge-sheet has not been presented.
In paragraph 17 of the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court considered a seeming contradiction between conclusion Nos. 1 and 4 which have been reached by the Tribunal.
The conclusions of the Tribunal were as follows :-  "16. xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx" (1) Consideration for promotion, selection grade, crossing the efficiency bar or higher scale of pay cannot be withheld merely on the ground of pendency of a disciplinary or criminal proceedings against an official;  (2) ........ (3) ....... (4) The sealed cover procedure can be resorted only after a charge memo is served on the concerned official or the charge-sheet filed before the criminal Court and not before."
The Supreme Court reckoned conclusion Nos. 1 and 4 within the following observations :-  "17.
There is no doubt that there is a seeming contradiction between the two conclusions.
But read harmoniously, and that is what the Full Bench has intended, the two conclusions can be reconciled with each other.
The conclusion No. 1 should be read to mean that the promotion etc. cannot be withheld merely because some disciplinary/criminal proceedings are pending against the employee.
To deny the said benefit, they must be at the relevant time pending at the stage when charge-memo/charge-sheet has already been issued to the employee.
Thus read, there is no inconsistency in the two conclusions."
10.
We are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court when applied to the facts and circumstances of the present case, leave no manner of doubt that the Tribunal has not committed any error in granting the relief to Sukhmohinder Singh.
This takes us now to the submission made by Mr. Lamba that the OA was not maintainable in view of Regulation 7(4).
According to the learned counsel, the select list was to remain in force only till 31st day of December of the year in which the meeting was held with a view to prepare the list under Sub-Regulation (1) of Regulation 5 or upto 60 days from the date of approval of the Select Lists by the Commission under this regulation or sub-regulation (2), whichever is later.
Accepting such an argument would be to put a premium on the illegality committed by the petitioners by terming the inclusion of the name of Sukhmohinder Singh in the select list as "provisional".
The petitioners cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong to deny the relief to Sukhmohinder Singh.
As noticed earlier, the Tribunal in its direction had already granted sufficient protection to the petitioners in case respondent-Sukhmohinder Singh is ultimately convicted in the criminal case.
We are of the opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioners.
In view of the above, we find that the writ petitions (CWP Nos. 15847-CAT of 2004 and 16723-CAT of 2004) are devoid of any merit and the same are hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.