SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
Mr. Mahajan vehemently argues that the petitioner would be entitled to gratuity in view of Regulation 131 of the Panjab University Calendar, Vol I He submits that simply because Shri Dhanwantry Ayurvedic College and Hospital (hereinafter referred to as "the College") is an unaided institution, would not debar the petitioner from the benefit of the University statutes.
He relies on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of K Krishnamacharyulu and others v. Sri Venkateswara Hindu College of Engg.
and another, 1997(3) SCT 155 (SC) : JT 1997(3) SC 455 and Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust and others v. VR Rudani and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1607 and a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Miss Ravneet Kaur v. The Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, 1997(3) SCT 210 (P&H) : 1997(2) PLR 320, in support of the submission that writ petition would be maintainable against the respondent-College.
Learned counsel also submits that the respondents have wrongly rejected the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner being a teacher does not fall within the definition of "employee" as contained in Section 2(3) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
He also submits that the respondents have wrongly relied on the ratio of law down by the Supreme Court in the case of Ahmedabad Pvt. Teachers Association v. Administrative Officer, 2004(1) SCT 667 (SC) : 2004(2) RSJ 315, in the reply submitted to the legal notice which had been served on the respondents-College, on behalf of the petitioner.
3.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
It is not disputed before us that respondent-College is an unaided institution.
It is not receiving any grant-in-aid either from the State of Punjab or from the Panjab University, to which it is affiliated.
In our opinion, mere affiliation of the College to the University would not make it amenable to writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The factors which determine as to whether a particular body or institution would fall within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, have been considered by the Supreme Court in a catena of judgments.
For the purposes of the present case, we need to notice only the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of G Basi Reddy etc. etc. v International Crops Research Instt.
and another, JT 2003(2) SC 180, wherein the Supreme Court has observed as follows :-  "25.
A writ under Article 226 lies only when the petitioner establishes that his or her fundamental right or some other legal right has been infringed.
The claim as made by the appellant in his writ petition is founded on Articles 14 and 16.
The claim would not be maintainable against ICRISAT unless ICRISAT were a "State" or authority within the meaning of Article 12.
The tests for determining whether an organisation is either, has been recently considered by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Pardeep Kumar v. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology and others.
In which we said :- "The question in each case would be whether in the light of the cumulative facts as established, the body is financially, functionally and administratively dominated by or under the control of the government.
Such control must be particular to the body in question and must be pervasive.
If this is found then the body is a State within Article 12.
On the other hand, when the control is merely regulatory whether under statute or otherwise it would not serve to make the body a State."
Applying the aforesaid tests, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, it would become apparent that respondent No. 2-College does not fall within the meaning of "State" or "authority" under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
However, in view of the law down by the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Anandi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust (supra), a writ petition would be maintainable even against the respondent No. 2-College for enforcement of constitutional or statutory legal rights.
This view of ours also finds support from the observations made by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Miss Ravneet Kaur v. The Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, 1997(2) The Punjab Law Reporter 321.
We, therefore, proceed on the basis that the present writ petition is maintainable.
5.
However, in the circumstances of the present case, no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
The petitioner only claims infringement of a University Regulation.
In the conditions of affiliation of the respondent-College, it was provided that the College shall by bound to follow all the guidelines, instructions, directions as may be issued by the University from time to time.
In case of non-observance of the University statute, the College can be disaffiliated.
Regulation 12 occurring in Chapter VIII-A of the Panjab University Calendar provides that "Every College must comply with all the conditions, imposed for grant of affiliation, within the stipulated period, failing which (affiliation) may be withdrawn".
Breach of conditions of affiliation by a College would not create a corresponding right in favour of the petitioner to seek a writ in the nature of Mandamus for enforcement of the Regulation.
As noticed earlier, in the reply given to the legal notice submitted by the petitioner, the respondents have relied on the judgment rendered in the case Ahemdabad Pvt. Teachers Association (supra) in which it has been held that a teacher does not fall within the definition of "employee" under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
Consequently, the petitioner has been denied the benefit of gratuity.
We are of the opinion that no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.