MM Kumar, J - The instant petition filed by the workman is directed against the award of the Labour Court dated 192000 upholding the order of his termination dated 1961997.
The Labour Court has found that the workman did not deposit Rs. 280/- which belonged to hospital and had kept the same in his pocket on 131997.
Rs. 195/- were given and Rs. 85/- were given later to him by Dr. Sandhya Gupta which was the payment received from different patients.
It has further been found that the workman-petitioner was charging Rs. 3/- instead of Rs. 2/- for the OPD slip.
In support of the aforementioned allegations, reliance was placed on a complaint made by Subedar Major Hari Kishan Bura Ex. MW4/4 was sent to the Administrator of the hospital which mentions specifically slip number.
The workman-petitioner in fact has admitted the fact that he retained Rs. 280/- and had expressed the desire for adjustment of that amount from his salary.
The aforementioned fact has also been amply proved by the letter written in his own handwriting dated 18.6.1997 which was endorsement of the same date.
It is appropriate to mention that the Management-respondent is a charitable hospital and the workman-petitioner who had retired as Labour Officer from the Govt. department was employed at a salary of Rs. 900/- pm which was later on raised to Rs. 1,000/-.
2.
Mr. Arun Jain, learned counsel for the Workman-petitioner has argued that no opportunity of hearing was given when the termination order dated 1961997 was passed.
He has maintained that the statement of Dr. Sandhya Gupta MW1 concerning complaint made by Vinod Kumari, Nurse cannot be relied upon and it is full of contradictions.
He has drawn my attention to the cross-examination of this witness where she had stated that the writing Ex. M1 was written by midwife before her and on her dictation.
The witness had further stated that the writing was given by us to the Administrator on that very day.
Thereafter, she volunteered that the midwife had narrated the incident to her and after that she gave her dictation because the midwife was illiterate.
She further clarified that she was not able to remember who had in fact written the document Mark A It has further been argued that the witness has accepted that this was the only allegation and there was no complaint against the workman before this report.
On the aforementioned basis the learned counsel has submitted that the award of the Labour Court is vitiated and the same be set aside.
3.
Mr. Ajay Jain, learned counsel for the Management-respondent has argued that the findings of the Tribunal are based on cogent evidence and once it has been found that the workman-petitioner has misappropriated and embezzled an amount of Rs. 280/- and was charging Rs. 3/- instead of Rs. 2/- for issuing outdoor slip, then there was no question of showing any relaxation or imposing any lesser punishment.
In this regard, he has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Additional District Magistrate (City) Agra v. Prabhakar Chaturvedi and another, 1996(2) SCT 567 (SC) : 1996(1) RSJ 681 and the judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Harish Chander, 1993(3) RSJ 476.
Learned counsel has then argued that the question of issuance of any show cause notice or granting opportunity of hearing to the workman- petitioner at the time of termination of his services on 1961997 would not arise as the Management-respondent could have proved those facts before the Labour Court.
Learned counsel has maintained that those facts have been proved before the Labour Court by producing cogent evidence.
In this regard, he has placed reliance on Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Workmen of M/s. Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co v. Management, 1973(1) LLJ 278.
4.
I have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and am of the view that there is no merit in this petition.
The Labour Court while acting within its jurisdiction under Section 11-A has permitted the Management-respondent to adduce evidence in support of the allegation levelled against the workman-petitioner which constituted the basis of his termination order passed on 1961997.
Such a course has been permitted by Section 11-A of the Act as has been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of Firestone Tyre & Rubber Company's case (supra).
There are categorical findings recorded by the Labour Court that the workman has embezzled an amount of Rs. 280/- and there is an admission made by him in Ex. MW4/7.
The aforementioned document has been recorded by the workman himself in his own handwriting and it has also been signed by him.
Signatures on this document are similar to the other document Ex. M2.
Both the documents have been signed in Hindi by the workman-petitioner Birbal Sharma.
Therefore, it cannot be concluded that the findings are vitiated on account of lack of evidence which may result into setting aside the impugned award of the Labour Court.
Signatures on this document are similar to the other document Ex. M2.
Apart firm the documentary evidence the oral statement made by Dr. Sandhya Gupta MW1, Vinod Kumari, Nurse MW2, Pawan Kumar, Supervisor MW3 and Bishan Swaroop MW4 amply support the findings.
5.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the statement of Dr. Sandhya Gupta has inherent contradictions is without any substance because the complete reading of the statement shows that Dr. Sandhya Gupta had given dictation to someone else and not to Vinod Kumari nurse as she was illiterate.
She has clarified in the concluding line of her cross-examination that she could not remember to whom the dictation was given which shows that dictation was not given to Vinod Kumari, nurse.
Therefore, no assistance would be available to the workman-petitioner from the so-called contradiction in the statement of Dr. Sandhya Gupta.
Similarly no opportunity of hearing was required to be afforded to the workman-petitioner on 1961997 as the Management-respondent has been held entitled to either avail an opportunity at the stage of termination or before the Labour Court.
The aforementioned option has been given to the Management by the Act on account of the fact that in cases where the workman indulges into rowdyism or embezzlement which may come to the notice of the Management he cannot be permitted to continue working on the post by spoiling the industrial peace.
Therefore, an opportunity was rightly afforded to the Management at the stage of reference before the Labour Court.
Therefore, there is no substance in this argument and I have no hesitation to reject the same.
There is no merit in this petition.
Therefore, the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.