MM Kumar, J - The instant petition filed Article 226 of the Constitution prays for quashing order dated 1632005 (Annexure P-1) suspending the petitioner from the post of Principal, Guru Nanak National College for Women, Nakodar (for brevity, `the College').
It has also been prayed that as an interim measure, respondent No. 1 be directed to permit the petitioner to continue and function as Principal of the College.
2.
Brief facts of the case necessary for dealing with the issues raised are that the College is receiving 95% aid from the respondent-State of Punjab and is affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (for brevity, `the University').
The service conditions of the petitioner are regulated by the provisions of Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974 (for brevity, `the Act').
The petitioner is asserted to have excellent academic career.
She was appointed as Lecturer in English in Lyallpur Khalsa College for Women, Jalandhar.
A reference has been made to various activities of the petitioner showing her active participation for growth and development of the College.
The petitioner was duly selected and appointed as Principal of the College in the year 1988.
It is claimed that on account of her efforts, the strength of students in the College has gone up and the College is located in its regular building, whereas earlier the classes used to be held in the open as a stop-gap arrangement.
A reference has also been made to various courses including the modern courses of BCA and B.Sc.
(IT) in the College.
It has also been claimed that the College has excellent library and hostel.
3.
The petitioner has also given details with regard to illegal working of the Managing Committee of the College.
In this regard, it has been asserted that the Civil Judge, Nakodar vide order dated 791974 constituted a managing committee by way of compromise between the parties.
The committee was to comprise of five members and the same was to function till such time the elections were to be held in accordance with the constitution of the College.
It is claimed that election has never been held and the Managing Committee constituted in pursuance to the compromise dated 791974 continued with some changes.
It has also been asserted that after the death of Sardar Darbara Singh in 1998, Sardar Pritam Singh started functioning as President and wife of late Sardar Darbara Singh was co-opted as a member.
It is, thus, submitted that there was no regular and legally constituted committee of the College.
A reference has also been made to Civil Suit No. 522 of 2004 filed by one Ajit Singh who is stated to be a permanent member as per provisions of constitution of the College Council, in which permanent injunction against S Pritam Singh has been sought to restrain him form posing himself as President of the Managing Committee.
It has also been pointed out that the Civil Judge has made interim arrangement by appointing the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar as receiver to run the College, in addition (to) the Sub Divisional Magistrates, Nakodar and Shahkot as well as the Principal.
It is appropriate to mention that apart from the Girls College where the petitioner has been working, there is another college known as Guru Nanak National College for Boys, Nakodar (for brevity, `Boys College') under the same management.
The College has been ordered to be looked after by the Additional Deputy Commissioner with the assistance of Principal of Boys College and the Sub Divisional Magistrates, Shahkot and Nakodar.
The interim arrangements made by order dated 1712005 are to continue till the elections of the Managing Committee in accordance with the Constitution of the College Council are conducted by the Additional Deputy Commissioner.
The petitioner claims that the Additional Deputy Commissioner who has been functioning as Receiver has passed an order on 1632005 placing her under suspension with immediate effect without disclosing any reason in the order.
It has further been averred that the order is violative of Section 2-B of the Act and the Ordinance 16 of the University Calendar Volume IV-99.
It has further been asserted that no reasons have been disclosed in the order Annexure P-1 and no notice of the report submitted by an illegally constituted committee could be taken into account.
4.
A detailed written statement has been filed by respondent No. 2 asserting that the petitioner has suppressed material portion of order dated 1712005 because it would have exposed her misconduct concerning misappropriation of funds of the College.
A complete copy of order dated 1712005 passed by the Civil Judge, Nakodar has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
A reference has also been made to the report dated 2592004 submitted by a sub-committee comprising of S Bikram Singh and S Pritam Singh in which serious allegations have been levelled against the petitioner.
On the basis of aforementioned report, a show-cause notice dated 842005 has been issued to the petitioner alongwith a copy of the report (Annexure R-2).
It has further been pleaded that in pursuance to the directions issued by the Civil Judge in his order dated 1712005, respondent No. 2 has written a letter dated 1022005 to the petitioner in her capacity as Principal of the College directing her that in the financial and management matters, she was not to take any decision without his prior permission or the permission of the interim management committee (Annexure R-3).
There are further allegations against the petitioner that despite the aforementioned communication, she has withdrawn a sum of Rs. 25,000/- from the College and deposited the same with the Punjab Kashmir Finance Private Limited.
Both the documents have been annexed as Annexure R-4.
It has further been explained that the decision to place the petitioner under suspension has not been taken by respondent No. 2 alone but has been taken in a meeting held on 1632005 which consisted of the answering respondent, Sub Divisional Magistrates, Nakodar and Shahkot as well as Principal of the Boys College (Annexure R-5).
On merits, the averments asserting the contribution made by the petitioner to the growth and development of the College have been denied and suspension order has been justified as it has been passed in contemplation of a disciplinary enquiry with regard to misappropriation of College funds.
5.
The petitioner has also filed a replication criticising the report dated 2592004 submitted by the committee comprising of two members.
It has been asserted that such report having been submitted by those who have never been legally appointed by elections as per the provisions of the constitution of the College Council cannot be taken into consideration for forming prima facie opinion against the petitioner.
6.
Dr. Balram K Gupta, learned senior counsel has argued that Section 2-B of the Act read with Ordinance 16 of the University Calendar Volume IV-99 postulates that suspension can be ordered only in the eventualities if the disciplinary proceedings against an employee are contemplated or are pending.
He has also referred to another eventuality when an order of suspension could be passed, namely, when a case against an employee in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, enquiry or trial.
Learned counsel has maintained that order dated 1632005 (Annexure P-1) is blissfully silent with regard to any pending or contemplated enquiry or commission of any offence.
According to the learned counsel, the authority passing the order is under a legal obligation to disclose all these facts in the order itself, failing which the order is liable to be set aside.
Learned counsel has then argued that respondent No. 2 alone who has been functioning as Receiver was not competent to pass the impugned order without the participation of any other member as has been directed by the learned Civil Judge in his order dated 1712005.
Learned counsel has maintained that the order is patently without jurisdiction and has been passed by respondent No. 2 without any authority of law.
The last argument of Dr. Gupta, learned senior counsel is that no reliance could be placed on report dated 2592004 submitted by two members committee comprising of S Bikram Singh and S Pritam Singh as S Pritam Singh has been a self-styled President of the Managing Committee and has not been elected ever in accordance with the provisions of the constitution of the College Council.
7.
Ms. Lisa Gill, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has argued that there is a calculated and designed attempt by the petitioner to suppress material facts from this Court with the object of obtaining order of admission of the petition.
She has referred to the partial reproduction of order dated 1712005 in para 6 of the petition which has been passed by the learned Civil Judge and argued that material portions of the order have been suppressed because the same would have disclosed the allegations of misconduct and many other facts detrimental to the case of the petitioner.
Learned counsel has then submitted that an order of suspension cannot be disputed merely because it fails to disclose that disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or are pending.
She has made reference to complete order dated 1712005 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Annexure R-1).
She has also submitted that after the passing of interim order, appointing respondent No. 2 as Receiver, he has addressed a letter to the petitioner on 1022005 restraining her from dealing with any financial and management matter without prior permission of the Receiver or the interim managing committee (Annexure R-3).
She has argued that despite the aforementioned direction of the Receiver, the petitioner had withdrawn a sum of Rs. 25,000/- on account of installment on 28.2.2005 and deposited the same on 1.3.2005 with the Punjab and Kashmir Finance Private Limited.
Controverting the argument of Dr. Gupta, learned counsel has also submitted that the decision to place the petitioner under suspension has not been taken by respondent No. 2 alone.
She has referred to Annexure R-5 which shows deliberation in the meeting held on 1632005 in the presence of Sub Divisional Magistrates, Nakodar and Shahkot as well as Principal of the Boys College apart from the presence of Receiver-cum-Additional Deputy Commissioner.
According to the learned counsel, the minutes of the meeting Annexure R-5 highlight the financial irregularities and misappropriation of funds committed by the petitioner.
It was, therefore, decided to place her under suspension.
8.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at a considerable length, we are of the view that there is no merit in this petition.
The suspension order dated 16.2.2005 has been passed by the interm managing committee which has been constituted in pursuance to order dated 1712005 passed by the learned Civil Judge.
According to the directions issued by the learned Civil Judge, the functioning of both the educational institutions could not be paralyzed as S Pritam Singh has been restrained to function as President and alternative arrangements were necessary to be made.
In this regard he has placed reliance on earlier order dated 791974 passed by the then Civil Judge, Nakodar.
Observing that both the institutions have to be run by a duly elected body as per constitution of the College Council, the learned Civil Judge has ordered the stop-gap arrangement which is evident from concluding para of his order which reads as under :-  "Now the question arises for consideration is as to how both the institutions are to run, because neither plaintiff nor defendant No. 1 has any legal sanction to run the same.
Keeping in view the spirit of the order dated 791974 passed by the then ld.
Sub-Judge Ist Class, Nakodar, which is based on a compromise arrived at between members of the College Council and other respectables, who have immensely contributed to set up the institutions, I am of the considered view that both the institutions are to be run by duly elected body under the constitution.
However, a stop-gap arrangement, till the election is held, is required to be made to run both the institutions in fair and transparent manner.
Accordingly, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar is appointed as a Receiver to run both the institutions in-absentia with assistance of Principal, Guru Nanak National College for Boys, Nakodar, Sub- Divisional Magistrate, Nakodar and Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Shahkot as Ex- officio member for smooth functioning till the disposal of the present case or till the election of the Managing Committee, whichever is earlier.
However, this injunction order would not be an embargo against enquiry proceedings, if any, pending or to be initiated against Smt. Gurmit Kaur Atwal, Principal of Guru Nanak National College for Women, Nakodar for alleged bungling of funds.
Deputy Commissioner will also explore the possibility of early election of the managing committee in accordance with the constitution.
Copy of this order be brought to the notice of the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar, immediately for smooth day-to-day functioning of both the institutions.
However, these observations of mine shall have no effect on merit of this case."
(emphasis added) 9.
It is also appropriate to mention that S Pritam Singh in his written statement and reply to the injunction application had asserted that the petitioner on 27122004 was asked to explain in the meeting of the managing committee about a sum of Rs. 20 lacs which is alleged to have been misappropriated by her.
It has further been asserted that she obtained an advance of Rs. 4 lacs which has never been returned and also had withdrawn an amount of Rs. 30,000/- for replacement of lenses of the eyes of her daughter- in-law.
There are further allegations of misappropriation of Rs. 11,000/- which have been collected by S Pritam Singh.
The fund is alleged to have been spent for the organisation floated by the petitioner called as `Punjab Tug of War Association'.
10.
It is further evident that after the passing of order by the learned Civil Judge for interim arrangement, the Receiver-respondent No. 2 had sent a communication to the petitioner on 1022005 (Annexure R-3) directing her not to deal with any financial matters concerning with the management of the College without his express permission or the express permission of the interim managing committee.
Despite that the petitioner appears to have withdrawn a sum of Rs. 25,000/- and deposited the same with the Punjab Kashmir Finance Private Limited (Annexure R-4).
The suspension order (Annexure P-1) has been passed after due deliberation on 1632005 in which respondent No. 2-the Receiver, both the Sub-Divisional Magistrates, Nakodar and Shahkot as well as the Principal of Boys College, Nakodar had participated.
It is pertinent to mention that the learned Civil Judge in his order dated 1712005 has clarified that his order would not be an embargo against holding any enquiry whether pending or to be initiated against the petitioner for alleged bungling of funds.
It was in this context that two members report dated 2592004 was considered by the interim management committee as is evident from minutes of the meeting held on 1632005 and the same reads as under :-  "The meeting of the Management Committee, Guru Nanak National College for Women, Nakodar was held today on 1632005 at the office of the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar.
In the meeting SDM Nakodar, SDM Shahkot and Principal, Guru Nanak National College for Boys, Nakodar were also present.
In the meeting resolution was moved that the report dated 2592004 was presented in respect to an inquiry directed by the Management Committee of the College conducted against the bungling of College funds by the Principal, Guru Nanak National College for Women, Nakodar Smt. Gurmit Kaur Atwal.
The Inquiry Committee after conducting the preliminary inquiry has found the charges to be correct.
The report has been considered.
On consideration it has been found that the allegations in the report are of a very serious nature and a number of financial irregularities have been committed and have come to the surface and loss of lakhs of rupees has been caused to the College.
There has been a criminal mis-appropriation of the College funds, UGC funds and the donations given by the Govt. and general public.
Therefore, the Committee after seriously considering the entire matter has reached to the conclusion that the Principal of Guru Nanak National College for Women, Nakodar Smt. Gurmit Kaur Atwal and the concerned Accountant are prima facie guilty of embezzling the amount.
In case they carry on with the management of the College it is possible that they will continue with such irregularities in the future and irreparable loss may be caused to the College which is not in public interest at all.
Therefore, the Committee has taken the following decision :- 1.
Smt. Gurmit Kaur Atwal, Principal is suspended from the post of Principal with immediate effect as well as Director, Guru Nanak Model School and her rights concerning the college are hereby suspended with immediate effect.
(emphasis added) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx."
Therefore, we are satisfied that order Annexure P-1 has been passed by the interim management committee which complies with order dated 1712005 passed by the learned Civil Judge in letter and spirit.
11.
We are further of the view that the impugned order of suspension (Annexure P-1) also satisfies the requirement of Section 2-B of the Act which requires that an employee can be placed under suspension if an enquiry is contemplated against him/her.
Section 2-B of the Act is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "2-B.
Suspension of employees.
- (1) No employee shall be placed under suspension, unless :- (a) disciplinary proceedings against him are contemplated or are pending; or (b) a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, inquiry or trial.
(2) No employee shall be kept under suspension for a period exceeding six months without the prior approval of the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Education."
A persual of the aforementioned provision would show that an employee could be placed under suspension if disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or are pending against him.
It is also evident from the plain reading of the provision that in case of any criminal offence under investigation, enquiry or trial against an employee of an affiliated college, then he could be validly placed under suspension.
There is no obligation imposed by the legislature that the order of suspension must disclose that disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or pending.
In the absence of express provision or necessary intendment of the Statute, we are not inclined to read such a requirement in Section 2-B of the Act, especially when the respondents have placed on record the minutes of the meeting dated 1632005 (Annexure R-5) disclosing sufficient material which shows that the petitioner is alleged to have misappropriated the funds of the college.
It has further been shown on the basis of Annexure R-4 that despite the express directions issued by the Receiver-respondent No. 2 prohibiting the petitioner from dealing with the financial matters, the petitioner has withdrawn a sum of Rs. 25,000/- as is evident from the two documents placed on record as Annexure R-4.
Therefore, we are satisfied that the departmental enquiry is contemplated against the petitioner.
It is further appropriate to mention that the Civil Judge has expressly clarified that his interim order should not be read as the stay of any disciplinary proceedings pending or contemplated against the petitioner.
In this regard, we are fortified by the view taken by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co Ltd v. State Industrial Tribunal, UP and others, AIR 1961 SC 1381.
The following observations of their Lordships can be relied upon with advantage and the same read as under :-  "..... We cannot accept the extreme argument of Shri Aggarwal that the mere fact that the order has been passed is sufficient to raise the presumption that conditions precedent have been satisfied, even though there is no recital in the order to that effect.
Such a presumption in our opinion can only be raised when there is a recital in the order to that effect.
In the absence of such recital if the order is challenged on the ground that in fact there was no satisfaction, the authority passing the order will have to satisfy the Court by other means that the conditions precedent were satisfied before the order was passed.
We are equally not impressed by Shri Pathak's argument that if the recital is not there, the public or Courts and tribunals will not know that the order was validly passed and therefore, it is not necessary that there must be a recital on the face of the order in such a case before it can be held to be legal.
The presumption as to the regularity of public acts would apply in such a case; but as soon as the order is challenged and it is said that it was passed without the conditions precedent being satisfied the burden would be on the authority to satisfy by other means (in the absence of recital in the order itself) that the conditions precedent had been complied with.
The difference between a case where a general order contains a recital on the face of it and one where it does not contain such a recital is that in the latter case the burden is thrown on the authority making the order to satisfy the Court by other means that the conditions precedent were fulfilled, but in the former case the Court will presume the regularity of the order including the fulfillment of the conditions precedent; and then it will be for the party challenging the legality of the order to show that the recital was not correct and that the conditions precedent were not in fact complied with by the authority : (see the observations of Spens, C.J.
In Emperor v. Sibnath Banerjee, 1944 FCR 1 at 42 : (AIR 1943 FC 75 at p. 92) which were approved by the Privy Council in Emperor v. Sibnath Banerjee, 1945 FCR 195 at pp. 216-17 : (AIR 1945 PC 156 at p. 161).
Nor are we impressed with the contention of Shri Pathak that conditions become a part of legislative process and therefore, where they are not complied with the subordinate legislation is illegal and the defect cannot be cured by an affidavit later.
It is true that such power may have to be exercised subject to certain conditions precedent but that does not assimilate the action of the subordinate executive authority to something like a legislative procedure, which must be followed before a bill becomes a law.
Our conclusion therefore is that where certain conditions precedent have to be satisfied before a subordinate authority can pass an order (be it executive or of the character of subordinate legislation), it is not necessary that the satisfaction of those conditions must be recited in the order itself, unless the statute requires it, though, as we have already remarked, it is most desirable that it should be so, for in that case the presumption that the conditions were satisfied would immediately arise and burden would be thrown on the person challenging the fact of satisfaction to show that what is recited is not correct.
But even where the recital is not there on the face of the order, the order will not become illegal ab initio and only a further burden is thrown on the authority passing the order to satisfy the Court by other means that the conditions precedent were complied with.
In the present case this has been done by the filing of an affidavit before us......."  (emphasis added).
12.
The aforementioned view has also been followed by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Hari Ram Yadav and others, 1994(1) SCT 714 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 1262.
The relevant observations of the Supreme Court in this regard read as under :-  ".....
The law is well settled that in cases where the exercise of statutory power is subject to the fulfillment of a condition then the recital about the said condition having been fulfilled in the order raises a presumption about the fulfillment of the said condition, and the burden is on the person who challenges the validity of the order to show that the said condition was not fulfilled.
In a case, where the order does not contain a recital about the condition being fulfilled, the burden to prove that the condition was fulfilled would be on the authority passing the order if the validity of the order is challenged on the ground that the said condition is not fulfilled......." (emphasis added) 13.
When the aforementioned principles are applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that ample material has been placed on record in the form of Annexures R-4 and R-5 which show that disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner are contemplated.
A reading of order dated 1712005 further discloses serious allegations of misappropriation of funds by the petitioner which led to the observations by the Civil Judge that he was not staying any disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner whether pending or which were to be initiated.
Therefore, the condition postulated by Section 2-B of the Act that an enquiry must be contemplated stands satisfied which is consistent with the view taken by the Supreme Court in Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co Ltd's case (supra) and Hari Ram Yadav's case (supra).
14.
The argument of the learned counsel that the impugned order Annexure P1 has been passed by the Receiver-respondent No. 2 would also not survive in view of the fact that detailed deliberations were held as is evident from perusal of minutes of the meeting dated 1632005 (Annexure R-5) in which respondent No. 2-the Receiver-cum-Additional Deputy Commissioner, Sub- Divisional Magistrates, Nakodar and Shahkot as well as the Principal of Boys College had participated.
The aforementioned four persons have been named by the learned Civil Judge in his order dated 1712005.
We are also not impressed with the argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioner that the report dated 2592004 made by two members committee comprising of S Bikram Singh and S Pritam Singh cannot constitute the basis for levelling allegations of misappropriation against the petitioner because the Civil Judge has taken notice of this fact and made it clear that his interim directions should not be construed to mean stay of any disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner which may be initiated.
Moreover, the petitioner is alleged to have violated the directions of the Receiver-cum-Additional Deputy Commissioner issued on 1022005 prohibiting her from dealing with any financial matter.
Despite the prohibition issued on 1022005 (Annexure R-2), the petitioner is alleged to have withdrawn a sum of Rs. 25,000/-.
The aforementioned allegation is based on documents appended as Annexure R-4.
Therefore, we are not impressed with the submissions made by learned counsel for the petitioner.
15.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we do not impose any costs.
It is clarified that we are not opining on the validity of the Managing Committee or the acts of S Bikram Singh and S Pritam Singh because the matter is sub-judice against S Pritam Singh.
We also make it clear that any observation made by us shall not be construed as an expression of opinion on merits of the controversy pending before the Civil Judge.
Petition dismissed.