KL Manjunath, J - The petitioner is a Flying Officer joined Indian Air Force in July, 2000.
She was working at Air Force Station, Belgaum.
Since November, 2003 petitioner is working in Air Force Station, Vimanapura, Bangalore.
Based on certain charges levelled against the petitioner, General Court-martial Proceedings are initiated by the 3rd respondent.
Therefore, the present petition is filed to quash the charge-sheet issued by the 4th respondent in the month of October, 2004 which is produced as Annexure-D and to quash Annexure-H dated 14-3-2005 a report recommending to the Commandant and to quash Annexure-J an order to convene a General Court-martial by Group Captain dated 2nd April, 2005 and for other reliefs.
2.
According to the petition averments, since the petitioner did not heed to the request of her superior officers, the superior officers are inimically disposed towards her and she had lodged complaints against her superiors.
Instead of taking action against her superiors, based on false allegations, charges are levelled against the petitioner as per Annexure-D Later on Annexure-D was withdrawn and a fresh charge-sheet as per Annexure-E was issued.
Subsequently charge-sheet as per Annexure-E was also withdrawn and a fresh charge-sheet as per Annexure-F was issued.
Based on the charges levelled as per Annexure-F dated 21-2-2005, a summary of evidence was recorded between 2-3-2005 and 4-3-2005.
Later on, as per Anexure-H, the Commanding Officer forwarded the summary of evidence to the 3rd respondent on 11-3-2005.
Subsequently, the entire file was referred to Wing Commandant Mr. Dixit who was appointed as Command Judge Advocate.
Command Judge Advocate, after scrutiny of charges and the summary of evidence, placed the matter before the AOC for his opinion and for orders to try the petitioner by General Court- martial.
On 2-4-2005, the 3rd respondent has passed an order to try the petitioner by General Court-martial.
Subsequently as per Annexure-J, members of the General Court-martial were constituted.
When the General Court-martial was in progress, the petitioner contending that the very constitution of the General Court martial is bad in law, the present petition is filed seeking the above reliefs.
3.
The respondents have filed a detailed counter.
According to the respondents, the writ petition filed by the petitioner is not maintainable and that there is no substance in the contentions urged by the petitioner.
According to them, summary of evidence was recorded in accordance with the provisions of Rule 24 of the Air Force Rules, 1969 and an opportunity was also given to the petitioner to examine the defence witnesses if any.
The petitioner sent a long list of witnesses, seeking permission of the respondents to examine them as defence witnesses, for which the respondents called upon the petitioner to show the relevancy of those witnesses.
Since the petitioner did not show the relevancy, the summary of evidence was closed and thereafter report was forwarded to the 3rd respondent-Senior Commandant, General Court-martial.
4.
According to the respondents, the matter was placed before the Command Judge Advocate.
After scrutinising the entire evidence and the charges levelled against the petitioner the Command Judge Advocate referred the matter to the 3rd respondent.
The 3rd respondent after the subjective satisfaction, passed an order to convene a General Court-martial.
It is contended by the respondents that 3rd respondent before order to convene a General Court- martial had applied his mind and, therefore, the petitioner cannot contend that there is no application of mind or subjective satisfaction of the 3rd respondent in ordering to convene a General Court-martial.
5.
It is also contended by the respondents that the constitution of the members of the General Court-martial is also in accordance with Rule 43 of the Air Force Rules, 1969.
It is also contended by the respondents that the petitioner cannot question the order passed by the 3rd respondent in constituting the members of the General Court-martial, since she has to file an appeal under Section 161(1) of the Air Force Act.
Therefore, they request this Court to dismiss the writ petition.
6.
I have also heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and respondents.
After hearing, the following points would emerge for consideration of this Court in this writ petition :  (a) Whether recording of summary evidence is proper and in accordance with Rule 24 of the Air Force Rules, 1969 ?
(b) Whether respondents have committed an error in not permitting the petitioner to examine defence witnesses ?
(c) Whether the 3rd respondent has applied its mind and whether there was any subjective satisfaction of the 3rd respondent in ordering General Court- martial ?
(d) Whether the petitioner proves that the constitution of General Court- martial is contrary to Rule 49 of the Air Force Rules, 1969 ?
(e) Whether the order of constitution of the General Court-martial can be questioned before this Court in view of Section 161(1) of the Air Force Act ?
7.
Pursuant to the directions of this Court, the respondent's counsel has made available the original records to this Court.
This Court has perused the records maintained by the respondents.
Whenever a charge is levelled against an official, investigation of charges, has to be conducted by the respondents by taking down the summary of evidence, as per Rule 24 of the Air Force Rules, 1969.
The issuance of charge-sheet as per Annexure-F is not in dispute.
The earlier charge-sheet issued by the respondents as per Annexure-D was withdrawn.
Subsequently, a fresh charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner as per Annexure-E Later on, the same was also withdrawn and a fresh charge-sheet as per Annexure-F was issued to the petitioner.
Based on the charges levelled against the petitioner in Annexure-F, an investigation is conducted as per Rule 24 of the Air Force Rules.
The deposition of the witnesses were recorded in the presence of the petitioner.
After recording the evidence, the same has also been read over to the petitioner and an opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross-examine the witnesses.
A note made in the records would shows that the petitioner has failed to respond to the query of the Recording Officer.
The evidence is recorded by the Wing Commanding Officer Mr. Sharma in the presence of a Flying Officer Priyadarshini.
Since there was no defence evidence or the summary of evidence was concluded on 4th March.
2005.
After closure of the prosecution witnesses, the petitioner requested the respondents to permit her to examine the defence witnesses.
A long list was submitted by her, for which, the respondents requested the petitioner to show the relevancy of the witnesses.
The petitioner did not show the relevancy of the witnesses cited by her.
Thereafter, the report was forwarded to the 3rd respondent for further course of action as per Rule 25(3) of the Air Force Rules, 1969.
8.
The petitioner's counsel does not dispute about recording of summary of evidence of the prosecution witnesses in the presence of the petitioner.
He also does not dispute that the petitioner did not avail the opportunity to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses.
His grievance before this Court is that the petitioner was not permitted to adduce the defence witnesses and the officer who called upon the petitioner to show the relevancy of the witnesses was not the Commanding Officer, who recorded the summary of evidence, but he was a different officer.
From the records it is clear that the Commanding Officer had directed the said officer to secure the reply from the petitioner.
Therefore, it is clear that though an opportunity was given to the petitioner, to show the relevancy of the witnesses whose name finds a place in the list of witnesses, was not submitted by the petitioner before the respondents.
Therefore, it cannot be held that the respondents have committed an error in recording the summary of evidence and this Court is of the opinion that the recording of summary of evidence is in accordance with Rule 24 of the Air Force Rules, 1969.
Therefore, the said point has to be held against the petitioner.
9.
The next point to be considered by this Court is whether the 3rd respondent has applied its mind or has passed an order to convene a General Court Martial after satisfying himself about the charges levelled against the petitioner.
From the perusal of the records, it is clear to me that the Command Judge Advocate has prepared a note based on the charges levelled against the petitioners and the evidence let in by the prosecution on each of the charges.
The Command Judge Advocate VK Dixit, has submitted his comments on 31-3- 2005.
Thereafter, the same is scrutinised by the Commanding Officer Incharge Administration and has recommended for General Court Martial on 31-3-2005.
Thereafter the 3rd respondent has passed an order as hereunder : "To be tried by GCM".
These facts are also not in dispute.
The only question to be considered by this Court while deciding this point is whether the 3rd respondent after satisfying himself about the charges levelled against the petitioner and the summary of evidence recorded by the recording officer was justified in convening a General Court Martial and whether 3rd respondent without application of mind had passed an order to convene a General Court Martial or whether a detailed order is required to be passed by the 3rd respondent in order to convene a General Court Martial.
10.
Rule 43 of the Air Force Rules deals with the convening of General and District Court Martial, which reads as hereunder :  "43.
Convening of general and District Court-martial.
- (1) An officer before convening a general or District Court-martial shall first satisfy himself that the charges to be tried by the Court are for offence within the meaning of the Act, and that the evidence justifies a trial on those charges, and if not so satisfied, shall order the release of the accused, or refer the case to superior authority.
(2) He shall also satisfy himself that the case is a proper one to be tried by the description of Court-martial he proposes to convene.
(3) The officer convening a Court-martial shall appoint or detail the officers to form the Court, and may also appoint or detail such waiting officers as he thinks expedient.
He may also, where he considers the services of an interpreter to be necessary, appoint or detail an interpreter to the Court.
(4) The officer convening a Court-martial shall send to the senior member thereof, the original charge-sheet on which the accused is to be tried, the summary of evidence and the order for the assembly of the Court-martial."
11.
In order to convene a General Court-martial, an officer has to first satisfy himself that the charges to be tried by the Court are for the offence within the meaning of the Act.
If he is not satisfied, he shall order the release of the accused or refer the case to the superior authority.
He has to be satisfied himself about the case, in order to try by the description of the Court-martial he proposes to convene.
It is not in dispute that the charges levelled against the petitioner are the offences within the meaning of the Air Force Act, 1950.
Since the petitioner has not even cross-examined the prosecution witnesses, and has not let in defence witnesses, it cannot be said that there was no evidence for a trial on those charges.
But only question to be considered is whether there was any subjective satisfaction of the 3rd respondent and whether the 3rd respondent satisfying himself about the charges has passed an order to convene a General Court-martial.
12.
The question is whether a detailed order is required to be passed by the 3rd respondent in convening a General Court-martial.
According to the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, there was no need or necessity for the 3rd respondent to pass a detailed order.
In order to support his arguments, he has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Som Datt Datta v. Union of India, AIR 1969 SC 414.
The Supreme Court had occasion to examine Sections 164 and 165, Army Act.
Head Note D reads as hereunder :  "(D) Army Act (1950), Sections 164, 165 - Orders confirming proceedings of Court-martial - No obligation to give reasons - Orders not illegal for not giving any reasons.
There is no express obligation imposed by Section 164 or by Section 165 of the Army Act on the confirming authority or upon the Central Government to give reasons in support of its decision to confirm the proceedings of the Court- martial.
Apart from any requirement imposed by the statute or statutory rule either expressly or by necessary implication, it cannot be said that there is any general principle or any rule of natural justice that a statutory Tribunal should always and in every case give reasons in support of its decision.
Such orders cannot, therefore, be held to be illegal for not giving any reasons for confirming the orders of the Court-martial."
13.
Relying upon this passage, learned counsel for the respondents submits that there is no express obligation under the Air Force Act or under the Air Force Rules on the 3rd respondent to pass an order in detail about the subjective satisfaction of the 3rd respondent in passing the order to convene a General Court-martial.
According to the petitioner's counsel, this ruling cannot be made applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
Be that as it may.
Even according to the learned counsel for the petitioner either under the Air Force Act or under the Rules made therein, there is no provision enabling the 3rd respondent to pass a detailed order in order to convene a General Court-martial.
Therefore, there is no necessity for me to rely upon the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the respondents.
In the instant case, 3rd respondent has filed an affidavit supporting the statement of objections filed by him.
In the statement of objections, he has categorically stated that after the file was sent by the Command Judge Advocate, he had satisfied himself about the charges levelled against the petitioner and the evidence recorded against the petitioner, and after satisfying himself about the charges levelled against the petitioner and the summary of evidence, he passed an order to convene a General Court-martial meeting.
On a oath if an officer has stated before this Court that he has applied his mind before passing an order to convene a General Court-martial, there is nothing for this Court to disbelieve the same.
It is no doubt true that the Command Judge Advocate has examined each and every charge levelled against the petitioner and the evidence recorded against the petitioner after perusal of the note put up by the Command Judge Advocate.
If the same is accepted by the 3rd respondent after satisfying himself, there is nothing for this Court to hold that there is no subjective satisfaction of the 3rd respondent to convene a General Court-martial since there is no provision either under the Air Force Act or under the Rules that the 3rd respondent is required to pass a detailed order.
Just because the 3rd respondent has passed an order as "To be tried by GCM", this Court cannot hold that there is no application of mind by the 3rd respondent.
Accordingly, the said point is answered against the petitioner.
14.
Then the only question to be considered by this Court is whether the constitution of the General Court-martial is in accordance with the provisions of Rule 49 of the Air Force Rules and whether the constitution of a General Court-martial can be questioned before this Court in view of Section 161(1) of the Air Force Act, 1950.
15.
In regard to the challenge to the constitution of the composition of the General Court-martial is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the same is contrary to Rule 52(c) of the Air Force Rules, 1969 and that the objections raised by the petitioner has not been considered by the Court-martial, as per the provisions of Section 129 of the Air Force Act.
Rule 52 of the Air Force Rules, 1969 reads as hereunder :  "52.
Proceedings for challenge of members of Court.
- The order convening the Court and the names of the presiding officers and members of the Court shall then be read over to the accused and he shall be asked, as required by Section 129, whether he objects to be tried by any officer sitting on the Court.
Any such objections shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Section 129 : Provided that - (a) The accused shall state the names of all the officers to whom he object before any objection is disposed of; (b) The accused may call any person to give evidence in support of his objection, and such person may be questioned by the accused and by the Court; (c) If more than one officer is objected to, the objection to each officer shall be disposed of separately, and the objection in respect of that officer lowest in rank shall be disposed of first, and on an objection to an officer, the remaining officers of the Court shall in the absence of the challenged officer, vote on the disposal of such objection notwithstanding that objections have also been to any of the officers; (d) When an objection to an officer is allowed that officer shall forthwith retire, and take no further part in the proceedings; (e) When an officer objected to retire, and there are many officers in waiting, the vacancy shall be forthwith filled by any of the officers in waiting being directed by the presiding officer to serve in lieu of the retiring officer.
If there is no officer in waiting available, the Court shall proceed as directed by Rule 44; (f) The eligibility, absence of disqualification, and freedom from objection of an officer filling a vacancy shall be ascertained by the Court, as in the case of other officers appointed to serve on the Court."
16.
According to the petitioner, on the first hearing of the General Court- martial, the members of the Court-martial to ask the petitioner as to whether she has any objections in regard to the composition of the General Court- martial or against any member in particular.
Though she raised an objection, the same has not been considered in accordance with Section 129 of the Air Force Act, 1950.
In the first sitting of the Court-martial, the petitioner in writing has submitted that she has got objections for the appointment of all members of the Court-martial, as all the members are working at Bangalore and all the members of the Court-martial happens to be the ACC in C training commandant and that all of them are working under the same ACC-3rd respondent.
According to her, she had proposed to examine some of the members of General Court-martial as her witness and, therefore, she may not get justice.
The objections raised by the petitioner has been overruled by the Committee of Court-martial they have given a separate decision after hearing each of the members who have been constituted for the Court-martial proceedings.
The proceedings of the Court-martial is also made available to the Court.
Just because the members of the General Court-martial are working in Bangalore under one commandant, cannot be a ground to hold that they are prejudiced against the petitioner.
Be that as it may.
On the objections raised by the petitioner an order is passed under Section 129 of the Air Force Act.
According to the counsel for the respondents, against an order passed under Section 129, an appeal is provided under Section 161, therefore, the said contention cannot be considered by this Court.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, Section 161 would come into operation only if an order is passed by the Court-martial on merits after the trial.
According to him, an order is passed under Section 129 by the remaining members of the Court-martial in regard to the challenge made by the petitioner to a particular member of the Court-martial.
I have also seen the records produced by the respondents' counsel in regard to the proceedings of the Court-martial held on 5th April, 2005 and of the further dates of hearing.
Pursuant to the challenge made by the petitioner in regard to the deposition of each of the members of the Court-martial.
Proceedings were recorded and then a decision is given by the other members of the Court-martial.
Without going into the questionwhether the petitioner has to file an appeal under Section 161 of the Air Force Act in regard to an order passed under Section 129 of the Air Force Act, this Court is satisfied that the case of the petitioner is properly considered by the respondents in regard to the challenge made by her to the constitution of the Committee.
17.
The remaining grounds urged in the petition are left open and it is open for the petitioner to urge the same at a relevant point of time after the verdict of the Court-martial.
18.
In the circumstances, this Court does not see any reason to interfere with the proceedings initiated against the petitioner by the General Court-martial.
Accordingly, the petition is rejected.
Petition dismissed.