JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was engaged in the first instance on work-charged basis as a Class-IV employee in the Bhakra Dam Project, Nangal Township on 661955.
He continued to render service as such till 141962.
Thereafter, he came to be employed by the Beas Dam Project (Pong Dam), Talwara, on 26.4.1962 and he continued to render service till 12121975.
On being relieved from the Beas Dam Project (Pong Dam), Talwara, the petitioner assumed his duties at the Pong Power Plant, Civil Division (Power Wing), Talwara Township, on 15121975 and he continued to discharge his duties till 20.1.1977.
Thereafter, the petitioner was engaged in the Shah Nehru Project, Field Division, Talwara, on 19.8.1977 and he continued to render service at the said project till 631980.
Last of all, the petitioner was appointed in the Mukerian Hydel Project, Talwara, on 191980, wherein he continued to serve till 8101994, i.e., the date on which the petitioner attained the age of superannuation.
2.
It would be pertinent to mention, that during the course of his employment with the Mukerian Hydel Project, Talwara, the petitioner was absorbed into the service of the Punjab Electricity Board with effect from 161982.
While in the employment of the Punjab State Electricity Board, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4365 of 1991, claiming regularisation in service.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of in terms of the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2130.
Despite the aforesaid determination, the petitioner was not regularised in service.
3.
The Punjab State Electricity Board issued a policy instruction dated 1881994 providing for regularisation of work-charged staff like the petitioner, who had completed ten years' service.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, that the petitioner was entitled to regularisation under the aforesaid policy instruction.
The claim of the petitioner in the present writ petition, therefore, is for regularisation in service in terms of the policy instruction dated 1881994, and thereafter, for the release of pensionary benefits, which are available to regular employees on retirement from service.
4.
The claim of the petitioner for regularisation under the policy instruction dated 1881994 is contested by the respondents primarily for two reasons.
Firstly the attention of this Court has been invited to a communication dated 1291994 addressed by the petitioner to his employer, wherein he asserted as under :-  "It is respectfully submitted that I am working as a work-charged Mistri under your control.
I shall attain the age of 60 years on 8101994.
Now, the Board has decided to regularise the service of work-charged employee who have completed ten years as on 3131994 but I am not interested in regularisation any longer because I am going to retire from the service of the Board on 31.10.1994."
5.
It is, therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, that the petitioner himself having made up his mind that he did not wish to be regularised in service, cannot turn around to claim regularisation.
6.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that the age of superannuation for work-charged staff in the Punjab State Electricity Board is 60 years, whereas, the age of retirement on superannuation for regular employees is 58 years.
It is, therefore, the pointed contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, that in case the petitioner desired to be regularised, the petitioner should have claimed regularisation before attaining the age of retirement.
Since by the time of issuance of the policy instruction dated 1881994, the petitioner had already crossed the age of retirement on superannuation prescribed for regular employees, he is no longer entitled to press his aforesaid claim.
Having chosen to continue till the age of 60 years and having benefited by continuing as a work-charged employee, he cannot be allowed now to claim regularisation under the policy instruction dated 1881994.
7.
It is also the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, that the claim of the petitioner for pensionary benefits is wholly misconceived in view of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Executive Engineer, PSEB and others v. Teja Singh, 2000(10) SCC 15, wherein the facts were identical to the controversy in hand, namely, the concerned employee had continued in the employment of the Punjab State Electricity Board as a work-charged employee upto the age of 60 years and he had accepted the benefits under the Employees Provident Fund Scheme (as is also the case in the present controversy).
Despite thereof, Teja Singh aforesaid, had claimed pension under the Punjab Civil Services Rules (which are applicable to regular employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board).
The aforesaid contention of Teja Singh was not accepted by the Apex Court.
8.
In order to overcome the contention advanced on behalf of the respondents, learned counsel for the petitioner has invited the attention of this Court to the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh v. Hari Om Sharma and others, 1998(3) SCT 90 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 87, wherefrom the pointed attention of this Court has been invited to the following observations :-  "Learned counsel for the appellant attempted to contend that when the respondent was promoted in stop-gap arrangement as Junior Engineer-I, he had given an undertaking to the appellant that on the basis of stop-gap arrangement, he would not claim promotion as of right nor would he claim any benefit pertaining to that post.
The argument, to say the least, is preposterous.
Apart from the fact that the government in its capacity as a model employer cannot be permitted to raise such an argument, the undertaking which is said to constitute an agreement between the parties cannot be enforced at law.
The respondent being an employee of the appellant had to break his period of stagnation although, as we have found earlier, he was the only person amongst the non-diploma-holders available for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer-I and was, therefore, likely to be considered for promotion in his own right.
An agreement that if a person is promoted to the higher post or put to officiate on that post or, as in the instant case, a stop-gap arrangement is made to place him on the higher post, he would not claim higher salary or other attendant benefits would be contrary to law and also against public policy.
It would, therefore, be unenforceable in view of Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872."
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also invited the Court's attention to the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Polu Ram and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(4) RSJ 152 wherein it was observed as under :-  "In our opinion, the objection of the learned Advocate General to the maintainability of the writ petitions on the ground that the petitioners have accepted the terms of engagement without any protest is clearly misconceived.
The petitioners do not have any say in the matters relating to enactment of the rules, creation of the posts or mode of selection.
All these matters lie in the exclusive domain of the government/employer.
They are not in a position to dictate the terms to the government.
If they make an attempt to enter a bargain with the government about the terms and conditions of employment/engagement and insist on incorporation of those conditions which are more favourable to them, the appointing authority can refuse to appoint/engage them.
Therefore, acceptance of the conditions incorporated in the orders of appointment/letters or engagement cannot be made a ground to deny hearing to the petitioners in support of their plea that the respondents have acted arbitrarily in appointing them with wholly unreasonable and oppressive conditions of employment.
An identical objection was raised on behalf of the respondents in Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana, 1995(4) RSJ 329.
The same was rejected by placing reliance on the observations made by three- Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Government Branch Press v. DB Belliapa, AIR 1979 SC 429.
A similar objection was raised to the maintainability of the writ petition filed by Dr. Gulshan Kumari and others (supra), but same was over-ruled by placing reliance on the decision in Rajni Bala's case (supra).
For the detailed reasons recorded in Rajni Bala's case (supra) and Dr. Gulshan Kumari's case (supra), which we need not repeat here, we over-rule the objection raised to the maintainability of the writ petitions."
10.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgments, the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is, that as a model employer, the respondent cannot deprive the petitioner of benefits due to him.
11.
It is not possible to accept the various contentions advanced on behalf of the petitioner, for claiming, either regularisation or pension, as a consequence of the petitioner's employment with the Punjab State Electricity Board.
It is not a matter of dispute, that the claim of the petitioner for pension would crystalise only if the petitioner can be granted regularisation in service.
In so far as, the issue of regularisation is concerned, it is clear, that the petitioner opted for continuing in service upto the age of 60 years as a work-charged employee, since the claim of the petitioner for regularisation would curtail his employment at the age of 58 years.
Moreover, it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to claim regularisation after he had addressed a letter to his employer dated 1291994 (extracted above) that he does not desire to be regularised in service.
For the instant reason, the reliance on the judgments (noticed above) on behalf of the petitioner, is also misconceived.
The claim for regularisation in the instant case is based on the policy instruction dated 1881994.
The said instruction was issued well after the petitioner crossed the age of 58 years, i.e., the prescribed age for retirement of regular government employees.
In view of the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Balwant Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board, 2005(3) S.C.T.
769, Civil Writ Petition No. 820 of 1991, decided on 2742005, wherein the same issue had been raised by Balwant Singh was not accepted, the claim of the petitioner for regularisation under the policy instruction dated 1881994 is clearly unsustainable in law.
12.
Since the claim of the petitioner for regularisation itself is not acceptable, there is no question of dealing with the consequential benefits like release of pension etc., to the petitioner.
Even otherwise, the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Teja Singh's case (supra) settles the issue in hand.
The petitioner is identically placed as Teja Singh in the case adjudicated upon by the Apex Court, wherein it was concluded that in the circumstances in hand, pensionary benefits cannot be claimed by Teja Singh.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.