Uma Nath Singh, J - This order shall also dispose of connected CWP No. 1858 of 2004, as in both the petitions, only common questions of law, based on identical facts, are impugned.
In the CWP No. 8401 of 2003, widow of a deceased employee has prayed for (i) writ of Certiorari quashing the impugned order dated 2852002 (Annexure P/3) denying her claim for grant of family pension and (ii) writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to release gratuity and family pension with interest at the rate of 18% from the date of her husband's death (w.e.f 13121977).
2.
Briefly narrated the facts of the case are that petitioner's husband Karan Singh Rawat joined the Education Department, Haryana, as J.B.T.
Teacher on temporary basis on 231973 in Government Middle School (Village Kondal) Faridabad.
He died in harness on 13121977 while serving as J.B.T.
Teacher in Government Middle School (Village Sangala, Tehsil Nuh) District Gurgaon.
The petitioner being the legal heir of her deceased husband requested the District Primary Education Officer, Gurgaon (respondent No. 3) to release family pension and other benefits accruing to her in terms of relevant rules but the same yielded no results.
3.
Accordingly, the petitioner served a legal notice dated 10102001 (Annexure P/2) through her counsel for grant of family pension, but it also yielded no result.
Hence the petitioner was constrained to file Civil Writ Petition No. 3705 of 2002, which was disposed of by a direction to the respondents to decide the legal notice within a period of three months.
4.
To her utter dismay, the respondents vide their letter dated 2852002 (Annexure P-3) rejected the claim on the ground that her husband had worked only on six months basis and, therefore, she was not entitled to get benefits of family pension and gratuity.
5.
Similarly in connected CWP No. 1858 of 2004, petitioner's husband Balwant Singh, who had been appointed as temporary Driver through Employment Exchange on 511990, died on 11121994, after five years of service.
Her request for family pension in terms of Rule 4(1) of the Haryana Family Pension Scheme also yielded to results.
Accordingly, the petitioner served a legal notice for family pension on 1552003 and filed a writ petition in this Court wherein, this Court vide order dated 2282003 also directed the respondents to decide legal notice within four months.
Her legal notice too was rejected by the respondents on 28102003.
Hence, she filed the writ petition.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records.
The main submission of learned counsel in CWP No. 8401 of 2003, inter-alia, is that is that it is obvious from the service book of deceased husband of the petitioner that he was a temporary employee, therefore, to say that her husband was appointed on six months basis was palpably wrong; that in terms of Rule 122(b) of C.S.R.
Vol. 1 Part 1, service books of only those employees are maintained, who are either appointed on permanent or temporary post and who completed more than one year of service; that petitioner's husband was taken into Government service after proper medical check up, as provided under Rule 31 of CSR Vol. 1, Part 1; that her husband was issued only one appointment letter dated 371973 (Annexure P/1) and on the basis of that letter alone, he continued to work for about five years with the respondents as J.B.T.
Teacher till his death on 13121977, and that, besides, her husband was also given annual increments, as entered in his service book.
7.
It was further contended that the Director, Primary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, had also granted pay of summer vacation to petitioner's husband.
This is also a contention of learned counsel that in terms of Rule 4 (supra), an employee is entitled to get pension only after completion of one year of service, whereas petitioner's husband had served for five years on temporary basis and, therefore, she is entitled to get family pension under Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court reported in 1996(2) SCT 809 (P&H) : 1996(2) Recent Services Judgments 854 (Savitri Devi v. State of Haryana), wherein it was held that under the Family Pension Scheme, even if the deceased employee did not complete one year of continuous service, his dependents would be entitled to get family pension, provided the deceased employee was found medically fit before joining government service and a medical fitness certificate to that effect was placed on his service record.
Thus, the substance of the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner seems to be that the order of the respondents denying benefits of death-cum-retirement gratuity and family pension to the petitioner on account of death of her husband in harness is contrary to object and mandate of Rule 616-A(2)(b) of C.S.R.
Vol. II Part I and also the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
8.
Reliance was also placed on a Full Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1978(2) I.L.R.
Punjab and Haryana 414 (SK Verma and others v. State of Punjab, etc.), wherein this Court has held that ad hoc employee stands at the lowest rank and besides that there are also other categories, like permanent, quasi-permanent and temporary employee.
It has further been clarified that ad hoc employee is engaged casually or for a stop-gap arrangement or fleeting purposes.
Hence learned counsel submitted that petitioner's husband was a temporary employee and as such he was not in the category of ad hoc employee on six months basis.
9.
Reliance was also placed on another DB judgment of this Court reported in 2003(1) Recent Services Judgments 126 (Kewal Singh v. State of Punjab), wherein, it has been held that en employee, who served for more than 15 years, cannot be deprived of pension at the end of service, merely for the reason that the government failed to sanction a regular post for him.
10.
It was further contended that in yet another judgment of this Court reported in 1991(3) Services Cases Today 14 (Parwati w/o late Man Singh v. State of Haryana), it has been held that even an ad hoc/work charge service period would be counted towards qualifying service for the purpose of grant of pension and gratuity.
11.
It is pertinent to mention that death-cum-retirement gratuity is governed by Rule 616-A(2)(b) of Punjab Civil Services (as applicable to Haryana) Rules, Vol. 2, Part 1, which, on re-production, read as under :-  "Rule 616-A(2)(b) : The family of a pensionable employee who dies before completing five years of qualifying service shall also be eligible for the gratuity equal to six months emoluments of a Government employee at the time of his death except in cases in which death occurs in the first year of service where the gratuity admissible shall be equal to two months emoluments."
Similarly, grant of family pension to a widow after death of an employee is governed by the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 and the relevant portion thereof being Rule 4, on re-production, reads as under :-  "RULE 4 : This scheme is administered as below :- (i) The family pension is admissible in case of death while in service of after retirement on or after the 1st July, 1964, if at the time or death, the retired officer was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
The Family Pension will not be admissible in case of death after retirement if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
In case of death while in service a Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break.
Note 1 : The term one year continuous service used in para-4 (i) above is inclusive of permanent/temporary service in a pensionable establishment but does not include periods of extraordinary leaves, boy service and suspension period unless that is regularised by the competent authority or before completion of one year continuous service provided the deceased Government employee concerned immediately prior to his retirement to the service or post was examined by the appropriate Medical Authority and declared fit by that authority for Government service."
12.
Hon'ble the Apex Court in a judgment, reported in 2003(1) SCT 367 (SC) : 2003 Lab.
IC 76 (SK Mastan Bee v. The General Manger, South Central Railway and another), has held that in a case where husband of appellant widow, who was railway employee died in harness, denial of family pension to her amounted to violation of her fundamental right granted under Article 21 of the Constitution.
It was further held that it was obligatory on the part of the railway to have computed the family pension and other dues and offered the same to the appellant as soon as it became due to her and moreso, in view of the fact that she was an illiterate lady.
Further, also in the judgment reported in 1999(4) SCT 89 (SC) : 1999(4) Recent Services Judgements 78 (Madan Singh Shekhawat v Union of India and others), Hon'ble the Apex Court has held that it is the duty of the Court, while interpreting the provisions specially a beneficial provision, to give it a wider meaning rather than a restricted one, which would negate the very object of the rule.
Similar view had also been taken by the Hon'ble Court in judgment reported in 1999(2) SCT 600 (SC) :  1999(2) Recent Service Judgements 310 (Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Suresh and others).
13.
This Court has also held in a judgment reported in 2000(2) Service Cases Today 32 (Kanta Devi v. State of Haryana), that even in the case of a government employee having one year service to his credit, irrespective of the fact that he was permanent or temporary, his widow would be entitled to get family pension.
Further in a latest judgment of the Court reported in 2004(4) RSJ 546, it was held that even in the case of work charge service, if the employee has rendered more than five years of service, his widow and dependent would be entitled to get family pension and other benefits.
14.
Thus, on due consideration of rival contentions so also from the settled legal proposition as discussed and elucidated hereinabove, we have no hesitation to hold that both the writ petitions deserve to be allowed on merits in toto and it is accordingly ordered.
Consequently, the impugned orders of the department are quashed and the petitioners are held entitled to get family pension and gratuity apart from other monetary benefits, if any, in respect of service of their deceased husbands.
The respondents are directed to make the entire payment of dues resulting from success of these writ petitions within a period of two months from receipt of a copy of this order.
Thus, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8401 of 2003 and 1858 of 2004 stand allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.