SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the notice dated 3111994 (Annexure P-5) and the order dated 14.6.1994 (Annexure P-7) by which the petitioner has been informed that his date of promotion as Chief Engineer will remain 2421992.
The petitioner also seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondent to grant the pay-scale of Chief Engineer w.e.f.
1871991 together with interest at the rate of 18% pa. on the amounts that may become due.
2.
The petitioner was initially recruited as a Temporary Engineer with the erstwhile State of Punjab on 4.12.1957.
On re-organisation of the State, his services were permanently allocated to the successor State of Punjab.
In due course of time, he was promoted as Executive Engineer on 2151970/8121970 and as Superintending Engineer on 1451985.
The petitioner claims that it has been a normal practice in the respondent-department to grant promotion by way of Current Duty Charge, even against clear vacancy.
Later on, the period is regularised by ante-dated promotion from the earlier due date.
He has quoted instance of one GR Kalra who was initially appointed to the post of Chief Engineer on 151988 by giving him Current Duty Charge.
He was regularly promoted by order dated 5.8.1989 and was given promotion w.e.f.
151988.
Copy of this order is attached as Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The petitioner further states that in a similar manner, he was initially given Current Duty Charge on the post of Chief Engineer, even though a clear vacancy had existed, by order dated 1671991 (Annexure P-2).
By order dated 17.2.1992, his promotion was regularised, retrospectively w.e.f.
1871991 i.e. from the date he had taken Current Duty Charge (Annexure P-3).
Although the petitioner is entitled to the pay-scale of Chief Engineer, he was wrongly placed in the scale of Rs. 5900-200-6700 i.e. pay-scale of Superintending Engineer.
Subsequently, by order dated 1151992, the date of promotion of the petitioner had been changed to 2421992.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid order by filing CWP No. 7951 of 1993.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court by order dated 5111993.
The order dated 2421992 was quashed.
The respondents were given liberty to pass fresh order after complying with principles of natural justice.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the respondents issued a show-casue notice to the petitioner on 311994.
It was mentioned in the show-cause notice that in the order of promotion dated 2421992, it was wrongly mentioned by mistake that he had been regularly promoted as Chief Engineer from the date he took Current Duty Charge on the post of Chief Engineer i.e. 1871991.
The petitioner submitted reply to the show-cause notice and stated that the original order of promotion dated 1871991 is correct.
He is, therefore, entitled to the pay and pension with interest at the rate of 18% pa.
The explanation of the petitioner has been rejected only on the ground that the petitioner has failed to submit any legal ground or rules in support of his claim.
It has also been mentioned that in similar cases of Avtar Singh, Tarlochan Singh, RL Kukkar and GM Wadhwa, promotions were not granted from the previous date when they were entrusted the Current Duty Charge on the post of Chief Engineer.
3.
The respondent has filed a written statement in which it is stated that GR Kalra was not promoted as Chief Engineer retrospectively, as stated by the petitioner.
The order of promotion was not issued alongwith the other Superintending Engineers, who had been promoted as Chief Engineer w.e.f 151988, as there was some point raised by the Competent Authority about the seniority of GR Kalra.
Therefore, the case was referred to the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
Subsequently, the promotion of GR Kalra was approved from the same date i.e. 151988.
Rest of the averments made by the petitioner are not denied.
It is, however, maintained that the action which has been taken by the respondent in changing the date of promotion of the petitioner is in accordance with law and the applicable rules.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
He has mentioned a number of other officers who have been granted promotion with retrospective effect from the dates they were granted Current Duty Charge.
This replication was filed on 1431995.
In paragraph 1 of the replication, it is quite categorically stated that the respondent has wrongly stated that regular promotion is only given with effect from the date of issue of the order.
He points out that by order dated 551988 by Endst.
No. 550-70/EE-1 (4)/88 dated 19188, one Gurbachan Singh Juneja had been given the promotion on the post of Chief Engineer w.e.f.
1121987 and Gopalakrishna from 111988 (Annexure P-8).
The petitioner further goes on to state that the other 5 Chief Engineers referred to in the order (Annexure P-9), namely, KL Gandhi, HS Bedi, KS Sittal, Satinder Singh and PD Khanna were all placed in Current Duty Charge by order dated 2741988.
Since there was some dispute about the seniority of GR Kalra, so orders of regular promotion in regard to the other five were issued on 12588, though made effective from 1588.
He then reiterates the facts about the retrospective promotion of GR Kalra made by order dated 591989 w.e.f.
151988.
The respondent has not cared to controvert any of the factual averments made in the replication.
The petitioner also filed CM No. 1673 of 2000 seeking to place on record Annexures P-10, P-11 and P-12.
By CM No. 6901 of 2001, the petitioner has placed on record promotion orders dated 17101990 (Annexure P-13) and Notification dated 22101999 (Annexure P-14), by which a number of Superintending Engineers have been assigned Current Duty Charge in the old scale.
Except putting these orders on record, the petitioner has not made any averments as to the relevance of the same to the controversy.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also filed written submissions.
6.
I have heard Mr. KK Jagia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Ms. Charu Tuli, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent- State.
7.
At the outset, it may be noticed that Ms. Tuli has submitted that since the written submissions made by the counsel for the petitioner have been taken on the record, the State ought to be granted the same opportunity.
I am unable to accept the aforesaid submission.
This matter has been argued on a number of occasions.
Mr. Jagia and Mr. Gurdeep Singh had argued the matter on a number of occasions.
In fact the written submission do not add anything to the submissions which are contained in the writ petition.
Even the citations of authorities are the same, as the ones mentioned in the writ petition.
Mr. Jagia submits that the order dated 2421992 could not have been reviewed by the respondent by passing the subsequent order dated 1151992.
He submits that once the competent authority had passed the order, there is no power under the statutory rules which would enable the subsequent authority to review the order.
In support of the submission, the learned counsel has relied on judgment of the Privy Council in the case of RT Rangachari v. Secy.
of State, AIR 1937 PC 27.
In the aforesaid case, it has been observed as follows :-  "In a case in which after Government officials, duly competent and duly authorised in that behalf, have arrived honestly at one decision, their successors in office, after the decision has been acted upon and is in effective operation, cannot purport to enter upon a reconsideration of the matter and to arrive at another and totally different decision."
The aforesaid decision has been followed by division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 43-69 (General Manager and another v. Madan Lal Chopra and others) decided on 3.9.71.
Mr. Jagia relies on the following observations :-  "It was open to the authority to decide in any manner, but once having held that the said benefit was due to the respondents, it cannot review its order without there being specific power to review wherein the said authority is empowered to do so.
No provision has been shown to us in any of the relevant rules which could entitle the appellants to review their earlier order.
We are unable to agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that the impugned order is an executive order.
The order in question certainly decided adversely the rights of the employees and snatched from them the benefit which has already been given to them.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that no right was vested in the respondents as no provisions of rules afford any such right to them, is hardly of any consequence.
The rights can be vested in the employees in accordance with the rules and in accordance with the decisions taken by the employer from time to time."
8.
Having considered the entire matter, I do not find any merit in the aforesaid submissions.
It is by now well-settled that appointments or promotions given by mistake or against the rules can be corrected by the Competent Authority.
The only condition for rectifying an error is that before the error is corrected and any adverse order is passed against the Government employee, he should be given a show-cause notice.
His explanation should be sought.
If necessary, an opportunity of hearing should also be given.
On complying with the rules of natural justice, the mistake can always be corrected.
9.
Mr. Jagia thereafter argues that the order dated 1151992 has been quashed by this Court in CWP No. 7951 of 1993, on the ground that the petitioner had not been given an opportunity of hearing.
The issuance of a show-cause notice dated 311994, after order had been quashed by this Court, is of no consequence as it would amount to a post-decisional hearing.
He relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of KL Shepherd and others v. UOI, JT 1987(3) SC 600 and relies on the following observations :-  "It is common experience that once a decision has been taken, there is a tendency to uphold it and a representation may not really yield any fruitful purpose."
Learned counsel for the petitioner also relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case HL Trehan and others v. UOI and others, decided on 22111988, reported in AIR 1989 SC 568.
He lays emphasis on the following observations of the Supreme Court :-  "In our opinion, the post-decisional opportunity of hearing does not subserve the rules of natural justice.
The authority who embarks upon a post- decision hearing will naturally proceed with a closed mind and there is hardly any chance of getting a proper consideration of the representation at such a post-decisional opportunity."
10.
I am of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations would also not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of this case.
The respondent had issued the show-cause notice pursuant to the orders passed by this Court directing the respondents to take a fresh decision after observing rules of natural justice.
The petitioner had raised no objection before the Division Bench when the direction had been issued by the Division Bench on 5111993 in CWP No. 7951 of 1992.
The same argument was available to the petitioner at that time.
The petitioner accepted the opportunity of hearing, as he submitted a reply to the show-cause notice.
He cannot now be permitted to say that the respondents have passed the order with closed mind on the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the cases of KL Shepherd (supra) and HL Trehan (supra).
Learned counsel thereafter argues that the petitioner would be entitled to the pay on the post of Chief Engineer as he has actually performed the duties on the post of Chief Engineer from 1871991 to 1321992.
In support of this submission, learned counsel for the petitioner relies on a number of judgments which are as under :-  (1) Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana, 1983(2) SLR 734.
(2) Sewa Singh and another v. P.S.T.C.
and others, 1987(1) SLR 691.
(3) Ajit Kumar Jain v. State of Punjab and another, 1992(1) SCT 365 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 255.
(4) Secy-cum-Chief Engineer Chandigarh Administration v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(3) SCT 90 (SC) : JT 1998(3) SC 654.
(5) Selvaraj v. Governor of the Island of Port Blair and others, JT 1998(4) SC 500.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner thereafter submits that the petitioner was entitled to be promoted from the date he was given Current Duty Charge.
He submits that his claim is at par with the case of GR Kalra who was actually promoted on 591989 retrospectively w.e.f.
151988.
In the replication, the petitioner has categorically stated that the aforesaid Officer had been granted retrospective promotion from the date when he was given Current Duty Charge.
The respondent has not controverted the averments by filing a reply to the replication.
However, at the time of the hearing, Ms. Tuli has submitted that from the record, it becomes evident that numerous persons who were senior to the petitioner, have not been granted the benefit of promotion with retrospective effect from the dates they were given Current Duty Charge.
She also points out that in the order (Annexure P-7), it had been specifically pointed out that Avtar Singh, Tarlochan Singh, RL Kukkar and GM Wadhwa were not promoted from previous dates when they were entrusted Current Duty Charge on the post of Chief Engineer.
It is not possible to accept the submission of Mrs. Tuli.
Although these names had been mentioned in the order, but the corresponding plea had not been taken in the written statement.
What has not been pleaded, cannot possibly be taken notice of.
Apart from this, it is to be noticed that the case of the petitioner had throughout rested on the retrospective promotion having been granted to GR Kalra.
The impugned order (Annexure P-7) does not even make a mention of the claim of the petitioner in comparison to the case of GR Kalra.
It does not in any manner show as to how the claim of GR Kalra was distinguishable from that of the petitioner.
It is a settled proposition of law that employees similarly situated cannot be given differential treatment.
Such action would lead to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Failure of the respondent to distinguish the case of the petitioner from the case of GR Kalra impels me to hold that the petitioner has been discriminated against.
Therefore, the action of the respondent is in clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
12.
Even otherwise, I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner is clearly entitled to be promoted on the post of Chief Engineer from 1771991, the day he was given the Current Duty Charge.
There was a clear vacancy available against which the petitioner could have been promoted.
He was denied the promotion without any justification.
The petitioner would also be entitled to the salary of the post of Chief Engineer, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in a number of cases.
In the case of Smt. P Grover (supra), it has been categorically laid down that if a Government employee is asked to perform the duties of a higher post, the incumbent would be entitled to the salary of the higher post also.
In the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court has observed as follows :-  "Our attention was not invited to any rule which provides that promotion on an acting basis would not entitle the officer promoted to the pay of the post.
In the absence of any rule justifying such refusal to pay to an officer promoted to a higher post the salary of such higher post (the validity of such a rule would be doubtful if it existed), we must hold that Smt. Grover is entitled to be paid the salary of a District Education Officer from the date she was promoted to the post, that is, July 19, 1976 until she retired from service on August 31, 1980."
These observations are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The petitioner had worked on the post of Chief Engineer since 1871991.
He cannot, therefore, be denied the benefit of pay-fixation as Chief Engineer from the aforesaid date.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, however, submits that the judgment in the case of Smt. P Grover is distinguishable as the petitioner had not actually been promoted on the post of Chief Engineer and he had only been given Current Duty Charge.
In support of the submission, she relies on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. R.K. Aggarwal, 1997(3) SCT 638 (SC) : 1997(4) RSJ 49.
I am of the considered opinion that the aforesaid judgment would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In that case, the Supreme Court was dealing with a situation where the position of seniority of the employee was subject- matter of litigation.
It was not a case of an employee who had been given Current Duty Charge inspite of the fact that there was a clear vacancy in existence.
In the present case, the petitioner has categorically averred that a clear vacancy was available against which the petitioner could have been promoted.
He was not promoted, but given Current Duty Charge for the reasons best known to the respondent.
No reasons have been spelt out as to why it was absolutely essential to give only Current Duty Charge to the petitioner rather than the promotion to which he was entitled.
13.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned show- cause notice dated 311994 (Annexure P-5) and the order dated 14.6.1994 (Annexure P-7) are quashed.
The respondent is directed to fix the pay of the petitioner in the scale of the Chief Engineer from 1871991 till his retirement.
The respondent is also directed to redetermine the pension and other retiral benefits of the petitioner.
The consequential benefits be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.