SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
On 31101981, the petitioner resigned from the post of ASI in the Border Security Force (hereinafter referred to as "the BSF"), after rendering 11 years, 1 month and 17 days of service.
He was granted Pension under Rule 19 of B.S.F.
Rules, 1969.
The services of the petitioner were regularised under BSF Act, 1968 and BSF Rules, 1969.
Under Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as "the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972"), resignation entails forfeiture of entire past service and an employee resigning from service is not entitled to any pensionary benefits.
However, according to the petitioner, under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969, pension is available to a person who resigns after rendering minimum qualifying service of 10 years.
It was in these circumstances that the petitioner was granted full pensionary benefits, which, according to the petitioner, have been abruptly withdrawn by order dated 2282002 (Annexure P-2).
In this order, it is clearly stated that BSF personnel who have resigned from service under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969, before completing qualifying service of 20 years, are not entitled to get pensionary benefits as decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in its judgment dated 3032001 in respect of SLP Nos. 6166 of 1999, 2121 of 2000 and 2491-92 of 2001, reported as Union of India and others v. Rakesh Kumar, 2001(2) SCT 1085 (SC) : JT 2001(4) SC 306.
The aforesaid judgment was considered by the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation with the Department of Pension and Pensionary Welfare.
After due consideration, it was decided to stop payment of pension/family pension to all ineligible pensioners.
On the basis of the aforesaid, the Manager of the State Bank of Patiala, Gurdaspur and the Commandant 22nd BSF have been directed to stop payment of pension to the petitioner.
3.
Mr. Bal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued that pensionary benefits have been granted to the petitioner under the unamended Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules.
1972.
Under the unamended rules, it was specifically provided that on completion of minimum 10 years of service, one would be entitled to draw pension.
The aforesaid rule was amended in the year 1987.
The judgment of the Supreme Court has been rendered on the basis of the amended Rule 49.
In any event the petitioner had been granted pension w.e.f.
31101981.
Any subsequent amendment in Rule 49 could not have the effect of nullifying the vested rights of the petitioner.
Mr. Bal further submits that a bare perusal of the judgment in particular para 10 clearly shows that Proviso to Rule 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969 stood deleted w.e.f.
1411998.
Therefore, only the person resigning after 1411998 can be denied the benefit of pension in view of Rule 26 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
The deletion of Proviso to Rule 19 of the BSF Rules would operate prospectively and cannot take away the rights already vested in persons like the petitioner who are/were in receipt of pension for the last two decades.
4.
Mr. Guglani, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, submits that the matter is no longer res integra in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar (supra).
5.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
We are of the considered opinion that the arguments put forward by Mr. Bal have to be rejected in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar (supra).
The precise question which was raised before the Rent Control was "whether Members of BSF who have resigned from their posts, after serving for 10 or more years, but less than 20 years, are entitled to pension/pensionary benefits under the relevant provisions of the BSF Act, 1968 and the BSF Rules, 1969 or the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972."
The Supreme Court, after considering the entire matter, has held as follows :-  "In the result, there is no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules or on the basis of the GO, the respondents who have retired after competing qualifying service of 10 years but before completing qualifying service of 20 years by voluntary retirement, are entitled to get pensionary benefits.
The respondents, who were permitted to resign from service under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules before the attainment of the age of retirement or before putting such number of years of service as may be necessary under the Rules, to be eligible for retirement are not entitled to get any pension under any of the provisions under the CCS (Pension) Rules.
Rule 49 only prescribes the procedure for calculation and quantification of the pension amount.
The GO dated 27121995 does not confer any additional right of pension on BSF employees".
6.
Mr. Bal has vehemently argued that vested rights of the petitioner cannot be taken away.
he has submitted that the law laid down by the Supreme Court would be prospective and since the petitioner had been granted pension in the year 1981, the same cannot be withdrawn at this stage.
We are unable to agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
A wrong benefit granted on the basis of erroneous interpretation of the statutory service rules, cannot be permitted to be compounded by a direction of this Court.
The Courts cannot direct the grant of a benefit even if it causes hardship to a person, if it is initially granted contrary to the rules.
In fact, it appears that a similar argument was raised before the Supreme Court which has been noticed in paragraph 20 of the judgment in the case of Rakesh Kumar (supra), Shah, J has dealt with the aforesaid submission in the following words :-  "20.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that on the basis of the GO, a number of persons are granted pensionary benefits even though they have not completed 20 years of service, and, therefore, at this stage, the Court could not interfere and see that the pensionary benefits granted to the respondents are not disturbed and are released as early as possible.
In our view, for grant of pension, the members of BSF are governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules.
The CCS (Pension) Rules nowhere provide that a person who has resigned before completing 20 years of service as provided in Rule 48-A is entitled for grant of pensionary benefits.
It only provides that if a member of the Force who resigns and to whom permission in writing is granted to resign then the authority granting such permission may reduce the pensionary benefits if he is eligible to get the pension.
Therefore, by erroneous interpretation of the rules, if pensionary benefits are granted to someone it would not mean that the said mistake should be perpetuated by direction to the Court.
It would be unjustifiable to submit that by appropriate writ, the Court should direct something which is contrary to the statutory rules.
In such cases, there is no question of application of Article 14 of the Constitution.
No person can claim any right on the basis of decision which is de hors the statutory rules nor can there by any estoppel.
Further, in such cases there cannot be any consideration on the ground of hardship.
If the Rules are not providing for grant of pensionary benefits it is for the authority to decide and frame appropriate rules but the Court cannot direct payment of pension on the ground of so-called hardship likely to be caused to a person who has resigned without completing qualifying service for getting pensionary benefits.
As a normal rule, pensionary benefits are granted to a government servant who is required to retire on his attaining the age of the compulsory retirement except in those cases where there are special provisions."
Relying on the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a member, dismissed CWP No. 7050 of 2003 on 852003 reported as Gulzar Mohd.
v. Union of India, 2003(3) SCT 626 (P&H) : (2003(3) SLR 771).
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.