Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of a bunch of seven writ petitions being Civil Writ Petitions No. 7154, 7156, 7157, 7159, 7164, 7170, and 7179 of 2005.
2.
Respondent No. 1, Ram Avtar was engaged as Beldar in the month of March, 1984.
His services came to be terminated in the month of December, 1994.
Claiming that neither any charge-sheet had been served upon him nor and domestic enquiry had ever been held and further claiming that his services had been terminated in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), he raised an industrial dispute.
The aforesaid dispute was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak (hereinafter referred to as the "Labour Court").
3.
The claim of the workman was contested by the management.
Besides claiming that the workman had worked only on daily wages upto May, 1993 and that the work in the Forest Department was of seasonal nature, various other objections with regard to the jurisdiction of the Court were also raised.
It was also claimed that the Forest Department was not covered under the Act being not an industry.
4.
Learned Labour Court on the basis of the material available on the record found that the workman had completed more than 240 days during the preceding 12 calender months prior to his termination.
It was also found that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not complied with inasmuch as neither any notice of one month had been issued nor any compensation was paid to him either in lieu of notice period or for his retrenchment.
The learned Labour Court further found that the Forest Department was covered under Section 2(j) of the Act and was an industry.
5.
On the basis of the aforesaid findings, the learned Labour Court ordered reinstatement of the workman with continuity of his service and awarded 60% back wages vide an award dated January 20, 2000.
A copy of the aforesaid award has been appended as Annexure P/5 with the present petition.
The aforesaid award has been impugned by the State of Haryana, through the present petition.
6.
Shri Rameshwar Malik, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana has raised a solitary argument that the conclusion arrived at by the learned Labour Court that the management was an industry was totally unsustainable in law and was in fact contrary to the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of State of Gujarat and others v. Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar, Civil Appeal No. 1084 of 1998, decided on January 31, 2001.
A copy of the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court has been appended as Annexure P/6 with the present petition.
7.
We have duly considered the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner but find ourselves unable to agree with the same.
In fact, the controversy in question stands duly concluded against the petitioner by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition 1983 of 2002, decided on December 20, 2003 (State of Haryana v. Chiranji Lal and another).
In Chiranji Lal's case (supra) another Division Bench of this Court had duly examined the judgment of the Apex Court in Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar's case (supra).
The judgment rendered in Chiranji Lal's case (supra) has been followed by another Division Bench of this Court in Divisional Forest Officer v. Dhoppa and another, C.W.P.
No. 11987 of 2003, decided on April 20, 2004.
Relying upon the judgment of three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Chief Conservator of Forests and another v. Jagannath Maruti Kodhare, 1996(1) S.L.R.
56, wherein it was held that the Forest Department of the State of Maharashtra is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act, and also relying upon an earlier Division Bench of this Court and the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Sub Divisional Inspector of Post, Vaikam and others v. Theyyam Josheph, 1996(3) S.C.T.
786 : 1996(1) R.S.J.
623 and the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Banglore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa and others, A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 547, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the Forest Department, qua the workman is an industry.
In view of the aforesaid pronouncements, the ground of attack raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner to the award of the Labour Court is without any basis.
8.
We further find from the record that the award in the present case was passed on January 20, 2000.
A period of more than five years has elapsed.
No explanation with regard to the aforesaid inordinate delay has been given by the petitioner.
Thus, the present writ petitions are also liable to be dismissed on account of delay and laches.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present writ petitions are, accordingly, dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.