Viney Mittal, J - In Indian Society a teacher enjoys an exalted and elevated status.
He has been placed only next to the parents.
By the very nature of his job, a teacher is expected to impart not only the education but also impart in his students aesthetic abilities, moral and spiritual values and impeccable character.
The higher pedestal upon which a teacher is placed by the Society is because of the selflessness with which a teacher is expected to act while preparing the future of the country.
A teacher is not only incharge of the physical person of a student but also of his intellect and to shape up both, has to act with selfless involvement, diligence and a sense of renunciation so as the future of the country is safe in his hands.
2.
In the backdrop of the aforesaid expectations from a teacher, we are sadly dealing with the petition of a teacher who was found "guilty of moral turpitude involving exhibition of immoral sexual behaviour" towards girl students of class 10th.
On the basis of the aforesaid charges, his services were ordered to be terminated.
An appeal filed by him before the Appellate Authority also failed.
His challenge to the termination order before the Central Administration Tribunal was also rejected.
3.
Petitioner, Madan Lal, was appointed as a Trained Graduate Teacher (English) on June 4, 1992.
After the completion of his probation period, he was allowed to continue on his post till further orders.
He claims that his performance was satisfactory.
Initially, the petitioner was appointed as a teacher with Jawahar Novodaya Vidyalaya (hereinafter referred to as "JNV"), Longowal, District Sangrur.
On July 7, 1999, he was transferred to JNV, Chandigarh.
Certain complaints were received against the petitioner.
Accordingly, in contemplation of the disciplinary proceedings, he was placed under suspension vide order dated February 17, 2003.
In exercise of the powers conferred vide notification dated December 12, 1993, enabling the Commissioner (earlier Director) to dispense with the provisions of Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, for imposing major penalty in a case where a delinquent is prima facie found guilty of moral turpitude involving sexual behaviour or exhibition of immoral sexual behaviour towards any student, the Commissioner, Novodaya Vidyalaya Samiti passed an order dated March 17, 2003 whereby a preliminary enquiry was ordered into the complaints of sexual harassment of girls students of JNV, Chandigarh by petitioner, Madan Lal.
The petitioner, who was under suspension, was required to appear before the Enquiry Committee.
The inquiry committee informed the petitioner about the complaint of sexual harassment received from the girl students.
The petitioner was required to explain.
He submitted his explanation on April 25, 2003.
Mrs. Sushma Goswami, Principal, JNV, Pandoh who was directed to conduct a preliminary enquiry submitted her report to the effect that the petitioner is in the habit of making physical advances towards girl students and that he has been indulging in his nefarious activities for last some time.
Accordingly, the committee found the petitioner guilty.
The services of the petitioner were, accordingly, terminated vide order dated June 18, 2003 by the Commissioner in exercise of the power conferred under Notification dated December 20, 1993 with immediate effect.
It was further ordered that the petitioner would be paid pay and allowances for three months, as admissible under the rules, in lieu of the notice period.
Further, the Commissioner released a sum of Rs. 8,530/- towards subsistence allowance.
The petitioner challenged order of his termination by filing an appeal before the Chairman, (Appellate Authority).
The appeal filed by the petitioner was also dismissed and a communication in this regard was sent to him on February 23, 2004.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid order of termination as well as the order of rejecting his appeal by filing an Original Application, before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
4.
The claim of the petitioner was contested by the respondents, before the Tribunal.
They maintained "that 5-6 girls of 10th class met the Principal to complain about habit of applicant in making physical advances towards them.
The Principal marked an enquiry to be conducted by Mrs. Anupa Thakur, PGT (Bio) who recorded the statements of about 20 girl students belonging to 10th Class; 12th Class, 8th Class, 7th Class and even from 6th Class.
Thereafter, one Mrs. Sushma Goswami, Principal, JNV, Pandoh was directed to conduct preliminary investigation.
She submitted her report on 1922003 to the effect that applicant is in the habit of making physical advances towards the girl students.
The applicant was indulging in his nefarious activities for the last 2-3 months but the girl students could not dare to inform either their House Mistress or Principal due to fear and tortuous behaviour of the teacher concerned.
The report discloses...... "It is established that Sh. Madan Lal is guilty of kissing, touching private parts and making physical advances to Kumari.....
In addition to it he had also been making sexual overtures to Kumari...., Kumari.... etc." When the applicant appeared in the enquiry on 24th March, 2003, copies of the written statements of the girl students and staff members of Vidayalaya recorded earlier during the preliminary investigation were handed over to the applicant to enable him to know the evidence.
However, the Committee found the applicant guilty and he was ultimately dismissed from service by the disciplinary authority.
The appellate authority also upheld the order passed by the disciplinary authority.
They supported the action taken against the applicant.
5.
The various contentions raised by the petitioner were examined by the Tribunal.
However, vide order dated August 20, 2004, the Original Application filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Tribunal.
The petitioner has now approached this Court through the present petition.
6.
We have heard Shri SP Jain, learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner and have also perused the record of the case.
7.
Shri SP Jain, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the petitioner was a permanent employee of JNV and as such his services could not be terminated on the ground of misconduct except by following the procedure as provided under the Appointment and Appeal Rules.
Shri Jain has maintained that the notification dated December 20, 1993 relied upon by the Punishing Authority for passing the termination order was not applicable to the case of the petitioner, who was a permanent employee.
It has further been argued that once there were serious charges of misconduct levelled by the authorities against the petitioner then the regular procedure for holding an enquiry should have been followed.
Elaborating the aforesaid arguments further, the learned senior counsel has submitted that the misconduct of the petitioner could not be taken to have been proved without affording an opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine the students and various other witnesses, whose statements have been made the basis for coming to the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of moral turpitude involving exhibition of immoral sexual behaviour.
The other argument raised by the learned senior counsel is that the copy of the enquiry report has not been furnished and, therefore, the order of termination as well as the appellate order were liable to be set aside on this short ground alone.
In support of the aforesaid contention, the learned senior counsel has relied upon two judgments of the Apex Court in Avinash Nagra v. Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and others, 1997(1) SCT 852 (SC) : 1997(2) Supreme Court Cases 534 and State of UP v. Harendra Arora and another, 2001(2) SCT 1091 (SC) : 2001(6) Supreme Court Cases 392.
8.
We have given our anxious and thoughtful consideration to the aforesaid contentions of the learned senior counsel.
However, we find ourselves unable to agree with the same.
9.
At the out-set, we may notice the relevant clauses of notification dated December 20, 1993 as follows :-  "It has further been decided with the approval of the Executive Committee that the relevant provisions of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, as amended from time to time, which are applicable to all members of the staff of the Samiti, mutatis mutandis, shall be suitably amended to provide for special procedure in certain types of cases.
Accordingly, the provisions of Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 as applicable to the employees of the Samiti, relating to procedure for imposing penalties will stand amended to provide for special procedure in certain types of cases as enunciated below : A.
- (i) ............ (ii) ................ "B.
Whenever the Director is satisfied, after such summary enquiry as he deems proper and practicable in the circumstances of the case; that any member of the Navodaya Vidyalaya is prima facie guilty of moral turpitude involving sexual office or exhibition of immoral sexual behaviour towards any student, he can terminate the services of that employee by giving him one month's or three months' pay and allowances depending upon whether the guilty employee is temporary or permanent in the services of the Samiti.
In such cases, procedure prescribed for holding enquiry for imposing major penalty in accordance with CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965, as applicable to the employees of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, shall be dispensed with, provided, that the Director is of the opinion that it is not expedient to hold regular enquiry on account of serious embarrassment to the student or his guardians or such other practical difficulties.
The Director shall record in writing the reasons under which it is not reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry and he shall keep the Chairman of the Samiti informed of the circumstances leading to such termination of services."
A perusal of the aforesaid notification shows that although the provisions of Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 had been made applicable to all the employees of Samiti, mutatis mutandis, but in certain situations, as noticed in Clause B of the notification, it was provided that whenever the Director (now Commissioner) is satisfied after such summary enquiry, as he deemed proper and practicable in the circumstances of the case, that any member of the Navodaya Vidyalaya is prima facie guilty of moral turpitude involving sexual offence and immoral sexual behaviour, he can terminate the services of that employee by giving him one month or three months' pay and allowances, depending upon whether the guilty employee is temporary or permanent in the services of the Samiti.
In such a situation, the procedure prescribed under 1965 Rules was liable to be dispensed with, in case the Director (now Commissioner) is of the opinion that it is not expedient to hold regular enquiry on account of serious embarrassment of the student or his guardians or such other practical difficulties.
The Commissioner in such a case is required to record reasons.
10.
It is, thus, apparent that in cases covered under Clause B of the notification dated December 20, 1993, the Commissioner has been given powers to dispense with the application of 1965 Rules.
However, before resorting to the provisions of Clause B of the notification, reasons are required to be recorded in writing.
There is absolutely no distinction between a temporary employee or a permanent employee.
The notification is applicable to either of them.
11.
The allegations against the petitioner are of course covered under Clause B of the notification.
From the perusal of the order dated June 18, 2003 terminating the services of the petitioner, we find that it has been recorded by the Commissioner that it is not expedient and practical to hold regular enquiry under the provisions of 1965 Rules on account of serious embarrassment which would be caused to the concerned girl students and their parents.
Thus, we find that the Commissioner, while passing the order of termination, has exercised his powers conferred upon him vide notification dated December 20, 1993.
There is complete compliance of the provisions of the aforesaid notification.
12.
In Avinash Nagra's case (supra), the matter before the Apex Court also concerned a teacher who had been charged with sexual harassment of girl student.
Action had been taken against the aforesaid teacher under the notification dated December 20, 1993.
The regular departmental enquiry had been dispensed with.
The Supreme Court held that the conduct of the appellant (in that case) is unbecoming of a teacher muchless a loco parentis and, therefore, dispensing with regular enquiry under the rules and denial of cross-examination were legal and not vitiated by violation of the principles of natural justice.
13.
However, Shri Jain has relied upon the fact that the Supreme Court in that case had directed the management to issue a show-cause notice to the petitioner; conduct an enquiry and submit the report to the Court.
We have considered the aforesaid contention.
However, from the perusal of the judgment in Avinash Nagra's case (supra) we find that the Supreme Court had merely granted an additional opportunity to the aforesaid delinquent teacher when it had directed the management to issue show-cause notice and conduct an enquiry and thereafter submit a report to the Court.
The aforesaid show-cause notice was not issued to the aforesaid delinquent teacher under the Rules but under the directions of the Supreme Court, when the Special Leave Petition was kept pending.
Thus, the petitioner cannot draw any advantage from the issue of the show-cause notice on the directions of the Supreme Court.
Even in that case, the Supreme Court had held that exposing a girl student and her room-mates to the cross-examination and further publicity would be hazardous.
14.
Dealing with the next contention raised by the learned senior counsel, we may notice that in the case of Harendra Arora (supra), Supreme Court had made the following observations :  "If after hearing the parties, the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given, the Court/Tribunal should not interfere with the order of punishment.
The Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The Courts should avoid resorting to short cuts.
Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment, and not any internal appellate or revisional authority, there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonably opportunity.
It is only if the Court/Tribunal finds that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set aside the order of punishment."
15.
Once the procedure with regard to the holding of regular enquiry has been dispensed with and the order of termination has been passed by the Commissioner in exercise of the powers conferred under the notification of 1993, then it has not been shown by the petitioner as to in what manner any prejudice has been caused to him by the non-supplying of the copy of the enquiry report.
As a matter of fact, the aforesaid enquiry report was merely a preliminary enquiry.
On the basis of the statements of the girl students, the explanation of the petitioner had been sought.
He had been afforded an opportunity to present his case, thus, when the Commissioner had fully been satisfied about the existence of the misbehaviour of the petitioner, then the petitioner cannot claim that any prejudice had been caused to him by non- supplying of the copy of the aforesaid enquiry report.
The observations of the Supreme Court in Harendra Arora's case (supra) are fully attracted.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we do not find any merit in the present petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.