Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - Petitioner-Jagir Singh has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer made in the petition is to issue a writ of certiorari for quashing the award dated March 24, 1987 passed by the learned Labour Court, Bathinda.
A copy of the aforesaid award has been appended as Annexure P1 with the petition.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Conductor with Punjab Roadways.
His services were terminated on December 17, 1981 on the basis of a misconduct.
In fact on July 4, 1981 when the petitioner was working as a Conductor with the Punjab Roadways, then a raid was conducted and it was found that the petitioner had failed to issue the tickets of the requisite amount to the passengers although he had collected the full fare from the passengers.
Accordingly, a charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner.
He replied to the same and denied the charges.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed.
A departmental enquiry was held.
During the course of enquiry, Kartar Singh and Mohinder Singh, Inspectors of the Punjab Roadways who had checked the bus of the workman were examined.
The petitioner was given an opportunity to cross- examine the aforesaid witnesses.
Accordingly the petitioner cross-examined them at length.
3.
After the aforesaid evidence was led by the parties, the Enquiry Officer submitted a report and held the petitioner guilty.
Accordingly his services were ordered to be terminated.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute.
The matter was duly referred for adjudication under the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court, Bathinda.
4.
The learned Labour Court re-examined the matter.
On perusal of the entire record and examination of the enquiry file, the learned Labour Court found that the enquiry held against the petitioner was fair and proper.
The plea of the petitioner that the passengers had not been examined was rejected by the learned Labour Court on the basis of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India reported as State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, (1977)79 PLR 492.
Accordingly, it was held that the termination of the services of the petitioner was legal and proper and the workman was not entitled to any relief.
5.
The petitioner-workman has now approached this Court through the present petition.
6.
I have heard Shri Rohit Mahajan, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Shri CM Munjal, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the state-respondents No. 1 and 2 and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
7.
Shri Mahajan has primarily reiterated the grounds raised by the petitioner before the learned Labour Court and has argued that in fact a departmental action was taken against the petitioner and the aforesaid action was not supported by any evidence.
According to the learned counsel since it was a case of no evidence, therefore, the award of the Labour Court could not be legally sustained and is liable to be set aside.
According to the learned counsel it was mandatory for the department to have examined the passengers who were travelling in the bus at the relevant time.
8.
I am afraid the arguments raised by Shri Mahajan cannot be legally accepted in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Rattan Singh's case (supra).
It is well settled that the strict rules of evidence do not apply to the domestic proceedings.
It has also been held that in case of an embezzlement by a conductor of a bus, the statements of the passengers were not required to be recorded.
9.
The learned Labour Court on the basis of the examination of the entire enquiry file has given a categorical finding of fact that the enquiry held against the petitioner was fair and proper.
10.
No other point has been argued.
11.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any merit in the present petition.
This same is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.