VM Jain, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the plaintiff against the judgment and decree dated 292003 passed by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, whereby the appeal filed by the defendants was accepted, the judgment and decree of the Trial Court were set aside and the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
2.
Rajesh Kumar plaintiff had filed suit for declaration to the effect that the impugned order dated 1411998 passed by the Superintendent of Police-cum-Assistant Inspector General, Govt. Railway Police Punjab, Patiala, by virtue of which the plaintiff was discharged from service, was illegal and void and not binding on the rights of the plaintiff and similarly the impugned order dated 861999 passed by the Inspector General of Police Railway Punjab, Patiala rejecting the representation of the plaintiff was also illegal and void and as a consequential relief, it was prayed that the plaintiff be reinstated in the service from the date of discharge and the period during which he remained out of service be treated as period of duty and he was entitled to full pay allowances, etc. and was also entitled to other consequential benefits including seniority etc.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
After hearing both sides, the learned trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff and the orders dated 1411988 and 861999 were declared illegal and void and it was held that the plaintiff was entitled to all the benefits of service as if no order of discharge had been ever passed against him.
However, it was held that the plaintiff was not entitled to back wages from 1411998 onwards till he joined duty.
The appeal filed by the defendants was accepted by the learned Additional District Judge, the judgment and decree of the Trial Court were set aside and the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed, holding that the orders dated 1411998 and 861999 were perfectly legal and valid.
3.
The learned Trial Court while decreeing the suit of the plaintiff had placed reliance on the law laid down by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar v. The State of Punjab and others, 1994(4) RSJ 194.
The learned Additional District Judge, while accepting the appeal and setting aside the findings of the Trial Court had placed reliance on the law laid down by another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Parveen Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(2) SCT 527 (P&H) : 2001(3) RSJ 206, bearing CWP No. 17571 of 1998, decided on 27112000 in which the law laid down in Rakesh Kumar's case (supra) was also noticed.
Furthermore, reliance was also placed on the law laid down by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Sher Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 679 (P&H) : 1994(2) RSJ 412 and the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the cases of State of UP and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 551 and Jagdish Mitter v. Union of India, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 449.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted before me that as per the law laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in Rakesh Kumar's case (supra), the Trial Court had rightly decreed the suit of the plaintiff and the learned Additional District Judge had erred in law in accepting the appeal and setting aside the judgment and decree of the Trial Court, thereby dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
It has further been submitted that in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 427 (SC) : 1995(2) RSJ 869, the suit filed by the plaintiff deserves to be decreed as the parties had failed to follow the Punjab Police Rules while passing the impugned orders.
However, I find no force in these submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant.
As referred to above, the law laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in Rakesh Kumar's case (supra) was duly considered by the Division Bench in Parveen Kumar's case (supra) and it was held that the Hon'ble Judge did not agree with the observations of the Apex Court in Jagdish Mitter's case (supra) and Kaushal Kishore Shukla's case (supra).
It was further held that the Full Bench judgment in Sher Singh's case (supra) too had not been brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Judges and they were bound by the observations made therein.
It was further observed that in the normal course they would have referred the matter to the Larger Bench but in view of the aforesaid binding observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and in Full Bench of this Court, it was not necessary for them to adopt that course.
Since Rakesh Kumar's case (supra) was considered by another Division Bench of this Court in Parveen Kumar's case (supra) and it was held that the Judges were not bound by the observations of the Apex Court in Jagdish Mitter's case (supra) and Kaushal Kishore Shukla's case (supra), which were not brought to the notice of the Judges of the Division Bench deciding Rakesh Kumar's case (supra) and even the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Sher Singh's case (supra) had not been brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Judges, in Rakesh Kumar's case (supra), in my opinion, no case is made out for placing reliance on Rakesh Kumar's case (supra), which runs counter to the law laid down by a Full Bench of this Court and by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the various cases referred to above, which fact had been noticed by a latter Division Bench of this Court in Parveen Kumar's case (supra).
5.
In Parveen Kumar's case (supra), after considering the law laid down in various authorities referred to above, it was held by a Division Bench of this Court that the petitioners, who were Special Police Officers (SPOs) were daily wagers having no right to the post and according to the standing order dated 2671999, they would be governed by the Police Rules only after their enrolment as constables.
It was further held that since the petitioners had not been enrolled as constables, they were not governed by those Rules.
In view of the law laid down by this Court in Parveen Kumar's case (supra), in my opinion, it would be clear that the present plaintiff-appellant, who is also a Special Police Officer (SPO) was not governed by the Punjab Police Rules as he had also not been enrolled as a constable.
Under these circumstances, the learned Additional District Judge was perfectly justified in placing reliance on the law laid down by this Court in Parveen Kumar's case (supra) and in dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
So far as the authority 1995(2) RSJ 869 (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant is concerned, in my opinion, the same would have no application to the facts of the present case, inasmuch as the said authority pertained to a Police Official in the State of Haryana, who was appointed as a constable in Haryana Police and the Punjab Police Rules were applicable to him.
Placing reliance on the Punjab Police Rules, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had quashed the order of discharge.
However, the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagdish Mitter's case (supra) would have no application to the facts of the present case and the plaintiff-appellant cannot take any benefit of the same.
In view of the above, in my opinion, it would be clear that no case for interfering in the present Regular Second Appeal is made out, especially when no question of law, much less substantial question of law arises for determination in this appeal.
Hence, the present appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.