MM Kumar, J - The petitioner-State of Haryana has challenged the award of Labour Court, Rohtak dated 561986/2461986 vide which the workman- respondent No. 2 has been reinstated into service with the benefit of back wages because the demand notice was served by the workman-respondent No. 2 within less than two years of the date of his termination.
2.
It is appropriate to mention that services of the workman-respondent No. 2 were terminated on 2191979.
The misconduct which is alleged to have been committed by the workman-respondent No. 2 who has been working in the Haryana Roadways, Hisar Depot is dated 361979 when a bus bearing No. 5151 was to leave from Delhi to Fazilka at 2.15 A.M.
The bus was so overcrowded that 21 passengers were sitting on the roof top along with two members of the Inspectorate staff.
The allegation against the workman-respondent No. 2 was that he had charged fare of more than Rs. 97/- from the passengers without issuing them vouchers and blew the whistle to start at Baropal.
The workman- respondent No. 2 is alleged to have been caught red handed of embezzlement of Rs. 97/- because when two passengers were checked by the Inspectorate staff, they were found without ticket and the conductor did not issue them tickets.
The workman-respondent No. 2 has put his version stating that the bus was overcrowded and he had not stopped the bus at Baropal for not issuing tickets to the passengers sitting on the roof of the bus.
Those passengers had boarded for Fatehabad and when he was issuing tickets to them, the checking staff snatched the tickets from his hands.
He was not allowed to punch the tickets and charge of embezzlement was levelled against him.
The Enquiry Officer after holding enquiry held the workman-respondent No. 2 guilty of misappropriation and ordered termination of his services vide order dated 2191979.
On a reference made by workman-respondent No. 2 under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for brevity, `the Act'), the Labour Court although recorded the findings that the enquiry has been held in accordance with law by affording proper opportunity to the workman-respondent No. 2 but some reservation was shown with regard to the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
While expressing the view on issue No. 2, the Labour Court accepted the version of workman-respondent No. 2 that Bal Kishan MW-4 had categorically admitted that workman-respondent No. 2 was aware about the presence of the Inspectorate staff who were sitting on the roof of the bus.
It was claimed by MW-3 that they were sitting on the roof of the bus which was not noticed by the workman-respondent No. 2.
The Labour Court concluded that no conductor like the workman-respondent No. 2 would indulge into the conduct of embezzlement, once he knows that Inspectorate staff was in the bus and the Labour Court found the explanation plausible.
The view of the Labour Court on the aforementioned issue No. 2 reads as under :-  ".....
The defence offered by the petitioner is that since the bus was overcrowded, he had not stopped bus at Baropal for issuing tickets to the passengers sitting on the roof of the bus and the said passengers were bound for Fatehabad and that when he was issuing tickets to (sic ?)
Inspectors snatched the tickets from his hand and did not allow him to punch the same and in this situation a trumped up charge of embezzlement was made against him.
In support of his version, he has examined one witness Shri Gopi Ram as WM-1.
During the course of domestic enquiry also, this was the plea of the petitioner.
So, the consistent stand of the petitioner is that he never intended to embezzle any amount as alleged and that the Inspectorate staff whose duty was to assist him in collecting the Government revenue, acted in a mala fide manner in foisting a charge of mis-conduct against him.
Shri Bal Kishan MW-3 stated that when the bus started from Hisar bus stand they set on the roof of the bus un-noticed by the Conductor and that they knew that the passengers sitting on the roof of the bus had not been issued tickets.
He further admitted and not denied by Shri Bal Kishan, who was examined as MW-4 that the Conductor was in know that the Inspectorate staff was sitting on the roof of the bus.
Under these situations, it is difficult to believe that the Conductor will care to indulge in any act of mis-appropriation of Government money knowing fully well that he cannot escape scot free.
In this view of the matter the defence offered by the petitioner becomes plausible.
This aspect of the matter was not considered by the Enquiry Officer or the punishing authority.
Under these circumstances, the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer were not correct and resultantly, the order of the termination passed against him is unsustainable.
So, interference by this Court under Section 11-A of the said Act is called for.
The workman is ordered to be reinstated..." 3.
Ms. Mamta Singal, learned State counsel has argued that the Labour Court has committed grave error in law in recording the finding of facts that the workman-respondent No. 2 would not indulge in misappropriation as he was aware of the presence of the Inspectorate staff.
The findings are conjectural in nature.
According to the learned counsel, once the basis of the finding is knocked out, then plausible defence taken by the workman-respondent No. 2 would be completely exploded.
Learned counsel has further emphasized that the quantum of money would not be relevant consideration in case of embezzlement.
In support of her submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of State Transport Commissioner, Haryana and another v. Nafe Singh and another, 2001(1) SCT 289 (P&H) : 2001(1) RSJ 229.
4.
Mr. Kanwaljit Singh, learned counsel appearing for workman-respondent No. 2 has argued that the incident is of 361979 and the workman-respondent No. 2 was reinstated into service on 561986.
It is pointed out that when the writ petition came up for motion hearing, no stay was granted and subsequent application seeking stay of the impugned award of the Labour Court was also declined by this Court on 20.5.1988.
Learned counsel has also made submission that even in cases where the enquiry has been found to be in accordance with the procedure laid down by the rules, there is no bar on the powers of the Labour Court to set aside the findings under Section 11-A of the Act.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Scooter India Limited, Lucknow v. Labour Court, Lucknow and others, AIR 1989 SC 149 and The Workmen of M/s. Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co of India Pvt. Ltd. v. The Management and others, AIR 1973 SC 1227.
It has further been submitted that more than 25 years have passed and the workman-respondent No. 2 has been working with the petitioner- Department.
To reverse the findings, at this stage, would cause prejudice to the rights of the workman-respondent No. 2.
It is claimed that in similar circumstances, the Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation v. UA Malek, 2001(10) SCC 548 has taken the view that the award of the Labour Court should not be disturbed after such a huge delay.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the award made by the Labour Court, I am of the considered view that the findings recorded by the Labour Court on the issue of plausibility of the defence of workman- respondent No. 2 do not deserve to be disturbed.
There is nothing on the record to assume that workman-respondent No. 2 was not aware about the presence of the Inspectorate staff on the roof top of the bus.
The Labour Court has placed reliance on the statement made by MW-4 Bal Kishan who had not denied the aforementioned fact.
The defence of the workman-respondent No. 2 as put forward before the Labour Court was not considered by the Enquiry Officer or the punishing authority.
It was under these circumstances that the power under Section 11-A of the Act has been exercised by the Labour Court for setting aside the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
Such a source is permissible in law as has been held by the Supreme Court in the case of Scooter India Ltd (supra).
The timings of the bus and the travelling of the passengers on the roof top who were 21 in number further shows that there could be a bona fide mistake on the part of workman-respondent No. 2.
Even otherwise, the allegations made would be open to a suspicion because when the workman-respondent No. 2 was issuing the tickets, he was caught at that stage.
Therefore, the view of the Labour Court recorded in its award dated 561986 does not deserve to be interfered with.
Moreover, a long period has elapsed.
There is nothing on the record to infer that the workman-respondent No. 2 has thereafter misconducted himself.
In this regard reliance placed by learned counsel for workman-respondent No. 2 in UA Malek's case (supra) is meritorious and the view expressed in the aforementioned judgment is fully applicable to the facts of the present case.
Therefore, there is no ground to interfere with the award of the Labour Court which has the occasion to guage and peep into the demeanour of the witnesses including the workman-respondent No. 2.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.