Tapen Sen, J - The basic prayer of the petitioner in the instant case is for issuance of a writ of mandamus upon the Respondent authorities to appoint petitioner No. 2 on the post of a clerk under the Exgratia Rules and also to release salary and other benefits together with interest.
2.
From the pleadings made, it appears that the husband of petitioner No. 1 died in harness while he was working as driver on 251998.
In March, 2000 petitioner No. 2 passed his matriculation and thereafter he applied for employment.
On 2072000, respondent No. 3 informed petitioner No. 1 that the case for employment has been sent to the higher authorities.
In the meantime on 2822003 (vide Annexure P-4), the State of Haryana framed the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependants of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003.
It is the grievance of the petitioners that on 592003, the respondent No. 3, instead of providing employment to petitioner No. 2, informed the petitioner No. 1 to indicate as to whether she was interested in taking Rs. 25 lacs as financial assistance.
One month thereafter i.e. 5112003, the petitioners appeared before the Committee and filed affidavit stating that they were not interested in taking Rs. 25 lacs as financial assistance.
Finally on 2792004 (Annexure P-11), the respondents repeated their offer to petitioner No. 1 that if she so desired, she could take a sum of Rs. 25 lacs as financial assistance.
According to the petitioners, they then served several legal notices and prayed that instead, the petitioner No. 2 be provided employment.
3.
This Court is not inclined to grant any relief to the petitioner.
Let it be recorded that in this case, the husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of petitioner No. 2 died on 251998 and well over 5 years (now reaching almost 6 years) have gone by.
The consideration for compassionate appointment cannot be kept alive forever.
Let it further be recorded that this Court had the occasion to deal with a similar matter in the case of Subhash v. State of Haryana and others, 2005(2) SCT 478 (P&H), CWP No. 2227 of 2005) and by a reasoned judgment dated 10.2.2005, this Court, while referring to various judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court recorded as follows :  "While we deal with the issue, we think that perhaps the time has now come when we should tell the Government what the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India said in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal.
The relevant portion of paragraphs 2 and 3 of that judgment are therefore worth reproducing as follows : "The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz. relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment, which are suddenly unturned.
Unmindful of this legal position, some Governments and public authorities have been offering compassionate employment sometimes as a manner of course irrespective of the financial condition of the family of the deceased and sometimes even in posts above Class III and IV.
That is legally impermissible."
(Underlining by us) We are of the view that the normal procedure for appointment is open recruitment following a lawful and legal procedure.
Such a procedure means that appointment is made after vacancies are identified and then they are advertised calling for applications from the public at large.
Upon receipt of such applications, the candidates are screened, interviewed and short-listed in a rational and reasonable manner.
Legally, there are only two known methods/modes of recruitment.
One of them being open recruitment as indicated above and the other is filling up the vacant posts by promotion.
The concept of compassionate appointment is a third source which has been developed on the basis of compassion but such compassion cannot be allowed to gallop like an unruly horse in favour of one or other member of the family of the deceased because if it were to be so allowed, then such a consideration would go against the expectations of millions of other families which have been subjected to similar unforeseen miseries on account of the death of their bread-winner.
The concept of compassionate appointment virtually obliterates an elaborate and transparent procedure of open recruitment but in the opinion of this Court, following the observations of the Apex Court, such a procedure cannot be allowed to keep the consideration alive for a period ad finitum.
If it is allowed to do so, it will encroach and create inroads into an otherwise transparent procedure commonly known as open recruitment.
The effect would be that all of a sudden, when other persons are in the queue waiting for their turn for regular appointment, their legitimate expectations would abruptly be snatched away by a seeker of compassionate appointment at a time when the consideration for such appointment had become non-existent - the deceased parent having died 4/5 years ago - an event which can hardly be said to be reasonable vis-a-vis persons waiting for regular appointment.
We are, therefore, of the view that there cannot be continuity of cause of action in matters to compassionate appointment.
We also take notice of the fact that the Haryana Roadways was established for the benefit of the public.
It runs on the basis of public funds of the Government.
In the process of establishing a smooth network of vehicles and in order to provide comfort to the travelling public, it provides employment in a regular and lawful manner through open recruitment.
Such an organisation cannot be obliged to go on keeping alive the claims of every "Tom, Dick and Harry" for compassionate appointment.
Their obligation cannot be equated with the obligation of the State to ensure that no citizen is deprived of its livelihood.
Even then, such an obligation cannot be stretched to such an extent that the State or an organisation of the State is obliged to provide employment to every member of every family whenever there is death in that family.
In a matter pertaining to the claim for employment from displaced persons whose lands had been acquired, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, while dealing with the cases of Butu Prasad Kumbhar v Steel Authority of India Ltd, reported in 1995(3) SCT 325 (SC) : 1995 SCC Supp.
(2) 225 at 229 (para 6) have held, in the context of the Rourkella Steel Plant, that even if the Government or the Steel Plant would not have offered any employment to any person, it would not have resulted in the violation of any fundamental right.
On the contrary, their Lordships have said that acceptance of demand for employment would run counter to Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
This Court is constrained therefore to observe that Haryana Roadways has been dedicated to the public and it cannot be said to be the private property of its employees who can be allowed to raise demand for appointment whenever and wherever they like by invoking a procedure which blocks an otherwise transparent method of open recruitment.
Such demands, if allowed, would deprive the management an opportunity to appoint people through open advertisement from across the country.
It seems to us that on account of one or other Order/Orders passed by Courts, claims after claims are pouring into the portals of this Court raising a hue and cry about the inaction of the Government in not providing compassionate appointment.
We do not find any fault with the Government nor do we wish to compel them by an Order of this Court to be subjected to a position where they will be justified in complaining that they are being deprived of their right to resort to a transparent and open method of recruitment.
If we pass such an Order it would run counter to the principles of actus curiae neminem gravavit (an act of Court shall prejudice none), because this Court would frown and would not pressurize the respondents in such a manner that it has the effect of upsetting constitutional safeguards of public bodies to get and appoint the best hands through open advertisements from across the country.
We also take judicial notice of the fact that the father of the petitioner died on 1192001 and this writ petition has been filed on 8/922005.
Consequently, this Court holds that this writ petition is devoid of merit and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs."
We do not wish to take any contrary view to the ones already taken in the aforementioned judgment.
Consequently, we proceed to hold that this case is covered by the ratio of the judgment rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2227 of 2005 decided on 10.2.2005.
This writ petition is therefore dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.