Tapen Sen, J - The writ petitioner prays for issuance of a writ of mandamus commanding upon the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the post of a clerk or on any other suitable post under the ex-gratia scheme in view of the Government Instructions dated 3181995 (Annexure P-1) and the Notification dated 2822003 (Annexure P-5) as well as in view of the Government Instructions dated 1022004 (Annexure P-6).
2.
Suraj Mal, father of the petitioner, who was working on the post a driver in the Haryana Roadways, Rohtak Depot, died in harness on 1192001.
The petitioner stated that at that point of time, Government Instructions dated 851995 and 3181995 (Annexure P-1) in matters pertaining to the grant of compassionate appointments to the dependents of the deceased were applicable.
As per Instructions dated 3181995, ex-gratia employment was confined to Class III and IV posts and if such posts were not available with the department, then the head of the Department was required to take up the matter for appointment with other departments.
It was also stipulated therein that a seniority list in respect of pending ex-gratia appointment cases would be maintained by every Head of the Department and that the cases would be kept alive till the time the appointment was offered against a vacancy either in that department or some other department.
It was also provided that a compassionate appointee would be appointed one pay scale below the post held by the deceased.
3.
According to the petitioner, he was fully covered by Annexure P-1 and soon after the death of his father, he filed an application before the respondent No. 3 on 25.9.2001 (Annexure P-2) seeking compassionate appointment.
He also prayed that monetary benefits enuring to the benefit of the deceased such as GPF, GIS etc. be given in equal shares to him and to his brother namely, Sanjay Kumar.
4.
Further case of the petitioner is that he submitted the aforementioned application in the prescribed manner together with the marks that he had obtained in BA Part III and MA examinations vide Annexures P-3 and P-4.
5.
According to the petitioner, the respondent sat tight over the matter and in the meantime on 2882003, the Government amended the ex-gratia scheme and framed a new set of Rules known as "the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of the Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003."
6.
The petitioner states that as per the old Policy dated 851995 read with the one dated 3181995 (Annexure P-1) all cases of ex-gratia appointment had to be processed and decided by Heads of Departments within three months from the date of receipt of the application.
This has been stated by the petitioner in paragraph 5 of the writ petition but the Instructions dated 851995 has not been actually brought on record, but what the petitioner wants to convey has been stated in paragraph 5.
This statement in paragraph 5 has been verified by the petitioner as being true and correct to the knowledge of the petitioner.
If he was relying on portions of the instructions dated 851995, then he should have brought that document on record and should have verified the same as being true to his information derived from the records of the case.
This becomes all the more necessary because the Instructions dated 3181995 which has been annexed as Annexure P-1 do not indicate that in the earlier instructions the Government was actually obliged to process all claims under the ex-gratia schemes within a period of three months.
In any event, the Instructions dated 851995 were superseded by Instructions dated 3181995 (Annexure P-1) and these instructions do not contain any such obligatory clause.
7.
According to the petitioner, he was completely dependent on the deceased and his case is covered under the old instructions as also under the new instructions.
He states that he has submitted several representations to the authorities including the Chief Minister vide Annexure P-7 but no action was taken in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner has stated that even after the new Rules came into force, he opted for ex-gratia appointment instead of monetary compensation to the extent of Rs. 25 lacs.
8.
In fact, what the petitioner states and claims is that his father died in harness on 1192001 and he filed an application for compassionate appointment as per Rules on 25.9.2001 but the respondent sat tight over the matter and having done so, they have acted arbitrarily and have deprived the petitioner of the benefit of compassionate appointment and consequently, they should be mandated to appoint him through the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus by this Court exercising jurisdiction under It scope of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
9.
It is true that the father of the petitioner died on 1192001 while he was in harness.
It is also true that the petitioner applied for compassionate appointment vide Annexure P-2 on 25.9.2001.
It is a also a stark reality that the respondents sat tight over the matter and as a result of their inaction, almost four years have gone by till date.
10.
In a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India delivered in the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar, 1996(2) SCT 778 (SC) : (1996)8 SCC 23, their Lordships, follwing the judgment of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. The State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : (1994)4 SCC 138, have held that compassionate appointment cannot be granted after a long lapse of a reasonable period and that the very purpose of compassionate appointment, as an exception to the general rule of open recruitment, is intended to meet the immediate financial problem suffered by members of the family of the deceased employee.
Taking note of yet another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996(2) SCT 207 (SC) : (1996)1 SCC 301, their Lordships have observed that the very object of compassionate appointment is to relieve unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by the sudden demise of the earning member of the family.
11.
The aforementioned judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court was delivered while considering an order of this Court which had directed the compassionate appointment be given to Naresh Tanwar.
Being aggrieved with the aforementioned direction, the Haryana State Electricity Board moved up to the Apex Court and after considering the judgments delivered in the cases of Umesh Kumar Nagpal and Jagdish Prasad, their Lordships approved the view that the consideration for compassionate appointment was not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in future, the object being to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of death of the sole bread-winner.
As such, compassionate employment cannot be claimed and offered after whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over.
12.
While we deal with the issue, we think that perhaps the time has now come when we should tell the Government what the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India said in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal.
The relevant portion of paragraphs 2 and 3 of that judgment are, therefore, worth reproducing as follows :  "The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provisions of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz. relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment, which are suddenly upturned.
Unmindful of this legal position, some Governments and public authorities have been offering compassionate employment sometimes as a manner of course irrespective of the financial condition of the family of the deceased and sometimes even in posts above Classes III and IV.
That is legally impermissible".
(Underlining by us).
We are of the view that the normal procedure for appointment is open recruitment following a lawful and legal procedure.
Such a procedure means that appointment is made after vacancies are identified and then they are advertised calling for applications from the public at large.
Upon receipt of such applications, the candidates are screened, interviewed and short-listed in a rational and reasonable manner.
Legally, there are only two known methods/modes of recruitment.
One of them being open recruitment as indicated above and the other is filling up the vacant posts by promotion.
The concept of compassionate appointment is a third source which has been developed on the basis of compassion but such compassion cannot be allowed to gallop like an unruly house in favour of one or other member of the family of the deceased because if it were to be so allowed, then such a consideration would go against the expectations of millions of other families which have been subjected to similar unforeseen miseries on account of the death of their bread-winner.
The concept of compassionate appointment virtually obliterates an elaborate and transparent procedure of open recruitment but in the opinion of this Court, following the observations of the Apex Court, such a procedure cannot be allowed to keep the consideration alive for a period ad finitum.
If it is allowed to do so, it will encroach and create inroads into an otherwise transparent procedure commonly known as open recruitment.
The effect would be that all of a sudden, when other persons are in the queue waiting for their turn for regular appointment, their legitimate expectations would abruptly be snatched away by a seeker of compassionate appointment at a time when the consideration for such appointment had become non existent - the deceased parent having died 4/5 years ago - an event which can hardly be said to be reasonable vis-a-vis persons waiting for regular appointment.
We are, therefore, of the view that there cannot be continuity of cause of action in matters to compassionate appointment.
13. we also take notice of the fact that the Haryana Roadways was established for the benefit of the public.
It runs on the basis of public funds of the Government.
In the process of establishing a smooth network of vehicles and in order to provide comfort to the travelling public, it provides employment in a regular and lawful manner through open recruitment.
Such an organization cannot be obliged to go on keeping alive the claims of every "Tom, Dick and Harry" for compassionate appointment.
Their obligation cannot be equated with the obligation of the State to ensure that no citizen is deprived of its livelihood.
Even then, such an obligation cannot be stretched to such an extent that the State or an organization of the State is obliged to provide employment to every member of every family whenever there is death in that family.
In a matter pertaining to the claim for employment from displaced persons whose lands had been acquired, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, while dealing with the cases of Butu Prasad Kumbhar v Steel Authority of India Ltd, 1995(3) SCT 325 (SC) : 1995 Supp.
(2) 225 at 229 (para 6) have held, in the context of the Rourkella Steel Plant, that even if the Government or the Steel Plant would not have offered any employment to any person, it would not have resulted in the violation of any fundamental right.
On the contrary, their Lordships have said that acceptance of demand for employment would run counter to Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
14.
This Court is constrained therefore to observe that Haryana Roadways has been dedicated to the public and it cannot be said to be the private property of its employees who can be allowed to raise demand for appointment whenever and wherever they like by invoking a procedure which blocks an otherwise transparent method of open recruitment.
Such demands, if allowed, would deprive the management an opportunity to appoint people through open advertisement from across the country.
It seems to us that on account of one or other Order/orders passed by Courts, claims after claims are pouring into the portals of this Court raising a hue and cry about the inaction of the Government in not providing compassionate appointment.
We do not find any fault with the Government nor do we wish to compel then by an Order of this Court to be subjected to a position where they will be justified in complaining that they are being deprived of their right to resort to a transparent and open method of recruitment.
If we pass such an Order it would run counter to the principles of actus curiae neminem gravavit (an act of Court shall prejudice none), because this Court would frown and would not pressurize the respondents in such a manner that it has the effect of upsetting constitutional safeguards of public bodies to get and appoint the best hands through open advertisement from across the country.
We also take judicial notice of the fact that the father of the petitioner died on 1192001 and this writ petition has been filed on 8/922005.
Consequently, this Court holds that this writ petition is devoid of merit and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.