IM Quddusi, J- Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned standing counsel.
2.
This writ petition has been filed against the impugned order dated 27-5-96, contained in Annexure No. 2 to the writ petition, dismissing the petitioner from service on the basis of conviction from the civil Court.
3.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Forest Guard/Forest Preservator in the Forest Department on 4-9-1988 in place of his deceased father Sri Shyam Lal Sharma who died in harness.
According to the petitioner, a false case was registered against him under Section 302, IPC in the year 1993, in which the petitioner was sent to jail and was suspended from service vide order dated 20-1-1994 and subsequently, since the petitioner was convicted in the criminal case, he was dismissed from service vide impugned order dated 27-5-1996 contained in Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
4.
Against the order of conviction the petitioner had filed a criminal appeal in which the petitioner was released on bail on 29-4-1999.
Thereafter the petitioner filed a Writ Petition No. 7338(SS) of 2000 before this Court, in which vide order dated 15-12-2000 the subsistence allowance was directed to be paid to him but in relation to reinstatement of the petitioner, the said writ petition was not pressed.
Subsequently, when on the application filed by the petitioner the conviction order was suspended during pendency of Cri.
Appeal No. 285 of 1995 vide order dated 9-5-2003, then the present writ petition has been filed for reinstatement of the petitioner as well as for quashing the impugned termination order pending disposal of criminal appeal on the strength of stay of conviction order.
5.
During the course of arguments, mainly, two points were assailed by learned counsel for the petitioner.
Firstly, that the impugned dismissal order is solely based on conviction of the petitioner in Case Crime No. 384/1993 under Section 302, I.P.C. but in the entire dismissal order conduct of the petitioner leading to his conviction was not discussed which is mandatory under Art. 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Secondly, the order of conviction on the basis of which the petitioner was dismissed from service, was itself stayed by this Court in Criminal Appeal filed by the petitioner  6.
Therefore, before proceeding further, Article 311(2) and its second proviso of the Constitution of India are liable to be perused, which are quoted as under:-  "311.
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State -  (1) ..................................................... (2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges : Provided .....................................
Provided further that this clause shall not apply -  (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge, or (b) and (c) .........................................." 7.
In the case of the Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway v. TR Chellappan, (1976)3 SCC 190 : (AIR 1975 SC 2216) it has been held that a criminal Court after conviction does not impose any penalty but passes a sentence whether it is one of fine, or imprisonment or whipping or like.
The Penal Code has been on the statute book for a large number of years and the rule making authority was fully aware of the significance of the words `conviction' and `sentence' and if it really intended to use the word `penalty' as an equivalent for `sentence', then it should have used the word `sentence' and not `penalty'.
In these circumstances we are satisfied that the word `penalty' has been used in juxtaposition to the other connected provisions of the Rules appearing in the same part.
8.
In respect of Rule 14 of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1968 as well as Proviso (a) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution, it has been held that the words `where penalty is imposed' in rule 14(i) should actually be read as `where any penalty is imposable', because so far as the disciplinary authority is concerned it cannot impose a sentence.
It could only impose a penalty on the basis of the conviction and sentence passed against the delinquent employee by a competent Court.
9.
However, T R Chellappan's case (AIR 1975 SC 2216) (supra) has been overruled in Tulsi Ram Patel's case, 1985(3) SCC 398 : (AIR 1985 SC 1416) to the extent that natural justice principles are completely excluded from the purview of Proviso and the punishment has been imposed by the concerned authority ex parte.
10.
The Division Bench of this Court in the Case of Sadanand Mishra v. State of UP, 1993 LCD 70 has mentioned the principles enunciated by Hon'ble Supreme Court, as under :-  (1) On the conviction of an employee on a criminal charge, the order of punishment cannot be passed unless the conduct, which had led to his conviction is also considered.
(2) The scrutiny or examination of conduct of an employee leading to his conviction is to be done ex parte and an opportunity of hearing is not to be provided for this purpose to the employee.
11.
Similarly, in the case of Shyam Narain Shukla v. State of UP, 1988(6) LCD 530 a Division Bench of this Court on the basis of the Tulsi Ram Patel's case, has held as under :-  "In view of the above decision of the Supreme Court, it has to be held that whenever a Government servant is convicted of an offence, he cannot be dismissed from service merely on the ground of conviction but the appropriate authority has to consider the conduct of such employee leading to his conviction and then to decide what punishment is to be inflicted upon him.
In the matter of consideration of conduct as also the quantum of punishment the employee has not to be joined and the decision has to be taken by the appropriate authority independently of the employee who, as laid down by the Supreme Court, is not to be given an opportunity of hearing at that state."
12.
In the case of Union of India and another v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(3) SCC 398 : (AIR 1985 SC 1416) the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under :-  "Before, however, any clause of the second proviso can come into play, the condition laid down in it must be satisfied.
The condition for the application of each of these clauses is different.
In the case of clause (a) a government servant must be guilty of conduct deserving the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank which conduct has led to him being convicted on a criminal charge.
In the case of clause (b) the disciplinary authority must be satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry.
In the case of clause (c) the President or the Governor of a State, as the case may be, must be satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient to hold an inquiry.
When these conditions can be said to be fulfilled will be discussed later while dealing separately with each of the three clauses.
The paramount thing, however, to bear in mind is that the second proviso will apply only where the conduct of a government servant is such that he deserves the punishment of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
If the conduct is such as to deserve a punishment different from those mentioned above, the second proviso cannot come into play at all because Art. 311(2) is itself confined only to these three penalties.
Therefore, before denying a government servant his constitutional right to an inquiry, the first consideration would be whether the conduct of the concerned government servant is such as justifies the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
Once that conclusion is reached and the condition specified in the relevant clause of the second proviso is satisfied, that proviso becomes applicable and the government servant is not entitled to an enquiry.
The extent to which a government servant can be denied his right to an enquiry formed the subject matter of considerable debate at the Bar and we therefore, now turn to the question whether under the second proviso to Art. 311(2) even though the enquiry is dispensed with, some opportunity at least should not be afforded to the Government servant so that he is not left wholly without protection.
As most of the arguments on this part of the case were common to all the three clauses of the second proviso, it will be convenient at this stage to deal at one place with all the arguments on this part of the case, leaving aside to be separately dealt with the other arguments pertaining only to a particular clause of the second proviso."
13.
In view of the above, this Court is of the opinion that the order of dismissal from service has been passed merely on the basis of the conviction and not on the basis of the conduct, which has led the conviction of the petitioner and once the conviction order was stayed by this Court in Criminal Appeal No. 285 of 1995, the sole basis of dismissal of the petitioner i.e. the conviction order disappears after its stay.
14.
Therefore, the impugned order of dismissal from service is not sustainable in the eye of law and the petitioner is liable for his reinstatement in service.
15.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The impguned order dated 27-5-96 dismissing the petitioner from service is quashed.
Consequently, the petitioner will be reinstated in service subject to result of Criminal Appeal No. 285 of 1995 pending before this Court.
However, this will not bar the opposite parties to consider the conduct of the petitioner in the light of the observations made above, in case the stay order passed in the Criminal Appeal staying the conviction does not remain in existence.
Petition allowed.