NK Sud, J - This writ petition is directed against the award of the Labour Court, Bhatinda, dated 29111984 upholding the termination of the services of the petitioner-workman and thereby deciding the reference in favour of the Management.
2.
Petitioner was working as a Conductor with the Punjab Roadways since 1972.
He was granted leave of about four months from 27.5.1980 to 2391980.
He applied for further extension of leave which was declined.
Since, he did not join duty on 2491980, his services were terminated by the Management vide order dated 22.1.1981 with effect from (sic).
The petitioner challenged his termination and raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court.
According to the workman, the termination was illegal as the Management had failed to comply with the statutory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It was also claimed that no inquiry whatsoever had been held against him.
On the other hand, the Management claimed that since the workman had not joined duty after the expiry of his sanctioned leave on 2491980, letter dated 30101980 was sent to him requiring him to join the duty immediately.
Since the workman failed to respond to this letter, an advertisement was published in Daily Akali Patrika and the Tribune on 511981 notifying to the petitioner that he had remained absent from duty with effect from 2491980 and calling upon him to join duty within 15 days from the date of the said publication failing which his services would be terminated.
It was, therefore, claimed that since the workman had not joined even after the expiry of 15 days notice, his services had been validly terminated.
3.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner, points out that it has been proved on record that the registered letter dated 30101980 was addressed to Saudagar Ali and not to the petitioner whose name is Sardar Ali.
It has also come on record that the said letter had been received undelivered with the report from the Postman that the workman concerned was stated to be out of the village.
He further stated that the petitioner lived in a remote village Ramuwala Harchoka, Tehsil Moga, District Faridkot, where there is no circulation of Akali Patrika or the Tribune and, therefore, he was not aware of the notice published in the said two newspapers.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that even otherwise the services of the workman could not have been terminated without requiring him to explain the unauthorised absence from duty.
This not having been done, tantamounted to violation of the principles of equity and natural justice.
For this purpose, he placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lakshmi Precision Screws Ltd v. Ram Bhagat, AIR 2002 Supreme Court 2914, where termination order of a workman under identical circumstances had been set aside.
4.
Mr. Hoshiarpuri, learned Assistant Advocate General, on the other hand, supports the award of the Labour Court and states that since the workman had failed to respond to the registered letter as also to the notice published in the newspapers, his services were validly terminated.
5.
There is no dispute about the facts of the case.
It stands proved that the registered letter dated 30101980 had, in fact, been addressed to a wrong person and was never delivered to the petitioner.
When it was received back by the Management, it did not choose to send the letter afresh.
It is, however, true that the notice was duly published in the two newspapers; namely, Akali Patrika and the Tribune, on 511981 whereby the workman was asked to join duty within 15 days and also informing him that if he fails to join his services would be terminated.
However, the question for consideration is as to whether the Management could terminate the services of the workman on his failure to report for duty within 15 days as per notice published in the two newspapers on 511981 or was it required to call upon him to explain his absence before treating it as a misconduct warranting termination of his services.
The facts noticed earlier merely show that the workman had remained absent without obtaining leave from the Management.
However, before treating this absence as a misconduct warranting action against the workman, fair play in action required that the procedure adopted must be just, fair and reasonable.
The Management ought to have sought the explanation of the workman before taking any action against him which has, admittedly, not been done in this case.
The case is, therefore, squarely covered by the ratio of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Lakshmi Precision Screws Ltd (supra).
In that case also, the workman had remained absent from duty from 13101990 and a letter was sent to him on 17.10.1990 informing him that since he was absenting himself from duty without authorised leave, he was advised to report back within 48 hours and also tender his explanation for his absence, otherwise his dis-interestedness was to be presumed.
The Apex Court held that this letter could not be treated as an opportunity to the workman to explain his conduct.
6.
In L Robert D'Souza v. The Executive Engineer, Southern Railway and another, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 854, also, the Apex Court has observed that "absence without leave constitutes misconduct and it is not open to the employer to terminate service without notice and inquiry or at any rate without complying with the minimum principle of natural justice."
9.
In the present case, admittedly, no such opportunity had been granted to the workman.
Accordingly, the termination order of the workman violated the principles of equity and natural justice and cannot be sustained.
The same is, accordingly, set aside.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner has also contended that since the workman had put in more than 240 days of continuous service in the 12 months prior to the date of his termination, the Management could not terminate his services even on account of unauthorised absence without complying with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
For this purpose, he has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in L Robert D'Souza's case (supra).
However, since I have set aside the termination on the first ground itself, I do not deem it necessary to go into this question.
9.
It may also be mentioned that since the workman has died on 28112002, his legal heirs shall only be entitled to the amount which the workman would have been entitled to had he been allowed to continue in service from the date of demand notice up to the date of his death or retirement whichever was earlier.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
Petition allowed.