Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - This revision petition filed by the Management under Article 227 of the Constitution of India raises a challenge to an order dated 2482004, passed by Labour Court, Amritsar whereby the petitioner has been directed to produce certain record on an application filed by the respondent- workman.
2.
Briefly, the facts for deciding the controversy in this revision petition, are that the Management i.e. the Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (in short "BHEL") has unit at Goindwal Sahib in District Amritsar.
The dispute between the parties was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court, Amritsar, which is the following effect :-  "Whether termination of service of General Secretary, workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
3.
On 962004, the authorised representative for the workman filed an application for production of the following records :-  (i) All Attendance/Payment/Muster Roll Record of employees of all categories from 111985 to 31121994.
(ii) All appointment/letters issued to workmen concerned on initial appointment as per standing orders.
(iii) Termination order issued, if any, to concerned workmen.
(iv) Muster Roll of employees kept as contract workers or as contract labour from 111985 to 31121994.
(v) BHEL union letters 311993, 6.6.1993 to management.
(vi) Receipt Register 111993 to 6121993.
(vii) Order file 111993 to 3131994" 4.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar vide order dated 2482004 observed that so far as item Nos. (vi) and (vii) are concerned, the Management has already produced the record.
It further observed in regard to record at item No. (ii) that no appointment letters were issued.
Similar reference is with regard to item No. (iii).
The reply regarding item No. (v) was that these letters were never received in the office of the Management.
As regards item No. (iv) it was noticed that the Management is ready to produce the same.
The Presiding Officer by the impugned order had directed the Management to produce the record except that mentioned at item Nos. (ii) and (v).
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the application filed by the workman is not only vague but it seeks to make an attempt to dig out certain material in their favour by making fishing enquiry, into the summoned material which is legally not permissible.
The learned counsel further submitted that the record of all the employees sought by the workman is not only bulky but is irrelevant for the determination of controversy involved in the reference before the Labour Court and the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court has allowed the same without appreciating the implication and relevancy of the documents summoned by the workman.
6.
The counsel for the respondent-workman controverted the submission of the petitioner and supported the order of the Labour Court.
The learned counsel submitted that the production of record is essential for the just decision of the reference by the Labour Court and the Management cannot withhold the production of the record as the relevancy or otherwise of the same has to be seen at the time of arguments.
7.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance, perused the record.
As observed earlier, the Labour Court has directed the Management to produce the entire record except mentioned at serial Nos. (ii) and (v).
Since the workman has not challenged the order declining production of documents at serial Nos. (ii) and (v), the same stands accepted by the workman.
However, as regards the record mentioned at serial Nos. (vi) and (vii), the Labour Court has observed that the Management has produced the record, thus, there remains no controversy with regard to the same.
The record mentioned at serial No. (iii) has been stated by the Management to be not available with them, therefore, the Management could not be asked to produce the same.
The Management had agreed to produce record at item No. (iv).
Accordingly, the same shall be produced by the Management at the time of trial.
8.
The main bone of contention in the present case remains against the production of record mentioned at serial No. (i).
The prayer by the workman under serial No. (i) is for the production of All Attendance/Payment/Muster Roll Record of employees of all categories from 111985 to 31121994.
The objection raised by the counsel for the petitioner appears to be just as the workman cannot ask for the record of all the employees for the period 111985 to 31121994.
The counsel for the respondent-workman during the course of arguments, however, restricted the production of record for the period 111985 to 31121994 in respect of the 20 workmen who are before the Labour Court.
The prayer made by the respondent-workman is just and reasonable.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, the order dated 2482004 is modified to the extent that the Management shall produce the record for the period 111985 to 31121994 in respect of those employees whose cases are before the Labour Court for adjudication.
9.
With the above observations, the revision petition is disposed of.
Order accordingly.