JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The respondent-workman moved an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), seeking various monetary ascertainable reliefs based on the service rendered by him in the employment of the petitioner-management.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court), by an order dated 2431987 required the petitioner-management to pay an amount of Rs. 11,510/- along with interest @ 6% pa. till the date of the aforesaid amount was actually paid to the respondent-workman.
The award of the Labour Court dated 2431987 is subject matter of challenge through the instant writ petition.
2.
The first and foremost contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Labour Court through the aforesaid impugned award dated 2431987, awarded a sum of Rs. 11,510/- to the respondent-workman which included a component towards gratuity.
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the issue relating to payment of gratuity to the respondent-workman.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a decision rendered by the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Labour Court, Jullundur and others, 1981(1) Labour Law Journal 354, wherein an issue identical to the one raised in the instant writ petition, had been raised before the Apex Court.
In the aforesaid case also, the claim, inter alia, on the issue of gratuity had been made by the workman by filing an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
While adjudicating upon the aforesaid issue, the apex Court observed as under :-  "7.
It is apparent that the Payment of Gratuity Act enacts a complete Code containing detailed provisions covering all the essential features of a scheme for payment of gratuity.
It creates the right to payment of gratuity, indicates when right will accrue, and lays down the principles for quantification of the gratuity.
It provides further for recovery of the amount, and contains an especial provision that compound interest at nine per cent per annum will be payable on delayed payment.
For the enforcement of its provisions, the Act provides for the appointment of a controlling authority, who is entrusted with the task of administering the Act.
The fulfilment of the rights and obligations of the parties are made his responsibility.
Any error committed by him can be corrected in appeal by the appropriate Government or an appellate authority particularly under the Act.
8.
Upon all these considerations, the conclusion is inescapable that Parliament intended that proceedings for payment of gratuity (sic) the Payment of Gratuity Act must be taken under that Act and not under any other.
That being so, it must be held that the applications filed by the employee respondents under Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act did not lie, and the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and dispose of them.
On that ground, this appeal must succeed."
Based on the aforesaid determination of the Supreme Court, learned counsel for the petitioner states, that the impugned award of the Labour Court dated 2431987 deserves to be set aside.
3.
In order to controvert the aforesaid primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner on the issue of jurisdiction, learned counsel for the respondent-workman has placed his reliance on a decision rendered by the Apex Court in RSDV Finance Co Pvt. Ltd. v. Shree Vallabh Glass Works Ltd, 1993(3) RRR 425 (SC) : AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2094.
While dealing with the issue of jurisdiction, the Apex Court arrived at the conclusion that three conditions were to be satisfied before a decision could be set aside on the ground of want of jurisdiction.
The aforesaid three conditions were defined as under :-  "(i) That such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest possible opportunity; (ii) in all cases where issues are settled then at or before such settlement of issues; (iii) there has been a consequent failure of justice."
In order to ascertain whether the issues culled out by the Supreme Court in RSDV Finance Co Pvt. Ltd. (supra) were made out in the controversy raised in the instant case, learned counsel for the respondent-workman has invited the Court's attention to Annexure P-2 i.e. the written statement filed by the petitioner-management in response to the application filed by the respondent- workman under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Having perused the same, this Court is satisfied that the petitioner-management did not raise any jurisdictional issue before the Labour Court in response to the application filed by the respondent-workman under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Additionally, the award of the Labour Court, which is available on the record of this case as Annexure P-3, also reveals that no issue was struck by the Labour Court on the issue of jurisdiction.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner-management neither raised nor pressed the issue of jurisdiction before the Labour Court.
No argument whatsoever has been addressed at the Bar on the basis of which it can be concluded that there has been consequential failure of justice by the adjudication of the claim of gratuity at the hands of the Labour Court.
In view of the factual position noticed above, it is apparent that the petitioner-management does not fulfil even one of the three conditions stipulated/defined by the Supreme Court.
It needs to be emphasised that according to the determination by the Supreme Court in RSDV Finance Co Pvt. Ltd. (supra), each of the three conditions, extracted above, have to be fulfilled before a matter adjudicated upon by a Court, can be set aside for reasons of a jurisdictional error.
For the reasons recorded above, it is not possible for this Court to accept the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
It would be unfair to the learned counsel for the petitioner, if reference is not made to an argument repeatedly addressed by him on the issue adjudicated upon hereinabove, namely, that the plea of jurisdictional error was raised by the petitioner-management in response to the application filed by the respondent-management under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, in the form of preliminary objections taken in the written statement.
The preliminary objections raised in the written statement before the Labour Court are being extracted hereunder :-  "1.
The claim/benefits claimed by workman in present application are not based on existing right, and on the contrary they are non-existent, without any cause of action and are imaginary, bogus and hence straightaway merit dismissal with costs.
2.
That all the items of benefits claimed vide column No. 1 to 12 on the basis of award dated 1221980 in Ref.
No. 146 of 1970 (except claim under column No. 4 which has already been paid) merit rejection under law and will as under facts."
After having closely perused the pleadings in the preliminary objections raised at the hands of the petitioner-management before the Labour Court, it is clear that the issue of jurisdiction was never canvassed at the hands of the petitioner-management before the Labour Court.
Finding himself in the aforesaid predicament, learned counsel for the petitioner then contended, that the services of the respondent-workman had been terminated as a consequence of determination of his guilt in a regular departmental enquiry.
The aforesaid order of termination was, however, set aside at the hands of the Labour Court, Amritsar, by its award dated 1221980.
Relevant portion of the award, sought to be relied upon by the petitioner-management, has been extracted in paragraph 4 of the reply filed by the petitioner-management (to the application filed under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, by the respondent-workman).
Based on the determination of the Labour Court, Amritsar, in it award dated 1221980, learned counsel for the petitionr-management vehemently contends that the petitioner was awarded compensation for the remaining period of his employment, and on account of the fact that the petitioner had been granted the aforesaid compensation, it is contended that he would not be entitled to any other benefits other than the aforesaid compensation.
It is not possible for me to accept the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is apparent from the pleadings of the instant case, and the various extracts of the award of the Labour Court, Amritsar, dated 1221980, extracted therein, that the order of termination of the services of the respondent-workman, based on an alleged theft the quantum of which admittedly was less than Re.
1/-, was set aside by the Labour Court.
The compensation paid to the respondent-workman was in lieu of the shortfall of the remaining service i.e. from the date of termination till the date of retirement.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, it is natural to conclude that the order of termination of the respondent-workman was set aside and he was compensated for the remaining part of the service.
Thus viewed, the petitioner would be entitled to, in law, to all such benefits that a retiree would be entitled to on attaining the age of superannuation.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-management, having sought instructions, states that the entire compensation, determined by the Labour Court vide its award dated 2431987, has since been released to the respondent-workman.
In view of the determination recorded above, I find no merit in this petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.