Tapen Sen, J - Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the Respondent.
The Petitioner is aggrieved by the issuance of the impugned order as contained in Annexure P-6 by which the Under Secretary (Establishment), purporting to act for and on behalf of the Secretary of the Haryana State Electricity Board, informed the Petitioner that his request for restoring his original seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineer had not been found feasible for acceptance.
The Petitioner, therefore, prays for quashing of the said Communication dated 861988 and also simultaneously prays for a direction upon the Respondent to prepare the final seniority list of Assistant Engineers in accordance with Regulation No. 15 of the Punjab State Electricity Board, Services of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965.
The case of the Petitioner as has been sought to be made out in the writ petition is as follows :-  (a) On 12.2.1969, the Petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Engineer, Class-II and became due for promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer in the year 1975.
However, for some reason or the other, he was not promoted and on the contrary, on 2621976 he was awarded with a minor punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect.
(b) Prior to the aforementioned incident, the Board had prepared a seniority list which was circulated on 761974 vide Annexure P-2 wherein the Petitioner was shown at Serial No. 335 showing him in an officiating capacity.
According to the Petitioner, this was final for all practical purposes and he should continue to be at Serial No. 335 as on the date it was circulated.
(c) The Petitioner states that in the next year ie on 27101977, the Respondent Board issued Annexure P-3 by which he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar at the stage of Rs. 600/- in the Scale of Rs. 450-1100 which was stopped on account of the earlier order of punishment dated 2621976, whereafter his pay was accordingly fixed at Rs. 790/- with effect from 181977.
Pursuant to the aforementioned order dated 27101977, the Petitioner was then promoted as an Assistant Executive Engineer on 541978 and finally, to the post of Executive Engineer on 24111987.
(d) The Petitioner stated that on 1751978, a gradation list of Assistant Executive Engineers was circulated vide Memo dated 1961978 and the Petitioner was shown at Serial No. 174 whereas, if the earlier seniority list had been taken into consideration, he should have been placed at Serial No. 134.
He filed a representation followed by reminders but he did not receive any reply and in the meantime, the Board again circulated a tentative seniority list of Assistant Executive Engineers as on 31.8.1981 and in this seniority list, he was shown at Serial No. 117 whereas, he should have been placed between Serial Nos. 76 and 77.
2-3.
According to the learned counsel for the Petitioner, Regulation 15 of the aforementioned Regulations stipulates that the seniority shall be determined by date of appointment in a particular class and that, as per the 5th Proviso appended to the said Regulation, the inter se seniority would be as per the relative seniority in the class from which promotions were effected except in cases they were superseded either on account of inefficiency or ineligibility.
Learned counsel for the Petitioner stated that he was not given promotion for reasons which were neither for being inefficient nor for being ineligible for promotion, and therefore, his seniority should accordingly be restored.
4.
The learned counsel further submits that even if the order of punishment is taken note of, it will be evident that the same related only to stoppage of his monetary benefits and had nothing to do with seniority.
In fact, upon perusal of the order of punishment dated 2621976, it is evident that the punishment was stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect.
For the foregoing reasons, this Court is of the opinion that the Respondent was not justified in passing the orders to the prejudice of the Petitioner by relegating him lower in the subsequent seniority lists and in note taking into consideration the earlier seniority list.
5.
The learned counsel for the Respondent, referring to the written statement filed by the Haryana State Electricity Board, has submitted that the writ petition suffers from delays and laches, inasmuch as, the Petitioner seeks to challenge the denial of promotion to which he became entitled in the year 1975.
According to the Respondent, the Petitioner was promoted as an Assistant Executive Engineer on 541978 and the writ petition itself was filed in the year 1988 i.e. 10/12 years from the date of the accrual of cause of action because he actually became promoted on 541978, whereafter he had ample opportunity to move this Court.
It is also the case of the Respondent that the promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer was made on the basis of seniority with reference to service records and disciplinary cases and that his case was considered for promotion but he was not found fit in view of the department enquiry.
6.
This Court is unable to accept the contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the Board primarily for the reason that undoubtedly, departmental proceeding was pending only and that too of stoppage of one increment for one year without cumulative effect.
In other words, the Petitioner's increment for one year only was stopped but such stoppage of increment should not have come in the way of his seniority.
This Court draws inspiration in support of the aforementioned proposition to a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court passed in the case of Shiv Kumar Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh and others, reported in AIR 1988 SC 1673.
It is true that the Petitioner filed this writ petition in the year 1988 but that by itself, cannot act as an estopped against the Petitioner to come to this Court nor the plea that the writ petition is belated, can at this stage be allowed to be taken especially when the writ petition was itself admitted for final hearing on 24.1.1989.
7.
That apart, this Court notices that the grounds on which the statements made in the written statement are based, are totally and completely different from the impugned order.
It is relevant to mention that nowhere in the impugned order dated 841988 the Respondents have given any of the reasons that they have attempted to take in the written statement.
In this connection, this Court notices a judgment delivered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851, which observes that :-  "When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out."
8.
Upon perusal of the impugned order as contained in Annexure P-6, no reasons whatsoever have been given as to why the request of the Petitioner for restoring his original seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineers was not found feasible for acceptance.
That being the position, the written statement amounts to filling up of the lacunae and/or the blanks and that too, in a manner that is grossly irrational.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this Court is of the opinion that the writ petition must succeed and it is accordingly allowed to do so.
Consequently, the impugned order/communication dated 841988 as contained in Annexure P-6 is hereby set aside and this Court issues a writ of mandamus upon the Respondents to do the needful in accordance with law.
Let it be recorded that if any third party rights have, in the meantime, cropped up then the Respondent should give notice to all of them and should also give notice to the Petitioner and after hearing each one of them, should do not needful as per law.
The entire exercise however must be concluded as expeditiously as possible but not later then a period of eight months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.