GS Singhvi, J - The only substantial question of law which arises for determination in this appeal filed by the plaintiff (appellant herein) is whether he could have been dismissed from service solely on the basis of his conviction under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (for short, `the 1947 Act') and Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code without being served with notice to explain the conduct which led to his conviction.
2.
For deciding the afore-mentioned question, it will be useful to notice a few facts.
While he was working as Patwari Halqa, Sarawan, District Faridkot, the appellant was placed under suspension w.e.f.
31.1.1986 on account of registration of a criminal case under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the 1947 Act at Police Station, Sadar Kotkapura.
He was tried in the court of Special Judge, Faridkot who, vide judgment dated 2581987, held him guilty and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs. 1,000/- for offence under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the 1947 Act and to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for three months in case of default.
The learned Special Judge also imposed sentence of one year under Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code but directed that substantive sentences shall run concurrently.
After almost 2 years of his conviction by the Special Judge, the appellant was dismissed from service by Collector, Faridkot vide his order dated 27.6.1989.
3.
The appellant challenged his dismissal by filing a suit for declaration.
He pleaded that the order of dismissal is liable to be nullified because it was not preceded by an enquiry in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short, `the Rules') and no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to him.
The suit was dismissed by Senior Sub Judge, Faridkot vide his judgment and decree dated 29111991.
The learned trial Court held that in view of his conviction by the Special Judge, there was no necessity to hold an enquiry under the rules or to give him show-cause notice or opportunity of hearing.
Civil Appeal No. 4 of the 1922 filed by the appellant against the judgment and decree of the trial Court was dismissed by District Judge, Faridkot vide his judgment dated 26.8.1992.
4.
I have heard Shri Harinder Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant and Ms. Rita Kohli, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab and carefully perused the record.
5.
The question whether an employee, who is convicted for a criminal offence, is entitled to a notice and opportunity of hearing as a condition precedent to his dismissal or removal from service is no longer res integra.
In The Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and another v. TR Challappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court interpreted Rule 14(1) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1968, which is pari materia to Rule 13 of the Rules and Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and held that before an employee, who is convicted of criminal charge is removed from service, the disciplinary authority is duty-bound to give him show-cause notice in regard to the proposed penalty and consider the representation, if any, made by him.
6.
The afore-mentioned judgment was over-ruled by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416.
The Constitution Bench held that issuance of show-cause notice was not necessary for imposing penalty of dismissal or removal of an employee convicted of criminal charge.
7.
In Tirkha Ram v. VK Seth and another, AIR 1988 SC 285, a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court followed the judgment of the Constitution Bench and held that before dismissing an employee on the ground of his conviction for a criminal offence, the disciplinary authority is not required to give him notice or opportunity of hearing.
8.
The same question was again considered in Deputy Director of Collegiate Education (Administration), Madras v. S Nagoor Meera, 1995(2) SCT 717 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1364 and the following proposition was laid down :  "Taking proceedings for and passing orders of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of a government servant who has been convicted by a criminal court is not barred merely because the sentence or order is suspended by the appellate court or on the ground that the said government servant-accused has been released on bail pending the appeal.
It cannot be said that until the appeal against the conviction is disposed of, action under Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) is not permissible.
The more appropriate course in all such cases is to take action under Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) once a government servant is convicted of a criminal charge and not to wait for the appeal or revision, as the case may be.
If, however, the government servant-accused is acquitted on appeal or other proceeding, the order can always be revised and if the government servant is reinstated, he will be entitled to all the benefits to which he would have been entitled to had he continued in service.
The other course suggested, viz., to wait till the appeal, revision and other remedies are over would not be advisable since it would mean continuing in service a person who has been convicted of a serious offence by a criminal court.
The action under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) will be taken only where the conduct which has led to his conviction is such that it deserves any of the three major punishments mentioned in Article 311(2)."
9.
In Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1980(3) SLR 173, this Court held that even if appeal against conviction by a criminal court is pending, the disciplinary authority is competent to take action against the employee and dismiss him from service.
10.
In Sardari Lal v State of Punjab, 2003(2) RSJ 657, the learned Single Judge referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel (supra) and Tirkha Ram v. VK Seth and another (supra) and held that an employee, who is convicted in a case under the Prevention of Corruption Act could be dismissed without issuing a show-cause notice and without holding an enquiry.
11.
By applying the ratio of the afore-mentioned judgments of the Supreme Court and this Court to the facts of this case, I hold that dismissal of the appellant on account of his conviction under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the 1947 Act and Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code cannot be held as vitiated on the ground that the disciplinary authority did not give him notice of the proposed penalty and opportunity of hearing.
12.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
However, keeping in view the fact that during the pendency of this appeal, Criminal Appeal No. 495-SB of 1987 filed by the appellant was allowed by the learned Single Judge on 2632003 and the judgment of the trial Court was reversed resulting in the appellant's acquittal, he shall be free to avail departmental and/or legal remedies for reinstatement with retrospective effect.
I also direct that if he makes any representation to the concerned departmental authority for reinstatement in view of the judgment of acquittal passed by learned Single Judge of this Court, then such representation shall be considered and decided as early as possible, but latest within a period of 4 months from the date of submission.
Appeal dismissed.