SS Nijjar, J - The petitioners joined the education department, Punjab, as Physical Training Instructors.
They possess the qualifications of Matric with diploma in Physical Education.
All of them have been working as Physical Training Instructions on regular basis since 19.2.1979.
The petitioners have also qualified as Giani before 19.2.1979.
By letter No. 5058-ER-11-57/5600 dated 23.7.1957 (hereinafter referred to as 1957 letter), the State of Punjab had revised the pay scales of low paid government servants.
The teachers in the education department were divided into two broad categories i.e. Category-A and Category-B.
The petitioners fall in Category-B.
This category has been further divided into four groups.
Group-III includes the Classical and Vernacular teachers including the Physical Training Instructors.
Group-III was further divided into three different scales in the following ratio as per their seniority :-  1.
Lower Scale : 50 per cent = Rs. 60-4-80/5-120 2.
Middle Scale : 35 per cent = Rs. 120-5-175 3.
Upper Scale : 15 per cent = Rs. 140-10-320 2.
Out of these teachers in the Lower Scale, Shastries were given a starting pay of Rs. 80/- PM and all other C&V teachers were given a starting pay of Rs. 72/- PM in the pay scale of 60-4-80/5-120.
Thus, all the Classical and Vernacular teachers were granted 3/5 advance increments.
Shastries were given five advance increments and all other C & V teachers were given three advance increments.
The Physical Training Instructors were given a starting salary of Rs. 72/- PM which included three advance increments.
Subsequently, however, the respondents sought to withdraw the advance increments from petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 on the ground that their case does not fall within the ambit of government instructions contained in circular letter dated 23.7.1957.
3.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 6, it is stated that the petitioners, who fall in Group-4, are not entitled to three advance increments.
It is accepted that Shastries were given a starting pay of Rs. 80/- PM in the pay scale of Rs. 60-4-80/5-120.
Prabhakar, Gianies, Drawing Masters and all other Craft and Art teachers were given Rs. 72/- PM Since the petitioners were working as Physical Training Teachers even though they possess the qualifications of Giani, the higher starting salary could not be given.
The petitioners had been wrongly granted the benefit of increments which has now been withdrawn.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
5.
Mr. Pathela submits that the controversy in the present writ petition is squarely covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Labh Singh Garcha and others v. The State of Punjab and another, Civil Writ Petition No. 1810 of 1976, decided on 2071976.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents-State submits that the petition has to be dismissed in view of the judgment of this Court in the case of Sukhdev Singh PTI Teacher and others v. The State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 4644 of 1978, decided on 1121981.
7.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
8.
The judgment relied upon by the respondents-State of Punjab, in fact, supports the case of the petitioners.
In that case, considering the 1957 letter, it has been held that the salary can be linked to qualifications.
Classification on the basis of educational qualifications cannot be said to rest on any fortuitous circumstances and one has to bear in mind the facts and circumstances of the case in order to judge the validity of a classification.
In that case, the petitioners were working as Physical Training Instructors in the Punjab State Education Department.
The Physical Training Instructors were claiming the same scale as Art and Craft Teacher.
It was argued that since the Physical Training Teachers belong to the cadre known as Classical and Vernacular teacher, they are entitled to the same increments which had been granted to other categories of teachers, such as, Shastries, Gianies, Prabhakars, Drawing Masters and Art and Craft Teachers.
Relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Tirloki Nath Khosa and others, AIR 1974 SC 1, it was held that educational qualifications can be the basis of prescribing different scales of pay.
The aforesaid observations clearly support the claim of the petitioners in the present writ petition.
All the petitioners are Physical Training Instructors who possess the qualification of Giani.
Therefore, they are clearly entitled to the advance increments which have been granted to other categories of teachers possessing the qualifications of Giani/Prabhakar.
It is immaterial that the petitioners are working only on the posts of Physical Training Instructors.
In Labh Singh's case (supra), this Court had examined the claim of the petitioners who were vernacular teachers possessing the academic qualifications, such as, Matric, JBT along with Giani or Prabhakar.
The petitioners, however, had not been granted the advance increments of Giani or Prabhakar on the ground that they had been appointed in the cadre of Basic Trained teachers against the JBT vacancies as JBT teachers and in the grade meant for them.
Therefore, even on acquiring the qualifications of Giani/Prabhakar, they do not automatically become entitled to the grade meant for Punjab or Hindi Teachers, unless they are promoted departmentally.
This contention of the State of Punjab was rejected by the Division Bench.
It was held that the contention raised by the State of Punjab was contrary to the ratio of law laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, 1972 Services Law Reporter 402 and affirmed by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab and another v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, 1976(2) Services Law Reporter 621.
The judgment rendered in the case of State of Punjab and another v. Kirpal Singh and others, has been re-affirmed in the case of Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana (along with other connected cases), 1987(4) Services Law Reporter 4.
9.
Inspite of the law having been clearly settled, the respondents have continued to issue clarifications of 1957 letter.
By letter dated 19.2.1979, it was provided that henceforth the incumbents shall not become entitled to the benefit of higher pay on the basis of higher qualifications, but those teachers who were in service upto the date of issuance of the letter and had improved their qualifications by that date were entitled to the higher scales of pay.
By letter dated 2091979, it was further clarified that the arrears be paid to the employees restricted to the period of 38 months only.
Inspite of these clarifications, relief was not granted to the teachers resulting in litigation in this Court and the Supreme Court.
In the case of Avtar Singh v. Man Mohan Singh, Civil Appeal No. 3799 of 1983 the Supreme Court by order dated 1491984 and the clarificatory order dated 2121985 in the aforesaid Civil Appeal, directed that the higher pay be granted on the basis of the higher qualifications to the petitioners as well as the non-petitioners.
The State of Punjab thereafter issued a clarification on 76.8.1985 in which it was stated that the petitioners who have passed the examination of Giani/Prabhakar or Honours in Urdu, are entitled to the grades given to the Classical and Vernacular teachers, in Category-B and then Group-III(ii) of 1957 letter.
The petitioners except petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 were still not granted increments.
The advance increments granted to petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 are also sought to be withdrawn on the basis of an audit objection (Annexure P-8).
Various representations were filed by the petitioners against the audit objection.
One such representation is attached as Annexure P-9 to the petition.
It is also the case of the petitioners that the respondents have been granting advance increments in some cases.
One such example in the case of Manjit Singh has been mentioned in paragraph 5 of the writ petition.
It has been stated that on the basis of the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 7288 of 1976, the respondents have granted the higher pay scale to Manjit Singh, PTI by order dated 12101983.
During the pendency of this petition, the respondents filed an affidavit dated 612005 of Dr. Maghar Singh, District Education Officer (S), Sangrur.
It has been stated in the affidavit that there are no other cases except the case of Manjit Singh, PTI where the benefit of 1957 letter had been given to any PTI Even the benefit given to Manjit Singh, PTI has been withdrawn.
10.
In Chaman Lal's case (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with the claim of Trained Graduates possessing the qualification of B.Ed.
or BT in addition to BA All the petitioners were teachers in the State of Haryana.
They did not possess the B.Ed.
or BT degree when they joined service initially.
They acquired the degree qualification subsequent to joining service between the year 1953 to 1973.
Some of them acquired the degree qualification before September 5, 1979 and some acquired the same after September 5, 1979.
By the aforesaid letter, it has been provided that those teachers who acquired the higher qualifications after September 5, 1979, would not be entitled to the higher grade.
Considering the aforesaid letter, it has been held that all the teachers are entitled to the higher grades with effect from the respective dates of their acquiring higher qualifications of BT/B.Ed.
In coming to the aforesaid conclusion, the Supreme Court has reiterated the rule laid down in the case of State of Punjab and others v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others.
11.
In view of the law laid down by this Court as well as the Supreme Court, the petitioners cannot be denied the benefit of advance increments on the basis of the qualifications of Giani.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The audit objection, Annexure P-8, is hereby quashed.
The petitioners are held entitled to the advance increments which are admissible to the other C & V teachers possessing the qualifications of Giani/Prabhakar, Shastries/Drawing Masters and all other Craft and Art teachers with consequential benefits.
Arrears are, however, restricted to three years and two months prior to the filing of the writ petition.
Consequential benefits be released to the petitioners within a period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.