JS Narang, J - This petition has been filed for invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for seeking grant of writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated 922002 passed by respondent No. 2, copy Annexure P-4 and also a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to change the name of the parents of the petitioner in the certificate issued by respondent No. 2 pertaining to the examinations of Matriculation passed in the year 1998 and that of 10+2 passed in the year 2000.
2.
The petitioner had been adopted by Pal Singh Chahal and Amarjit Kaur the adoptive father and mother.
In this respect, the deed adoption was executed on 1011994.
She passed her tenth class examination in the year 1998 held by Central Board of Secondary Education at Ajmer.
Similarly, she also passed in 10+2 examination and was delivered the certificate accordingly.
However, she filed Civil Suit No. 806 dated 10, 2001, titled as Amandeep Kaur v. Balbir Kaur and others seeking declaration to the effect that the petitioner is the natural daughter of defendant No. 1 Smt. Balbir Kaur Bajwa and Shri Surinderpal Singh Bajwa (now deceased).
The adoptive father and mother had also been impleaded as defendant Nos. 2 and 3 respectively.
All the defendants had put in appearance and had virtually conceded the claim of the petitioner.
Upon the pleadings of the parties the issues had been framed, oral as well as documentary evidence had been led by the parties.
The requisite finding has been given upon the issues, which ultimately resulted in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
As a sequel thereto a declaration has been granted to the petitioner to the effect that she is the natural daughter of defendant No. 1 and not the adopted daughter of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 and that the alleged adoption deed dated 1011994, has been declared null and void.
It has been categorically observed by the trial Court that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 i.e. adoptive father and mother did not lead any evidence and that the fact of non-performance of religious ceremony and further the ceremony of giving and receiving the child in adoption had also not been proved.
Copy of the judgment has been appended as Annexure P-1.
3.
The petitioner has also filed an affidavit dated November 16, 2004, wherein it has been categorically averred that the judgment and decree dated 1242002 passed by the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division) has not been set aside or modified by any competent Court of law.
Further, it has also been contended that no appeal has been filed against the aforestated judgment and decree and that the same has become final between the parties.
The said affidavit has been taken on record by a separate order passed in C.M.
No. 20277 of 2004.
4.
Notice of motion had been issued vide order dated 2852004.
The respondents have contested the petition by taking the stand that the petition involves disputed questions of fact and that the adoptive parents have not been impleaded as parties to the present petition.
Thus, on both counts, the petition is not sustainable and the same deserves to be dismissed.
Reliance has also been placed on Rule 16.1(iv) of the Examination Bye-laws of CBSE.
It has been averred that the procedure prescribed under the aforestated rules has not been followed and, therefore, the respondents have correctly declined to change the name of the parents in the aforestated certificates.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the pleadings and so also the documents appended as annexures to the respective pleadings.
We are of the considered opinion that the civil Court has given a categoric finding and has granted a declaration to the effect that the plaintiff is the natural daughter of defendant No. 1 Smt. Balbir Kaur Bajwa widow of Surender Pal Singh Bajwa and not the adoptive daughter of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 i.e. Paul Singh Chahal son of Megh Singh Chahal and Amarjit Kaur Chahal and that the adoption deed dated 1011994, has been declared null and void.
The said judgment and decree has not been challenged by any of the parties and resultantly, the same has not been set aside or modified in any manner whatsoever as is evident from the categoric averment made by way of affidavit dated November 16, 2004 submitted by the petitioner before this Court.
The Board i.e. respondent No. 2 is not justified in ignoring the judgment and decree of the trial Court which has become final between the parties.
Such act on the part of the Board would amount to siting in appeal over the judgment and decree of the trial Court, which is definitely not based on vague averments or vague findings returned by the trial Court.
Since the categoric findings of the trial Court have not been challenged and that the judgment and decree has become final between the parties, the Board ought to have accepted the judgment and decree granted by way of declaration in favour of the plaintiff.
It is correct that normally the Board would accept the information which is based upon the record maintained by the respective schools but in a case where the judicial pronouncement has been made vis-a-vis the factual status of relationship between the parties and that the said pronouncement has not been challenged by any one or has been modified in any manner, it becomes imperative for the authorities to accept the judicial verdict of the Court.
6.
Another fact which needs to be noticed is that for change of the parentage on the basis of the judgment and decree of the trial Court, as aforestated, has also been notified in the Punjab Government Gazette published on Friday October 24, 2004, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-3.
It has been notified that the petitioner has been ordered to be known as the daughter of her natural parents i.e. late Shri Surinderpal Singh Bajwa and his wife Smt. Balbir Kaur Bajwa.
Coupled with this fact as well, the respondents are not justified in declining the relief asked for by the petitioner.
7.
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the petition deserves to be allowed.
Resultantly, the writ of certiorari is granted and the impugned communication dated February 9, 2004, copy Annexure P-4 is quashed.
Further, the respondents are directed to abide by the judgment and decree passed in Civil Suit No. 806 of 2001 and grant the necessary relief to the petitioner.
The grantable relief be granted within a period of one month from the date of production of certified copy of this judgment.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.