Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner against the respondents on 592003 with the prayer that by an appropriate writ, order or direction, the item No. 8 of the Circular dated 3172003 (Annexure-8) issued by the respondent No. 2 Director, Secondary Education, Rajasthan, Bikaner, which does not cover Inter-College Tournament as State Level Tournament, be quashed and set aside to that extent and the respondents be directed to give 10 bonus marks to the petitioner for the sport certificate of Inter College Kho-kho Tournament dated 1091997 (Annexure-6) treating it to be a State Level Tournament and after giving 10 bonus marks to the petitioner, if he comes in the merit, he may be given appointment to be post of Physical Teacher Gr.
III.
2.
The case of the petitioner as put forward by him in this writ petition is as follows :  The petitioner passed secondary examination from the Board of Secondary Education, Rajasthan, Ajmer with first division in the academic year 1992-93 and a copy of the mark-sheet is Annexure-2.
Thereafter, in the academic year 1994-95, he passed senior secondary with second division and a copy of the mark-sheet is Annexure-3.
Thereafter, he qualified the degree of Bachelor of Physical Education (three year degree course) from Maharashi Dayanand Saraswati University, Ajmer in the year 1998 and a copy of the mark- sheet is Annexure-4.
Thereafter, the petitioner also completed the Diploma Course of Physical Education (DPE) from Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University, Ajmer in the academic year 2001-02 and a copy of the mark-sheet is Annexure-5.
The respondent No. 2 Director, Secondary Education, Rajasthan, Bikaner through advertisement Annexure-1 dated 2872003 invited applications from the eligible candidates for the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III district- wise and in pursuance of the said advertisement Annexure-1, the petitioner being fully eligible applied for the said post of Physical Teacher Gr.
III alongwith requisite documents within the stipulated time.
The further case of the petitioner is that thereafter, the respondents prepared merit list, but according to the petitioner, the respondents while determining the merit of the petitioner, have not awarded 10 bonus marks to him for the sport certificate Annexure-6 dated 1091997 of participating in Inter College Kho-kho Tournament held at SPCM Pisangan (Ajmer) in the year 1997-98 and had 10 bonus marks would have been given to him, he would have got 8290% marks.
According to the petitioner, the action of the respondents in not giving 10 bonus marks to the petitioner for the sport certificate Annexure-6 is highly unfair, illegal, unreasonable and arbitrary.
The further case of the petitioner is that the respondent No. 2 Director vide Circular Annexure-8 dated 3172003 issued guidelines for computation of percentage of the testimonials for selection to the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III and item No. 8 of that Circular Annexure-8 provides table for computation of bonus marks for various sport certificates and in that table, Inter-College Tournament has not been treated as equivalent to State level Tournament and according to the petitioner, this is contrary to the Division Bench judgment of this Court dated 481997 passed in State of Rajasthan v. Umesh Jangid and 19 others, (1998(1) WLC (Rajasthan) 287) and thus, that part of item No. 8 which does not cover Inter-College Tournament as State Level Tournament cannot be sustained and liable to be quashed and set aside and the petitioner is entitled to get 10 bonus marks for the sport certificate Annexure-6 of participating in Inter College Kho-kho Tournament treating it equivalent to State Level Tournament.
Hence, this writ petition with the prayer as stated above.
A reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondents and their case is that Inter College Tournament is not a State Level Tournament.
It has been further submitted by the respondents that the guidelines/instructions issued by the respondent No. 2 Director through Circular Annexure-8 dated 3172003 for appointment to the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III clearly define which Tournament is a State Level Tournament and which Tournament is a National Level Tournament and since that Circular Annexure-8 does not provide for any bonus marks in respect of Inter College Tournament as the same is equivalent to Distt.
Level Tournament, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to get any bonus marks for the sport certificate Annexure-6 of participating in Inter-College Tournament as it is equivalent to Distt.
Level Tournament.
In this respect, reliance has also been placed on the order Annexure R/1 dated 2111998 issued by the respondent No. 2 Director.
Hence no interference is called for and this writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondents and gone through the record of the case.
4.
Before proceeding further, it may be stated here that Annexure-6 is a sport certificate issued by Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University, Ajmer on 1091997, by which it was certified that the petitioner had participated in Inter College Kho-kho Tournament held at SPCM Pisangan (Ajmer) in the year 1997-98.
5.
The question for consideration is whether the petitioner is entitled to 10 bonus marks on the basis of port certificate Annexure-6 of participating in Inter college Kho-kho Tournament treating it to be a State Level Tournament or not.
6.
A bare perusal of condition No. 11 of advertisement Annexure-1 dated 2872003 reveals that bonus marks for sport certificates would be awarded while preparing merit list, but as per reply of the respondents, it appears that they have not taken into consideration at all the sport certificates of Distt.
Level Tournaments and in my considered opinion, this approach of the respondents cannot be treated as fair, reasonable and rational one because when no distinction has been made in condition No. 11 of advertisement Annexure-1 in respect of sport certificates of District Level Tournaments, State Level Tournaments and National Level Tournaments, therefore, the candidates are entitled to get bonus marks for sport certificates irrespective of the fact whether they are District Level Tournaments or State Level Tournaments or National Level Tournaments.
7.
Apart from this, it may be stated here that the provision for giving bonus marks in the case of appointments to the Physical Education Teachers has been made for promotion of the sports and in order to give incentive to various sportsmen.
The grant of bonus marks, therefore, cannot be restricted to the tournaments of State Level and National Level only, but it should be made applicable to all District Level, State Level or National Level tournaments organized by a University or Sports Board/Authority or by any other Authority recognized in this regard because restricting the bonus marks only to the tournaments of State Level and National Level is against the object of the provision itself.
8.
The next question for consideration is what type of tournaments can be treated or regarded as District Level, State Level and National Level.
9.
In this respect, it may be stated here that the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra) at para No. 17 of the judgment dated 481997 has classified the tournaments in the following manner:-  "1.
National Level Tournaments  (a) Inter-zone University/Inter University tournaments.
(b) National Level School Tournaments organized by SGFI.
(c) Federal National Level Tournaments organized by National Federation.
2.
State Level Tournaments (a) Inter-college Tournaments.
(b) State Level School Tournaments.
(c) State Level Federal Tournaments organized by State Federation.
3.
District Level Tournaments (a) University Inter-Faculties Tournaments.
(b) District School Level Tournaments (organized by the District Education Officer.)
(c) Federal District Level Tournaments (organized by the District Sports Federation)."
10.
There is also no dispute on the point that in view of the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra), the respondent No. 2 Director issued Circular dated 17.1.1998 and from perusing that Circular, it is very much clear that bonus marks for appointment to the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III have to be given in respect of sport certificates of participating in District Level, State Level and National Level Tournaments.
11.
It may be stated here that in the Circular dated 17.1.1998, it had not been clarified as to what type of tournament would be treated as District Level, State Level & National Level and for that, another Circular Annexure R/1 dated 21.1.1988 was issued by the respondent No. 2 Director and that Circular Annexure R/1 classified the tournaments in the following manner :-  "1.
District Level (1) University Inter-Faculties Tournaments.
(2) Inter-College Tournaments.
2.
State Level (1) University Zonal Games Tournaments.
3.
National Level (1) University Inter-Zone Tournaments  (2) All India Inter-University Tournaments (for games for which zonal tournaments are not held, but directly tournaments are held at national level)."
12.
There is also no dispute on the point that at item No. 8 of circular Annexure-8 dated 3172003, Inter-College Tournaments are not treated as State Level Tournaments and thus, item No. 8 is similar to Annexure R/1 dated 2111998.
13.
The pertinent question is whether Inter-College Tournament should be treated as State Level Tournament or not.
14.
In the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra) at para No. 17 (2(a), as quoted above, it has been clearly mentioned that Inter-College Tournaments would be treated as State Level Tournaments.
15.
It may be stated here that in compliance of the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra), the respondent No. 2 Director issued Circular dated 17.1.1998 stating that bonus marks for appointment to the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III have to be given in respect of sport certificates of participating in District Level, State Level and National Level Tournaments and thereafter, a further circular Annexure R/1 dated 2111998 was issued by the respondent No. 2 clarifying as to what type of tournament would be treated as District Level, State Level & National Level, as quoted above, and thus, when the circulars dated 17.1.1998 and 2111998 (Annexure R/1) were issued by the respondent No. 2 Director in compliance of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra), now to say that Inter-College Tournaments would be treated as District Level Tournaments cannot be accepted and if Inter-College Tournaments are treated as equivalent to District Level Tournaments by the respondents, this would be contrary to the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra) where Inter-College Tournaments were treated as State Level Tournaments.
Hence, the action of the respondents treating Inter- College Tournaments as District Level Tournaments cannot be sustained.
16.
Apart from this, recently the Jaipur Bench of this Court in SB Civil Writ Petition No. 5835/2003, Ramesh Chandar Kathik v. State of Rajasthan (decided on 3122004) placing reliance on the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Umesh Jangid (supra) has held that Inter-College Tournaments would be treated as State Level Tournaments and for that, this Court directed for awarding of 10 bonus marks to the petitioner of that case.
17.
For the reasons stated above, it is held that the Inter-College Tournaments are equivalent to State Level Tournaments and when this being the position, the sport certificate of the petitioner Annexure-6 of participating in Inter College Kho-kho Tournament should be treated as State Level Tournament and not District Level Tournament and thus, Circular Annexure R/1 dated 2111998 as well as item No. 8 of Circular Annexure-8 dated 3172003 issued by the respondent No. 2 Director where Inter-College Tournaments were treated as District Level Tournaments and not as State Level tournaments, cannot be sustained and liable to be quashed and set aside to that extent and the petitioner is entitled to get 10 bonus marks for the sport certificate Annexure-6 of participating in Inter College Kho-kho Tournament and this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
Accordingly, this writ petition filed by the petitioner is allowed and the Circular Annexure R/1 dated 2111998 as well as item No. 8 of Circular Annexure 8 dated 3172003 issued by the respondent No. 2 Director where Inter-College Tournaments were treated as District Level Tournaments are quashed and set aside to that extent and the respondents are directed to give 10 bonus marks to the petitioner for the sport certificate Annexure-6 of participating in Inter-College Kho-kho Tournament treating it to be a State Level Tournament and after giving 10 bonus marks, if the petitioner comes in the merit, he may be given appointment to the post of Physical Teacher (PTI) Gr.
III.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.