Rajive Bhalla, J - By way of this common judgment, two Civil Writ Petitions No. 4601 and 4603 of 2003 shall be disposed of as similar/identical facts and question of law are involved therein.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 4601 of 2003.
2.
The petitioner in this writ petition, filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to release the gratuity payable to the petitioner, with interest at the rate of 24 per cent per annum.
It is also prayed that the order dated January 15, 2003 (Annexure P-6) be quashed.
3.
Shorn of details, the controversy in the present writ petition is confined to the right of the petitioner, who was a Lecturer in a private aided College from 1091976 it 3041999, to receive gratuity for service rendered by her.
The petitioner's right to receive gratuity flows from Ordinance 18.
Vol. III of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calender, which mandates payment of gratuity to Lecturers of private Colleges, affiliated to the University.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner retired on April 30, 1999, and has been denied the benefit of gratuity by the Appejay College of Fine Arts, Jalandhar (hereinafter referred to as the respondent-College) on the plea that Ordinance 18 Chapter 17, Vol. III of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calender (hereinafter referred to as `the Ordinance') does not apply to the petitioner and that Ordinance does not bind the respondent- College and stands superseded by the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act of 1972').
5.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that the controversy in the present case is squarely covered by a judgment of this Court rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 10460 of 1988, ND Malhotra v. Hindu College Governing Council, Amritsar, decided on November 8, 1990, (Annexure P-3), wherein Ordinance 18 has been held to be binding on a private college, affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University.
The Private College was directed to make payment of gratuity to the retired Lecturer, in terms of the Ordinance.
6.
The Letters Patent Appeal No. 20 of 1991, filed by the Managing Committee was dismissed.
The Special Leave Petition, filed by the Managing Committee, was also dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated December 7, 1992 (Annexure P-4).
7.
On the basis of the afore-mentioned submissions, counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner cannot be denied the benefit of gratuity as Ordinance 18 of the University Calender binds the management to pay gratuity to the petitioner.
The payment of gratuity is, thus, a right available to the petitioner and failure of the respondent-College to honour this right, entitles the petitioner to pray for the issuance of a writ of mandamus.
8.
Mr. CB Goel, learned counsel for the respondent-College, on the other hand, contends that the petitioner is not entitled to gratuity, as has been held by the College in the order dated January 15, 2003 (Annexure P-6).
The Ordinance does not bind the College as the said Ordinance has been superseded by the provisions of the Act of 1972.
The said Act has been held to be inapplicable to teachers, by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment reported as Ahmedabad Pvt. Primary Teachers Association v. Administrative Officer, 2004(1) SCT 667 (SC) : JT 2004(2) SC 27.
The petitioners are not entitled to receive any gratuity.
It is further contended that the Ordinance is not a mandate to the Colleges to pay gratuity.
A discretion is vested in the College to examine whether the employee was an efficient and faithful employee and only thereupon grant gratuity.
In the present case, as the College has rejected the claim for gratuity, it would be deemed that the petitioner was not an efficient and faithful employee and, therefore, the College was justified in rejecting the claim for gratuity.
In the alternative, it is argued that in case, the College is held liable to pay gratuity, the State, which defrays expenses to the extent of 95% towards salaries of teachers/lecturers, be directed to pay 95% of the gratuity.
9.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and perused the record.
10.
The dispute in the present writ petition, as stated above, is confined to the rights of the petitioner to claim gratuity and the obligation of the respondent-College to pay the same.
The said point is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in ND Malhotra's case (supra).
An identical controversy arose, in the said case.
A teacher of Hindu College, Amritsar sought the issuance of a writ directing the respondent-College to release gratuity.
This Court, after examining the matter in detail, held that Ordinance 18 of the University Calender bound the College to pay gratuity.
The said judgment was affirmed in Letters Patent Appeal and subsequently the Special Leave Petition, filed by the Managing Committee of the College, was also dismissed.
It is, thus, apparent that Ordinance 18 of the University Calender binds private Colleges to pay gratuity to their Teachers/Professors/Lecturers, upon retirement.
The contention of counsel for the respondent-College that Ordinance 18 of the University Calender does not contain a mandate to the respondent-College to pay gratuity, is without merits.
All private Colleges are bound to obey and implement rules and regulations, framed by the University.
The rules and regulations, framed by the University, are contained in the University Calender, as also in the Ordinances, issued from time to time.
The respondents cannot claim that the Ordinance does not bind private Colleges to pay gratuity.
Further, this contention has already been dealt with in detail in the above referred judgment of this Court and, therefore, cannot be accepted.
Even otherwise, counsel for the respondents has been unable to refer to any distinguishing feature between the present writ petition and the aforementioned judgment.
11.
The next contention of counsel for the respondent-College that the College can deny payment of gratuity, in terms of Ordinance 18, if a Lecturer has not served the College efficiently or faithfully is also without merit.
It is no doubt true that the Ordinance uses the aforementioned expression, while directing the College to pay gratuity.
However, a perusal of the order, Annexure P-6, pursuant whereto gratuity was denied to the petitioner, reveals that there is not even a whisper of an allegation that the petitioner was, in any manner, inefficient or unfaithful to the respondent-College.
Consequently, this contention, being contrary to the impugned order, and not substantiated by any material, must fail.
12.
The next contention, raised by counsel for the respondent-College is that in view of the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, Ordinance 18 cannot survive.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ahmedabad Pvt. Primary Teachers' Association's case (supra) has held that teachers are not entitled to gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be granted gratuity.
13.
The aforementioned contention is without merit.
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 does not, in any manner, affect the operation of Ordinance 18.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while holding that teachers are not entitled to gratuity under the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, did not hold that teachers are not entitled to gratuity under any other statute, rules or regulations.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while holding as above, in Ahmedabad Pvt. Primary Teachers' Association's case (supra), observed as follows :-  "26.
Our conclusion should not be misunderstood that teachers although engaged in very noble profession of educating our young generation should not be given any gratuity benefit.
There are already in several States separate statutes, rules and regulations granting gratuity benefits to teachers in educational institutions which are more or less beneficial than the gratuity benefits provided under the Act.
It is for the legislature to take cognizance of situation of such teachers in various establishments where gratuity benefits are not available and think of a separate legislation for them in this regard.
That is the subject matter solely for the legislature to consider and decide."
14.
The above observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court leave no manner of doubt that even if teachers are not entitled to gratuity under the provisions of the aforementioned enactment, there is no bar to the State Governments framing statutes, rules and regulations, some governments having framed such rules and regulations.
In this view of the matter, the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act do not, in any manner, affect the right of the petitioner to receive gratuity under Ordinance 18.
15.
The argument, raised by counsel for the petitioner, in alternative, that as the respondent-College is an aided Institution where the Government defrays 95% of the expenses towards salaries of teachers/lecturers, the Government should also bear 95% of the expenses towards gratuity, has also been answered by this Court against private Colleges.
In Letters Patent Appeal No. 20 of 1991, raised in CWP No. 10460 of 1988, (ND Malhotra v. Hindu College Governing Council, Amritsar which was disposed of alongwith the aforementioned L.P.A., held as follows :-  "The only point canvassed by the counsel for the appellants was with regard to directions to Government as sought in the writ petition that 95% aid be provided to privately managed government aided colleges also towards meeting their liability for payment of gratuity to their employees.
In support, counsel sought to contend that the words `salary' in this context deserve to be construed as inclusive of rights flowing from salary like gratuity, dearness allowance and interim relief.
No such construction is indeed warranted.
The expressions `salary' and `gratuity' have a well established different and distinct meaning and they cannot, therefore, be treated as being part of the same, i.e. within the expression `salary' alone.
3.
Next, counsel sought to press in the provisions of Article 41 of the Constitution, which reads as under :- "41.
Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases.
- The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right of work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want."
4.
The answer here is provided by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the State of Assam v. Ajit Kumar Sarma, A.I.R. 1965 Supreme Court 1196, where it was observed, "what grants the State should make to private educational institutions and on what terms are matters for the State to decide."
5.
Later in Union of India v. Tejram Prashramji Bombhate, 1992(2) SCT 467 (SC) : (1991)3 Supreme Court Cases 11, it was held that no Court or Tribunal can compel the Government to change its policy involving expenditure.
It was so held while dealing in a matter concerning posts and payment of salaries to school teachers.
No case thus arises for the issuance of any directions of the kind sought by the appellants namely that aid should be provided by the State Government to privately managed Government aided schools to meet their liability towards gratuity payable to their employees.
This is a policy matter for the State Government to decide."
16.
In view of the aforementioned judgment of a Division Bench of this Court, the point raised by counsel for the petitioner must also fail.
17.
The last point that merits consideration is whether any interest should be awarded to the petitioner on account of delayed payment of gratuity.
The petitioner has claimed interest @ 24% per annum.
The petitioner retired on 3041999 and thereafter not a single penny has been paid towards gratuity, due to her.
The respondent-College, despite the aforementioned judgment of this Court, made every endeavour to evade responsibility and deprived the petitioner of the amount of gratuity, due to her.
The respondent-College is responsible for this unnecessary delay in the payment of gratuity and, therefore, would be liable to pay interest on delayed payment.
Consequently, the respondent-College is held liable to pay interest @ 12% per annum on the about of gratuity, due to the petitioner.
In view of what has been stated above, the writ petitions are allowed and the orders, Annexure P-6 in CWP No. 4601 of 2003 and Annexure P-17 in CWP No. 4603 of 2003 are quashed.
The respondent-College is directed to make payment of gratuity, due to the petitioner, with 12% interest, to be calculated on the said amount from the date of retirement till its realisation, within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petitions allowed.