JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner during the course of his employment was stationed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in District Kurukshetra during 1982-83.
He relinquished the charge on account of his transfer from the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, Kurukshetra, on 15101983.
2.
The present controversy relates to the allegations levelled against the petitioner on account of his acts of omission and commission while he was holding charge of the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer at Kurukshetra.
In this behalf, a charge-sheet dated 2711993 was issued to the petitioner, wherein the following allegations were levelled against him :-  "1.
That due to carelessness and negligence of Shri Bachan Singh a quantity of 5656-80-000 qtls of wheat pertaining to the year 1983-84 was damaged at PR Centre, Kurukshetra.
These stocks were not accepted by FCI as a result of which Govt. had to auction the stocks resulting in a loss of Rs. 4,24,861/- as per Annexure `A' to the statement of allegations for which he is liable.
2.
That as per PR 38 reports the stocks started deteriorating just after 1919836 i.e. 4-5 months after the procurement although sufficient quantity of Polythene covers/Tarpauline and fumigants were available at the Centre.
This goes to show that stocks were not purchased according to the Govt. instructions.
3.
That entries recorded in PRF 6 register regarding treatment of stocks do not tally with the entries made in PR 86 which shows that actually no treatment was given to the stocks and bogus entries were made in PR 86 or PRF 6 as the case may be to justify the treatment.
4.
That as per general practice the stocks should have been despatched/delivered from hired/open godowns as the case may be on priority basis but Shri Bachan Singh, AFSO rather got despatched the stocks from Govt. godowns although it was in his knowledge that the condition of the stocks in hired godowns was bad.
This led to the above loss to the State Govt. 5.
That Shri Bachan Singh failed to keep the health of stocks in good condition and also failed to get the damaged stocks delivered in FCI in time."
3.
In sum and substance, the allegations pertained to the negligence and carelessness of the petitioner in not keeping the stock under his charge, in good condition.
None of the charges levelled against the petitioner pertained to embezzlement of stock or misappropriation.
4.
As is apparent from the two facts noticed above, firstly, that the petitioner relinquished charge of the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, Kurukshetra, on 15101983, and secondly, the charge-sheet in connection with his functioning at Kurukshetra, issued to him on 2711993, reveals that the actions of the petitioner were being examined and looked into after the lapse of about a decade.
The solitary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, while impugning the action of the respondents in charge-sheeting the petitioner is, that the charge-sheet has been issued to the petitioner belatedly, and that on account of the delayed initiation of the departmental enquiry against the petitioner, he is liable to be prejudiced on account of non-availability of record, as well as, on account of loss of memory.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in order to invite the Court's attention to the sequence of events, first of all, made a reference to a communication dated 15.4.1983 addressed by the District Food and Supplies Controller, Kurukshetra, to the Director, Food and Supplies, Haryana, inviting his attention to the fact, that heavy rain and hail-storm in April, 1983 had caused loss to the wheat grain and corn grain.
The aforesaid communication was followed by a letter dated 2771983, wherein the District Food and Supplies Controller, Kurukshetra indicated that the percentage of loss for the Kurukshetra centre was estimated as between 15% to 20%.
It also transpires from the pleadings of the instant writ petition, coupled with Annexure P-6, that the Commissioner and Secretary, Food and Supplies, Haryana, visited various `Mandis' in connection with the procurement of wheat in order to assess the effect of the heavy rains/hail-storm in the State at the relevant time.
It seems that the issue of damage of wheat stock to the extent of 758 tonnes due to rains in Ismailabad/Kurukshetra, came under the scanner of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India in the year 1986-87.
A reply to the audit objections was furnished by the District Food and Supplies Controller, Kurukshetra, on 30111987.
A perusal of the averments made in the written statement also reveals, that the allegations relating to damage of stocks, were examined through a preliminary enquiry conducted by Shri TS Malik, Additional Director, Food and Supplies (II), who submitted a report in connection therewith dated 29.7.1992, and on the basis of the findings recorded therein, in charge-sheet under reference, dated 2711993 was issued to the petitioner.
6.
On the basis of the facts narrated in the foregoing paragraphs, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends, that the issue of damage to grain caused in District Kurukshetra was to the knowledge and notice of the authorities in April, 1983 itself, and that if any action was to be taken against the petitioner, it should have been taken forthwith.
Whereas, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, based on the facts narrated in the foregoing paragraphs is, that having arrived at the conclusion that damage of stocks had taken place, it was imperative first to conduct a preliminary enquiry in order to find out, who was actually responsible for the damage in question, and thereupon, on the basis thereof to take appropriate action in accordance with law.
It is, therefore, contended that as soon as the preliminary enquiry report was submitted on 29.7.1992, a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner without any further delay, on 2711993.
7.
The only question to be adjudicated upon is whether the charge-sheet in the instant case issued to the petitioner on 2711993, should be set aside merely on account of the delay or that a regular departmental enquiry should be ordered to be conducted so as to punish the petitioner, in case he is found guilty of the charges levelled against him.
8.
So as to substantiate the claim raised by the petitioner, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Baljit Singh Grewal v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) SCT 699 (P&H) : 1994(2) Services Law Reporter 800, wherein on account of delay of about ten years, this Court quashed the enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner in the aforesaid case, whereupon, a direction was issued to the respondents to release the retiral benefits to the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on a decision rendered by another Division Bench of this Court in Er.
Narinder Singh Brar v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) SCT 340 (P&H) : 1992(3) Services Law Reporter 665, wherein on account of delay of six years in initiating a departmental enquiry against the petitioner, this Court, relying on the decision rendered by the Apex Court in State of M.P. v. Bani Singh, 1990(2) Services Law Reporter 798, arrived at the conclusion, that the petitioner therein could not be put to trial after the lapse of six years of the holding of the preliminary enquiry and eight years from the date of allegations levelled against him.
Reliance has also been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on yet another Division Bench judgment of this Court in Rajbir Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1999(7) Services Law Reporter 420, wherein this Court arrived at the conclusion, that non-initation of departmental enquiry against the petitioner for a period of eleven years, had the effect of depriving him of a reasonable opportunity to defend himself, inasmuch as, by the aforesaid passage of time, he would have forgotten vital issues connected with the incident.
9.
As against the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the Court's attention has been invited by the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana to a judgment rendered by a Division Bench of this Court, wherein a contrary conclusion has been recorded.
Reference, by learned counsel, has been made to the decision rendered in Harpal Singh v. State of Haryana, Civil Writ Petition No. 8934 of 1993, decided on 22121993.
In Harpal Singh's case (supra), the issue, according to the learned counsel for the respondents, has numerous similarities with the present controversy.
In the aforesaid case, the allegations levelled against the petitioner related to the year 1983-84 (just as in the present case).
In the aforesaid case, the charge-sheet was issued in 1993 (just as in the present case).
The preliminary enquiry on the basis of which the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner in Harpal Singh's case (supra) is the same as the one on the basis of which the instant charge-sheet has been issued to the petitioner.
In Harpal Singh's case (supra), it was contended on behalf of the respondents, that the government had suffered heavy loss on account of storage/damage of wheat stocks at Gurgaon, Faridabad and Kaithal during the tenure of the petitioner as District Food and Supplies Controller (just as in the present case, although the district herein is Kurukshetra).
In Harpal Singh's case (supra), the delay was sought to be explained by asserting that the same had been caused on account of inter- departmental communications between various functionaries and at different stages in the department itself.
It was alleged in Harpal Singh's case (supra), that delay in initiating proceedings by itself, cannot justify the non-holding of a departmental enquiry.
It is only when the delay is coupled with a further finding, that the same has been prejudical to the interest of a delinquent so as to deny/deprive him to fair trial, that delay can be a ground for setting aside a domestic enquiry ordered against an employee.
All the pleas raised in Harpal Singh's case (supra) as have been noticed hereinabove, have been pressed on behalf of the respondents.
10.
The solitary question to be considered is, whether the controversy in hand is covered by the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, or by the one in Harpal Singh's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents ?
In my considered view, there cannot be any prescribed strait-jacket formula to determine the effect of delay in initiating departmental proceedings against an employee.
The facts and circumstances of each case will have to be assessed and analysed to determine whether or not the proceedings initiated by the employer should be set aside on account of delayed initiation of proceedings.
11.
In the case in hand, the fact of damage of grain stored in the godowns at Kurukshetra under the supervision and control of the petitioner, came to the knowledge and notice of the authorities immediately after unprecedented rains/hail-storm which had struck the State in April, 1983.
A larger number of communications were addressed at various level of the organisation examining the factum of damage and blaming the inclement weather for the same.
The audit objections in respect of the damage caused to the wheat grain stored in the depots of the respondents in Kurukshetra district, were recorded in 1986-87 and a response from the officers/officials of the department was submitted on 30111987.
I have perused the official record produced in Court by the respondents.
In the reply to the charge-sheet filed by the petitioner, he clearly and unambiguously informed the respondents, that he had sought the inspection and supply of record through various communications including a registered communication dated 1121993.
The petitioner also indicated that he had visited the office of the respondents for the aforesaid purpose on 241993 on which date he had submitted yet another communication informing the respondents, that they had failed to supply the relevant record sought by him through his earlier communication.
In order to substantiate the prejudice suffered by the petitioner on account of non-supply/non-availability of relevant record, the averments made in the writ petition are to the following effect :-  "14.
That he requested the Department to supply him the relevant records which related to the year 1983 so that he may submit his reply to the charge-sheet.
However, record was not made available to him.
The petitioner thereafter retired from service on 3131993."
In response to the aforesaid averments in the writ petition, the reply was to the following effect :-  "14.
That the contents of para 14 are incorrect and hence denied.
Further it is submitted that it is not obligatory for the respondents to supply copies of relevant record.
However, he was shown all the relevant record at Headquarters on 241993 and he has already submitted his reply to the charge-sheet.
It is submitted that the petitioner retired from service on 3131993.
Rest of the submissions made in reply to para 13 are reiterated."
12.
I have perused the original record.
Although, the communication dated 241993 (referred to in the reply, submitted by the petitioner) is not available in the record produced before this Court, there are a large number of communications addressed to the petitioner, requiring him to inspect all relevant record during working hours and thereon to submit his reply.
It is, therefore, the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, that all available record was duly inspected by the petitioner, and he never made any grievance about the denial of any record to him for his inspection, or that any specified document which he considered relevant, had not been shown to him.
It is, therefore, contended that the issue of non-supply of relevant material for the inspection of the petitioner, has been wrongfully coined-up.
There cannot be any doubt, that the petitioner was allowed to inspect all the relevant documents, he therefore, cannot have any grievance on this aspect of the matter, specially when he has not point out or specified the denial of any material to him for inspection.
13.
The only difference between the controversy in hand and that raised before this Court in Harpal Singh's case (supra) is, that writ petition filed by Harpal Singh in 1993 came to be adjudicated upon forthwith, inasmuch as, the plea of delay raised by him to challenge the charge-sheet issued to him was dismissed by this Court on 22121993, whereas in the instate case, by an interim order dated 2581993, a Division of this Court stayed further proceedings of the departmental enquiry being conducted against the petitioner pursuant to the charge-sheet dated 2711993.
The aforestated interim order was confirmed when the main case was admitted on 2821994.
The instant writ petition has been eleven years.
In sum and substance, for the allegations levelled against the petitioner pertaining to the year 1983-84, he will have to suffer a departmental enquiry if the instant writ petition is dismissed, after a lapse of about twenty-one years.
Would it be justified to require the petitioner to face a departmental enquiry after such a long delay ?
In so far as the delay under reference is concerned, i.e. the delay which has occurred after 2581993, blame thereof cannot be fastened on the respondents, therefore, the petitioner cannot add delay in initiating the departmental proceedings after the issuance of the charge-sheet to substantiate the claim raised by him through the instant writ petition.
The only issue to be adjudicated upon is whether the delay preceding the date of issuance of the charge-sheet can be considered to be sufficient to quash the charge-sheet dated 2711993 ?
In so far as the instant issue is concerned, Harpal Singh's case (supra) which was decided by a Division Bench of this Court, is a complete answer to the controversy.
Sitting singly, I am bound by the Division Bench judgment rendered in Harpal Singh's case (supra).
The petitioner has not raised any plea so as to distinguish his case from the one in Harpal Singh's case (supra).
In view of the above, it is not possible for me to accept the solitary plea of the petitioner, that the charge-sheet dated 2711993 deserves to be set aside merely on account of the delay in initiating proceedings against him.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.