MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of two appeals filed by the appellant Gurnam Singh being R.S.A.
Nos. 4067 and 4068 of 2003 as the same questions of facts and law are involved in both the appeals.
The necessity to file two appeals has arisen because the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was partially decreed by the Ld.
Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Patiala on 2352001 which lead to the filing of two appeals before the Addl.
Dist.
Judge.
One appeal was filed by the appellant claiming that the whole suit deserved to be decreed and the other appeal was filed by the defendant- respondents for setting aside the judgment and decree dated 2352001 of the Civil Judge in favour of the plaintiff-appellant.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the plaintiff-appellant filed Civil Suit No. 331 T on 30111996 seeking a declaration that the orders dated 9111981 and 16111981 passed by the Forest Conservator, Patiala, South Circle and Shivalik Circle respectively were illegal, null and void, without jurisdiction, ultra vires, unconstitutional and against the service rules governing the service of the plaintiff-appellant.
According to the impugned orders, the plaintiff-appellant was ignored for the purpose of grant of seniority and he was denied confirmation as a Forester.
It was claimed that the plaintiff-appellant was entitled to be confirmed as a Forester from the date persons junior to him namely Nirmal Singh, Daljit Singh and others were confirmed as such and their seniority was fixed.
It was further claimed that against the adverse remarks doubting his integrity in respect of the year 1978-79 an appeal was filed which remained undecided by the department till the filing of the suit.
It has been asserted that the plaintiff-appellant had made representations and the last of the representation is dated 23.9.1994 which has been kept pending.
It is further claimed that adverse remarks recorded in the report of 1978-79 were subjected to an enquiry conducted by two Forest Rangers Shri Sital Dass and another and the plaintiff-appellant was found innocent.
3.
The stand taken by the defendant-respondents was that the suit was hopelessly time barred as per the law declared by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh, 1991(3) SCT 488 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2219.
It was further claimed that there was no cause of action which might have accrued to the plaintiff-appellant after his retirement and in the detailed particulars of the service rendered by the plaintiff-appellant to the defendant-respondent it has been mentioned that the plaintiff-appellant joined as a Mali w.e.f.
2.10.1956.
Thereafter he was promoted as a Forest Guard w.e.f.
1881961 vide office order No. 47.
Plaintiff-appellant belongs to reserved category of scheduled caste.
The case of the plaintiff-appellant was considered for confirmation as a Forester in the meeting of the Conservators held on 29101981 and he was not found suitable for confirmation as a Forester as per the criterion fixed by the Committee.
The reasons for non- suitability of the plaintiff was that his confidential report was unsatisfactory and remarks of honesty doubtful for the year 1978-79 which were conveyed to him were in existence, and no appeal against those remarks was filed.
Therefore, there is no question of any cause of action for issuance of direction to decide the afore-mentioned case.
It was denied that there is any relevancy of the enquiry conducted by Shri Sital Dass in respect of the report of the plaintiff-appellant for the year 1978-79.
It has further been pointed out that adverse remarks have been conveyed to the plaintiff-appellant for the years 1970-71, 1973-74, 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77, 1978-79 and 1982-83.
4.
The trial Court reached the conclusion that the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant against the adverse remarks of the year 1978-79 was pending and the same was required to be decided by the defendant-respondent after providing an opportunity of hearing to him.
The issue with regard to the application of the period of limitation of three years as opined by the Supreme Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) was decided in favour of the plaintiff-appellant.
Accordingly the suit of the plaintiff-appellant was partially decreed by issuing directions to the defendant-respondent to decide the appeal filed by him against the impugned order namely No. 85 dated 9111981 and No. 69 dated 16111981 after affording him an opportunity of hearing.
Against the afore-mentioned view taken by the Civil Judge, two appeals were filed before the ld.
Addl.
District Judge, one by the plaintiff- appellant and the other by the defendant-respondents.
The plaintiff-appellant claimed that his whole suit deserved to be decreed whereas the defendant- respondent submitted that directions issued by the trial Court for deciding the appeal of the plaintiff-appellant was erroneous.
The Appellate Court found that the plaintiff-appellant failed to prove the pendency of an appeal which might have been filed by him against the adverse remarks for the year 1978-79.
It has further been held that the plaintiff-appellant admitted in his cross- examination that he was conveyed adverse remarks for the years 1978-79 (Ex. D-1), 1970-71 (Ex. D-2), 1973-74 (Ex. D-3), 1974-75 (Ex. D-4), 1975-76 (Ex. D-5) and 1976-77 (Ex. D-6).
It was further held that in any case he was not entitled to any benefit because of the adverse record and reversed the finding of the trial Court on the afore-mentioned issue.
5.
On the question of limitation also, the ld.
Addl.
District Judge found that no suit could be filed after 15 years of the passing of the orders passed in 1981 and the suit was held to be hopelessly time barred.
On the basis of the afore-mentioned finding, the ld.
Addl.
District Judge dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant by accepting the appeal of the defendant- respondent.
She has, however, dismissed the appeal of the plaintiff-appellant.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel at a considerable length, I find that the view taken by the ld.
Addl.
District Judge does not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference of this court in the exercise of jurisdiction under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
It is well settled that even in service matters, an adverse order has to be challenged within a period of three years.
A Constitution Bench of seven Judges of the Supreme Court in the case of SS Rathore v. State of MP, 1989(4) SCC 582 has held that an order of dismissal has to be challenged within the period of limitation provided by Article 58 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
Article 58 of the year 1963 Act provides that a suit for declaration can be filed within three years from the date when the right to sue has accrued.
It has been held that in case of an order of dismissal the right to sue would not arise on the date of passing of the order of dismissal but would accrue when the statutory appeal was decided.
Thereafter a period of three years provided by Article 58 and a period of 60 days under Section 80 CPC is to be allowed.
However, in cases where the statutory authority fails to decide the statutory appeal and no order is made despite availing of remedy within a period six months from the date of preferring an appeal or representation then the date of expiry of six months is taken to be the date for the accrual of cause of action.
The views of their Lordships in this regard read as under :  "We are of the view that the case of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse order but on the date when the order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made and where no such order is made, though the remedy has been availed of, a six months period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making of the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen.
We, however, make it clear that this principle may not be applicable when the remedy availed of has not been provided by law.
Repeated unsuccessful representations not provided by law are not governed by this principle.
It is appropriate to notice the provision regarding limitation under Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
Sub-section (1) has prescribed a period of one year for making of the application and power of condonation of delay of a total period of six months has been vested under sub-section (3).
The civil court's jurisdiction has been taken away by the Act and, therefore, as far as government servants are concerned, Article 58 may not be invocable in view of the special limitation.
Yet suits outside the purview of the Administrative Tribunals Act shall continue to be governed by Article 58.
It is proper that the position in such cases should be uniform.
Therefore, in every such case only the appeal or representation provided by law is disposed of, cause of action shall first accrue and where such order is not made, on the expiry of six months from when the appeal was filed or representation was made, the right to sue shall first accrue.
Submission of just a memorial or representation to the head of the establishment shall not be taken into consideration in the matter of fixing limitation."
It is thus evident that in the instant case if the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant has not been decided then the maximum period of limitation for filing the suit was three years two months plus six months because after the expiry of six months from the date of filing of the appeal a right to sue would accrue and the limitation period of three years two months as provided by Article 58 of the 1963 Act would apply.
In the instant case, the suit has been filed after about 15 years which is hopelessly barred by time.
Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) wherein Article 113 has been considered which provides for three years period of limitation from the date when the right to sue accrues.
7.
I am further of the view that the pendency of the statutory appeal or a representation in any case would not restrain the defendant-respondents from taking into consideration existing remarks on the record of the plaintiff- appellant.
The afore-mentioned principle has been laid down by the Supreme Court in Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : 1992(2) SCC 299.
Even uncommunicated adverse remarks can constitute the basis of decision for withholding promotion or passing an order of pre-mature retirement etc. as has been held by the Supreme Court in the cases of State of UP and others v. Vijay Kumar Jain, 2002(2) SCT 408 (SC) : 2002(3) SCC 641 and Badri Nath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others, 2000(4) S.C.T.
832 : 2000(8) SCC 395.
Moreover, it is evident from the record of the plaintiff-appellants that during the five years proceeding 1978-79 he has earned adverse reports which have been duly received by him.
The plaintiff-appellant had the right of consideration and not that of actual confirmation and promotion.
Therefore, I do not find that any question of law much less a substantive question of law has been raised in these appeals warranting its admission under Section 100 of the Code.
Therefore, both the appeals are liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, both the appeals fail and are hereby dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.