Viney Mittal, J - The present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by Fetehabad Cooperative Processing Society Limited, Fetehabad (hereinafter referred to as the "petitioner- management").
The prayer made in the petition is for quashing the award dated June 7, 2002 passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar (hereinafter referred to as the "Labour Court").
Respondent No. 2, Dalip Singh, (hereinafter referred as the "workman") was appointed as a Salesman by the petitioner-management on August 11, 1982.
He was served with a notice of retrenchment on April 24, 1987.
He challenged the aforesaid notice of retrenchment by fling 4 civil suit before the Civil Court on May 12, 1987.
During the pendency of the civil suit, a statement was made by the petitioner-management to the effect that the service of the workman would not be terminated without having recourse to the law and the rules thereunder and without the issuance of prior notice of three months.
On the basis of the aforesaid statement made by the management, the suit filed by the workman was dismissed as withdrawn on August 28, 1987.
Subsequently, the service of the respondent-workman were terminated by giving him a notice of retrenchment on November 24, 1987.
The respondent-workman contested the aforesaid action of the petitioner-management by serving a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
On the failure of the conciliation proceedings, the matter was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court by the appropriate Government.
The claim made by the respondent-workman before the Labour Court was that after his termination many persons who had been retrenched and were junior to the respondent-workman, were re-employed, and even some persons were freshly employed, whereas, the respondent-workman claimed that he had a preferential right for re-employment in terms of Section 25-H of the Act.
2.
The claim made by the respondent-workman was contested by the petitioner- management.
Various objections were taken.
It was also claimed that since the retrenchment of the workman had been contested by him by filing a civil suit earlier which had been got dismissed an withdrawn, therefore, the workman had no right to make any further claim before the Labour Court.
It was also claimed that the workman had served a demand notice on March 1, 1991 ie after the expiry of a period of nearly four years and, therefore, his claim was liable to be rejected on account of delay alone.
3.
The learned Labour Court through the award dated June 7, 2002 held that the delay in serving the demand notice by the respondent-workman was of no consequence.
It was further held on the basis of the statement of Rajinder Kumar, Accountant, who appeared as MW-1, that new salesman Hawa Singh was appointed on March 1, 1991 and another person Richhpal was appointed on September 22, 1992.
It was also admitted by the aforesaid witness that no notice was sent to the claimant prior to the appointment of aforesaid two persons.
On the basis of the aforesaid fact, the Labour Court held that the action of the petitioner-management was violative of Section 25-H of the Act.
Accordingly, the respondent-workman was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service and 50% backwages.
4.
The petitioner-management has impugned the aforesaid award through the present petition.
5.
We have heard Shri RK Jain, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-management and Shri Vinod Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
6.
The primary argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner- management is that the demand notice had been served by the respondent-workman after the expiry of 4 years and, as such, the dispute raised by him had in fact, become stale and, therefore, should have been treated to be not subsisting on the date of the demand notice.
On that basis, the learned counsel argues that the award passed by the Labour Court was liable to be set aside on this ground alone.
7.
We are afraid that the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel is without any basis.
The narration of facts, noticed by us above, and the perusal of the award passed by the Labour Court, shows that the controversy in this case relates only to the violation of the provision of Section 25-H of the Act.
It has been admitted by Rajinder Kumar, Accountant, who appeared as MW-1 that new salesmen had been appointed after the termination of the services of the respondent-workman.
One Hawa Singh was appointed on March 1, 1991 whereas one Richhpal was appointed on September 22, 1992.
It has also been admitted by the aforesaid witness that no notice was ever sent to the claimant before appointing the aforesaid two salesmen.
It is, thus, clear that the respondent-workman, who had a preferential right to be appointed after his retrenchment, had not been so appointed.
This is in clear violation of the mandatory provision of Section 25-H of the Act.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we do not find that the impugned award passed by the learned Labour Court suffers from any infirmity.
Accordingly, the present petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.