Viney Mittal, J - The plaintiff having concurrently remained unsuccessful before the Courts below, has approached this Court, through the present regular second appeal.
2.
A suit for declaration was filed by the plaintiff to the effect that the order dated February 17, 1980 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Bathinda discharging him from the service, is illegal, null and void and that the plaintiff continues to be in the service of the Punjab Police despite the aforesaid order.
It was claimed that the plaintiff was entitled to all the benefits of service including salary allowance, leave etc.
The plaintiff further claimed that he joined as a police constable with the Punjab Police in the year 1978.
A criminal case was registered against him bearing FIR No. 75 dated February 9, 1982 at Police Station Kotwali, Bathinda under Section 385 of the Indian Penal Code.
Claiming that he was acquitted by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate vide judgment dated November 13, 1982, the plaintiff maintained that the order of discharge passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) was passed during the investigation of the aforesaid criminal case.
It was further claimed that the aforesaid Officer was not competent to discharge the plaintiff from service during the investigation of the cause registered against the plaintiff.
A grievance was also made that no show-cause notice was served before discharging him from service and the aforesaid order of discharge tantamounted to an order of punishment which caused stigma on the career of the plaintiff and, as such, the mandatory provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India were attracted to the case and since the provisions of the Rules for awarding the punishment were not followed, therefore, the aforesaid order of discharge was liable to be set aside.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
The defendants maintained that the aforesaid order of discharge dated February 17, 1980 was legal and valid.
The defendants admitted that a criminal case had been registered against the plaintiff but denied that the aforesaid factum of registration of the criminal case against him was in any manner relevant, since the same had not been taken into consideration while discharging the plaintiff from service under the Rule 1221 of the Rules.
The defendants further maintained that the plaintiff was found to be unlikely to become a good police official and, as such, he had been discharged prior to his completion of three years of service in accordance with law.
The defendants further maintained that there was no need to issue a show-cause notice to the plaintiff before passing order of discharge from service under Rules 1221 of the Rules as he had not completed three years of service from the date of his enrolment.
Another objection was taken that since the order of discharge had not been challenged by the plaintiff within the period of limitation and the present suit had been filed on August 13, 1985, therefore, the suit was also barred by limitation.
4.
The learned trial Court, on the basis of material available on record, found that the order of discharge had been passed by the defendants in accordance with Rule 1221 of the Rules.
It was further held that since the plaintiff had not completed three years of service from the date of his enrolment, therefore, the aforesaid Rule 1221 of the Rules was duly applicable.
It was further held that the Civil Court was not competent to sit as a Court of appeal over the administrative order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Bathinda.
Besides the aforesaid findings, the learned trial Court also held that the order of discharge had been passed on February 17, 1980, whereas the suit had been filed by the plaintiff on August 13, 1985.
Accordingly, it was held that the suit filed by the plaintiff was also barred by limitation.
On the basis of the aforesaid findings, the learned trial Court dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
5.
The plaintiff took up the matter in appeal.
The learned first appellate Court reappraised the entire evidence.
On such re-appraisal, the learned first appellate Court also affirmed the findings recorded by the learned trial Court.
Accordingly, the appeal filed by the plaintiff was also dismissed.
6.
The plaintiff has still remained dis-satisfied and has approached this Court through the present Regular Second Appeal.
7.
I have heard Shri GS Mann, the learned counsel for the plaintiff- appellant and Shri Ashish Sharma, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
8.
Shri GS Mann, the learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently argued that after the acquittal of the plaintiff from the criminal case, the competent authority was duty bound in law to review the whole matter keeping in view the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
In support of the aforesaid contention, the learned counsel relies upon the proviso to Rule 162 of the Rules.
9.
For the sake of appreciation of the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel, the aforesaid provisions of Rule 162 of the Rules may be noticed as follows :  "162 Dismissal - (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct providing incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
(2) An enrolled police officer convicted and sentenced to imprisonment on a criminal charge shall be dismissed : "Provided that in case the conviction of a police officer is set aside in appeal or revision, the officer empowered to appoint him shall review his case keeping in view the instructions issued by the Government in this behalf."
When a police officer is convicted judicially and dismissed, or dismissed as a result of a departmental enquiry, in consequence of corrupt practices, the conviction and dismissal and its cause shall be published in the Police Gazette.
In other cases of dismissal when it is desired to ensure that the officer dismissed shall not be re-employed elsewhere, a full descriptive roll, with particulars of the punishments, shall be sent for publication in the Police Gazette."
It is clear from the persual of the aforesaid provision of Rule 162 of the Rules and the proviso appended thereto that the aforesaid provision merely deals with a case of dismissal.
In the situation, where the police official has been dismissed from service on account of the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, the aforesaid proviso appended to the said Rules would be attracted.
However, in the present case the impugned order dated February 17, 1980 has been passed under Rule 1221 of the Rules.
For the sake of convenience Rule 1221 of the Rules may be noticed at this stage :  "1221 Discharge or inefficients - A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
Thus, it is clear that the impugned action against the plaintiff has been taken under Rule 1221 and not rule 162 of the Rules.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff has not been able to refer any provision that in such a situation where action has been taken under Rule 1221 of the Rules, provision of Rule 162 of the Rules would also be applicable.
In view of the aforesaid fact, the first argument raised by the learned counsel for the plaintiff is without any merit and as such cannot be accepted.
10.
At this stage, it may also be noticed that both the Courts below have concurrently held that the suit filed by the plaintiff was barred by limitation.
The plaintiff had filed the present suit on August 13, 1985.
The suit has been filed for a declaration to the effect that the order of Senior Superintendent of Police, Bathinda dated February 17, 1980 discharging the plaintiff from service is illegal, null and void and bad and that the plaintiff continues to be in the service.
It is obvious that the aforesaid suit filed after the expiry of more than 5 years from the date of passing of the aforesaid order is clearly barred by limitation.
11.
Faced with the aforesaid difficulty, the learned counsel submits that the limitation against the plaintiff would commence from the date of acquittal inasmuch as the cause of action for filing the present suit had accrued to the plaintiff at the time of his acquittal on November 13, 1982.
12.
I find myself unable to agree with the aforesaid contention.
Firstly, as noticed above, the impugned order dated February 17, 1980, discharging the plaintiff from the service, has not been passed on the basis of the criminal case registered against the plaintiff.
Secondly, once the limitation had commenced from the date of passing of the aforesaid order on February 17, 1980, then the subsequent acquittal of the plaintiff from the criminal case on November 13, 1982 would not enlarge the period of limitation in any manner.
Accordingly, the findings recorded by the Courts below that the suit filed by the plaintiff is barred by limitation cannot be held to erroneous in any manner.
Accordingly, I find that the findings recorded by the Courts below do not suffer from any infirmity.
No misreading of evidence has been pointed out.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in the present appeal.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any merit in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.