MM Kumar, J - This case again raises the controversy as to whether an order of termination simplicitor be considered as stigmatic and violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution by lifting the veil to find out the real character of the order.
One Bhanna Ram who was working on the post of Clerk in the office of District Education Officer, Jind has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order of his termination dated 1521984 passed by the Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Narwana.
Another prayer has been made for quashing the subsequent order dated 26101987 (Annexure P-11) passed by the DPI (Schools), Haryana (respondent 2) rejecting his representation for his reinstatement in service and order dated 4111988 (Annexure P-16) again rejecting his representation by the Commissioner and Secretary, Department of Education, Haryana.
2.
On proceeding on leave by one Jang Bahadur Bhatnagar who was working on the post of Assistant, Bhanna Ram was appointed on the post of Clerk on temporary basis.
He was sponsored by the District Employment Exchange, Jind.
It was made clear in the appointment letter that the appointment was totally temporary and he could be relieved any time without notice.
According to the averments made by the petitioner, he was considered on adhoc basis w.e.f.
17.10.1973 and his adhoc appointment was approved by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana vide Memo No. 2530-RI(III)-75/11403 dated 17.5.1975.
He was allowed to cross the efficiency bar by the District Education Officer (respondent 3) vide its order dated 17.5.1979 (Annexure P-2).
3.
On 111980, the respondent-State issued executive instructions by excluding from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board those Class III posts which have been occupied for a minimum period of two years w.e.f.
31121979 because such employees were to be regularised subject to the condition that they had completed two years on 31121979 and any break in service upto a period of one month was to be condoned.
The adhoc appointment was required to be sponsored through Employment Exchange and his work and conduct was required to be of an over-all good category.
They were also required to fulfill the prescribed qualification for the post which was applicable at the time of his appointment on adhoc basis.
The petitioner claims that his case for regularisation was sent on 371980 as he fulfilled all the necessary requirements as envisaged in the instructions dated 111980 (Annexure P-3).
However, his case was sent back vide memo dated 371980 as it was not accompanied by a medical certificate.
His case for regularisation was re-submitted to the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) (respondent 2) by the District Education Officer (respondent 3).
However on 2691980 the petitioner was placed under suspension with immediate effect (Annexure P-4).
The order further clarified that the petitioner was entitled to the subsistence allowance under Rule 72 of the Punjab Civil Services, Volume I, Part I.
He was reinstated in service on 1631981 (Annexure P-5) by respondent No. 2 with a stipulation that his reinstatement was without prejudice to the disciplinary action to be taken against him as a result of the case pending against him.
It is pertinent to mention that till that time, there was no first information report registered against the petitioner.
The reason for placing the petitioner under suspension as disclosed in paragraph 5 of the written statement was that he was found guilty of mis-appropriation of government funds.
It has been pointed out that in 1979 he was entrusted with the duty of supplying cheap exercise books to the schools which were to be distributed amongst the students.
He obtained commission from the supplier who sold the exercise books and kept the amount of commission with him.
When he was suspended, the amount of commission was deposited by him in the Government Treasury on 29111980.
The total amount was Rs. 511/-.
On account of his conduct, he was not found fit for regularisation of his services.
4.
On 1181982 an F.I.R. was registered against the petitioner and two others at Police Station State Vigilance Bureau, Hisar Range, Hisar.
On 1521984 his services were terminated by respondent 3 on the basis of a letter dated 8121983 sent by respondent 2.
It is further the case of the petitioner that he was acquitted in the criminal case registered against him on 21.3.1986 and the Criminal Misc. petition filed by the respondent-State for leave to appeal was dismissed on 7111986.
5.
The stand of respondents 1 to 4 taken in the written statement is that it was on account of lack of good conduct that services of the petitioner were not regularised because after suspension he deposited a sum of Rs. 511/- in the Government Treasury on 29111980.
In paragraph 8 of the written statement, the stand of the respondents further is that in August, 1980 the office of the Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Narwana was subjected to audit and numerous irregularities were found.
It is claimed that respondent 2 was fully competent to address letter dated 921984 for termination of services of the petitioner in his administrative capacity.
It is further claimed that termination of services of the petitioner is in terms of conditions of his appointment but not on account of registration of a case against him.
Therefore, no question of his reinstatement in service after his acquittal would arise.
The petitioner had routed his representations through the Education Minister which after thorough examination have been rejected firstly by the Director, Public Instructions (respondent 2) vide order dated 26101987 (Annexure P-11) and then by the Commissioner and Secretary, Education, Haryana (Annexure P-16) dated 4111988.
In paragraphs 19(i) and (ii) of the written statement the following stand of the department deserves to be noticed in extenso :-  "19.
(i) ......It is, submitted that when it was established that the petitioner had been misusing his powers and his conduct was found to be not becoming of a Govt. servant, his services were dispensed with.
Since the petitioner was working on adhoc basis at that time it was not necessary to hold an enquiry or serve a show cause notice and his services were liable to be terminated at any time without any notice.
Therefore, the order Annexure P-6 is legal and just and liable to be sustained in the eyes of law.
(ii) "..............the services of the petitioner were terminated by an innocuous order as no stigma of any kind was levelled against the petitioner, which could effect his future chances of employment."
6.
It has further been asserted that the work and conduct of adhoc employees is required to be of over-all good category in accordance with instructions dated 111980.
However, the conduct of the petitioner was not of a good category and he was not entitled to regularisation.
7.
Mr. Bhoop Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the order of termination dated 1521984 is based on the order issued by the Director, Public Instructions respondent 2 directing respondent 4 to terminate the services of the petitioner.
He has drawn my attention to the inter- departmental correspondence as is referred in para 8 of the petition.
The letter dated 921984 was a reply to the letter dated 8121983 sent by respondent No. 4 to respondent 2 as is evident from the perusal of that letter which reads as under :-  "Subject : Termination of services of Shri Bhanna Ram, Clerk (arrested).
Reference : Memo No. 5/110-80-ME(2) dated 8121983.
With reference to the above mentioned letter, you are ordered to terminate the services of Shri Bhanna Ram, Clerk in accordance with the terms and conditions mentioned in his appointment letter and send the compliance report immediately to this office.
In the order no reason should be given for terminating the services nor any reference to any letter be given in that.
Sd/- Assistant Registrar for Director Public Instructions Education Department, Haryana, Chandigarh."
8.
The learned counsel has argued that foundation of the order of termination dated 1521984 (Annexure P-6) is a misconduct which has been reflected when the petitioner was reinstated after suspension vide order dated 1631981.
According to the learned counsel, paragraph 2 of that order refers to the disciplinary action which was to be taken against the petitioner as a result of the case pending against him.
The learned counsel has maintained that it is no where disputed that the work and conduct of the petitioner was of over-all good category and his case for regularisation was recommended as early as on 371980 on that basis.
The only objection against regularisation raised by the department was the non-submission of medical certificate of the petitioner.
The learned counsel has maintained that it is only on account of suspension of the petitioner on 2691980 that his services were not regularised and his termination is the direct result of registration of first information report on 1181982.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on four judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, AIR 1984 SC 636; Jarnail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 278; Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of UP and others, 2000(2) SCT 946 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 1706 and AP State Fed.
of Coop.
Spinning Mills Ltd and another v. PV Swaminathan, 2001(3) SCT 128 (SC) : 2002(2) RSJ 247.
He has also relied upon on an unreported judgment of this Court in the case of Bijender Kumar v. State of Haryana and another, 2003(1) SCT 450 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No. 2473 of 1993, decided on 13112002.
Referring to the observations made by the Supreme Court in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the judgment in the case of Anoop Jaiswal (supra), the learned counsel has argued that it is now well settled that form of the order is not decisive to determine whether the order of termination is punitive in character and it has been passed in order to circumvent the holding of a regular departmental enquiry.
The learned counsel has argued that in the case of Anoop Jaiswal (supra), a probationer was discharged after an explanation was called from him regarding allegations of act of indiscipline.
It was alleged that he was acting as one of the ring leaders on that occasion.
The learned counsel has then referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) which is a case of an adhoc employee wherein the view taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Anoop Jaiswal (supra) was also considered.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on paragraphs 28 to 31 of the judgment and argued that even in the case of an adhoc employee holding of enquiry cannot be avoided if there were allegations of misconduct.
He has asserted that case of the petitioner is identical to the case of Jarnail Singh as in that case also there were allegations of embezzlement of funds which constituted the foundation for not considering the petitioner fit for regularisation of his services in that case.
The learned counsel has maintained that other two judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of PV Swaminathan (supra) and Chandra Prakash Shahi (supra) also fully support his contention because if motive is the moving power for the order of termination, then it has to be regarded as foundation of the order, not a mere deficiency in work and conduct of the petitioner.
The learned counsel has prayed that the impugned order of termination dated 1521984 (Annexure P-6) and the subsequent orders dated 26101987 (Annexure P-11) and 14111988 (Annexure P-16) are liable to be quashed.
9.
Ms. Mamta Singal, learned State counsel has argued that once the work and conduct of the petitioner has been found to be unsatisfactory, it cannot be alleged that the order of termination dated 1521984 is a punitive order warranting holding of an enquiry.
She has further submitted that the terms and conditions of his appointment order, Annexure P-1 clearly stipulates that his appointment was purely temporary and he could be relieved at any time without notice.
In support of her submission, the learned counsel his placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP and another v. Smt. Kamla Devi and another, 1996(4) SCT 720 (SC) : 1996(3) RSJ 250.
She has also relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Om Parkash Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1950-1988 (Vol. 2) Recent Services Judgments 246.
Another argument raised by the learned counsel is that decision of regularisation is merely a concession and the same cannot be claimed by any one as a matter of right.
In that regard, reliance has been placed on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Gian Chand and others v. The Director, Hydel Designs, Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1950-1988 (Vol. 4) Recent Services Judgments 215.
10.
The baflling question which has confronted the Courts is to determine whether an order of termination simplicitor is based on misconduct or it is visited by penal consequences which is a mere pretence to circumvent holding of a departmental enquiry envisaged by Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court in the case of Pavanendra Narayan Verma v. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical Sciences and another, 2002(2) SCT 358 (SC) : (2002) 1 SCC 520 has closely analysed the whole case law by making reference to its earlier Constitution Bench judgments in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36; Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab, (1974) 2 SCC 831; Chandra Prakash Shahi's case (supra); State of UP v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : (1991) 1 SCC 691 and many other judgments.
The following three pronged tests laid down by the Supreme Court in Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra) read as under :-  "21.
One of the judicially evolved tests to determine whether in substance an order of termination is punitive is to see whether prior to the termination there was (a) a full-scale formal enquiry (b) into allegations involving moral turpitude or misconduct which (c) culminated in a finding of guilt.
If all three factors are present the termination has been held to be punitive irrespective of the form of the termination order.
Conversely if any one of he three factors is missing, the termination has been upheld."
11.
For the aforementioned three factors, paragraph 64 of the judgment of Constitution Bench in Samsher Singh's case (supra) has been relied upon which reads as under :-  "64.
Before a probationer is confirmed the authority concerned is under an obligation to consider whether the work of the probationer is satisfactory or whether he is suitable for the post.
In the absence of any rules governing a probationer in this respect the authority may come to the conclusion that on account of inadequacy for the job or for any temperamental or other object not involving moral turpitude the probationer is unsuitable for the job and hence must be discharged.
No punishment is involved in this.
The authority may in some cases be of the view that the conduct of the probationer may result in dismissal or removal on an inquiry.
But in those cases the authority may not hold an inquiry and may simply discharge the probationer with a view to giving him a chance to make good in other walks of life without a stigma at the time of termination of probation.
If, on the other hand, the probationer is faced with an inquiry on charges of misconduct or inefficiency or corruption, and if his services are terminated without following the provisions of Article 311(2) he can claim protection."
(emphasis as in original) 12.
It is pertinent to mention that in Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra), the Supreme Court has relied upon its earlier judgment in the case of Radhey Shyam Gupta v. UP State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. and another, 1999(1) SCT 366 (SC) : (1999)2 SCC 21.
In that case, the delinquent officer was alleged to have taken Rs. 2,000/- fraudulently from the complainant and an ex parte enquiry at the back of the employee was held and the enquiry officer examined witnesses, recorded their statements and gave clear findings that the delinquent officer accepted a bribe.
He even recommended his termination.
The very next day, the order of termination was passed.
In these circumstances, the Supreme Court held that foundation of the order is the findings of the enquiry officer conducted at the back of the delinquent employee and, therefore, the form of the order would not be decisive.
It is pertinent to mention that judgment of the Supreme Court in Anoop Jaiswal's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner which was later on followed in the case of Jarnail Singh (supra) was also considered and relied upon.
Justice M. Jagannadha Rao after detailed analysis of all the judgments in Radhey Shyam Gupta's case (supra) recorded the following statement of law in paragraphs 33 and 34 which read as under :-  "33.
It will be noticed from the above decisions that the termination of the services of a temporary servant or one on probation, on the basis of adverse entries or on the basis of an assessment that his work is not satisfactory will not be punitive inasmuch as the above facts are merely the motive and not the foundation.
The reason why they are the motive is that the assessment is not done with the object of finding out any misconduct on the part of the officer, as stated by Shah, J (as he then was) in State of Orissa v. Ram Narayan Das case [AIR 1961 SC 177].
It is done only with a view to decide whether he is to be retained or continued in service.
The position is no different even if a preliminary enquiry is held because the purpose of a preliminary enquiry is to find out if there is prima facie evidence or material to initiate a regular departmental enquiry.
It has been so decided in Champaklal Chimanlal Shah v. Union of India case [AIR 1964 SC 1854].
The purpose of the preliminary enquiry is not to find out misconduct on the part of the officer and if a termination follows without giving an opportunity, it will not be bad.
Even in a case where a regular departmental enquiry is started, a charge-memo issued, reply obtained, and an enquiry officer is appointed - if at that point of time, the enquiry is dropped and a simple notice of termination is passed, the same will not be punitive because the enquiry officer has not recorded evidence nor given any findings on the charges.
That is what is held in State of Punjab v. Sukh Raj Bahadur case [AIR 1968 SC 1989] and in Benjamin case [(1967) LLJ 718 (SC)].
In the latter case, the departmental enquiry was stopped because the employer was not sure of establishing the guilt of the employee.
In all these cases, the allegations against the employee merely raised a cloud on his conduct and as pointed by Krishna Iyer, J in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel tubes Mazdoor Sabha [(1980) 2 SCC 593] the employer was entitled to say that he would not continue an employee against whom allegations were made the truth of which the employer was not interested to ascertain.
In fact, the employer by opting to pass a simple order of termination as permitted by the terms of appointment or as permitted by the rules was conferring a benefit on the employee by passing a simple order of termination so that the employee would not suffer from any stigma which would attach to the rest of his career if a dismissal or other punitive order was passed.
The above are all examples where the allegations whose truth has not been found, and were merely the motive.
34.
But in cases where the termination is preceded by an enquiry and evidence is received and findings as to misconduct of a definitive nature are arrived at behind the back of the officer and where on the basis of such a report, the termination order is issued, such an order will be violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the purpose of the enquiry is to find out the truth of the allegations with a view to punish him and not merely to gather evidence for a future regular departmental enquiry.
In such cases, the termination is to be treated as based or founded upon misconduct and will be punitive.
These are obviously not cases where the employer feels that there is a mere cloud against the employee's conduct but are cases where the employer has virtually accepted the definitive and clear findings of the enquiry officer, which are all arrived at behind the back of the employee - even though such acceptance of findings is not recorded in the order of termination.
That is why the misconduct is the foundation and not merely the motive in such cases."
13.
Form the perusal of statement of law made by the Supreme Court in Radhey Shyam Gupta's case (supra) and Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra), it becomes absolutely clear that even in cases, a departmental enquiry is initiated, charge-sheet issued, reply obtained and the enquiry officer is appointed, then if the enquiry proceedings are dropped at that stage by issuance of simple order of termination, then such an order cannot be regarded as punitive in nature.
In the case of Pavanendra Narayan Verma (supra), their Lordships have laid down three pronged tests : (a) if the termination proceeded with a full-scale formal enquiry; (b) the allegations involves moral turpitude or misconduct; and (c) and the enquiry has resulted in a finding of guilt against the delinquent employee.
If the aforesaid three elements are present, then the termination order has to be regarded as a pretence to an order dismissal.
In the absence of aforementioned factors, the order of termination simplicitor cannot be regarded as an order of punishment passed with the object of circumventing the holding of enquiry as envisaged under Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
14.
The facts of the present case are required to be examined in the light of statement of law made by the Supreme Court in the aforementioned two judgments.
Before the order of termination, the petitioner was placed under suspension on 2691980 (Annexure P-4) and he was reinstated on 1631981 (Annexure P-5).
In paragraph 2 of the order of reinstatement, it was mentioned that reinstatement of the petitioner is without prejudice to the disciplinary action which may be taken against him as a result of the pending case against him.
It is appropriate to mention that no F.I.R. was registered against the petitioner when he was placed under suspension on 2691980 or when he was reinstated on 1631981.
The services of the petitioner were never regularised because it appears that during the audit of the respondent-department conducted in August, 1980, some irregularities were detected.
It is also evident that no departmental enquiry was held in order to establish the charges against the petitioner.
None of the elements of three pronged tests laid down by the Supreme Court in Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra) are fulfilled warranting a conclusion that the order of termination dated 1521984 is punitive in nature and its foundation is a misconduct.
It is further evident that more than two years before the decision in the criminal case could be pronounced on 21.3.1986 acquitting the petitioner, the order of termination had been passed on 1521984.
Therefore, it cannot be concluded that the order of termination dated 1521984 suffers from any legal infirmity.
15.
Four judgments of the Supreme Court on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner have been considered in detail in Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra) and Radhey Shyam Gupta's case (supra).
Therefore, I do not feel any necessity to dwell on that issue any further.
However, it deserves to be highlighted that the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Om Parkash Sharma's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the learned State counsel is consistent with the view taken by the Supreme Court in Pavanendra Narayan Verma's case (supra) and Radhey Shyam Gupta's case (supra).
The termination of the services of the petitioner is in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment letter which expressly records that his services were temporary and he could be relieved at any time without any notice.
Therefore, the instant petition is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.