Viney Mittal, J - The defendant State of Punjab has approached this Court through the present regular second appeal.
2.
A suit for declaration was filed by the plaintiff to the effect that the order dated April 18, 1980 of the General Manager Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur and order dated July 25, 1980 of the Director, State Transport, Punjab, Chandigarh by virtue of which the services of the plaintiff had been terminated, are illegal, ultra vires, wrong, violative of principles of natural justice and contrary to the provisions of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The plaintiff claimed that he was working as a conductor in the department of Transport Punjab Roadways and had been dismissed from service.
He claimed that a charge-sheet was served upon him and he had filed a reply to the charge- sheet in which he denied all the allegations against him.
It was claimed that the charge-sheet was defective in nature and the same had been issued with a prejudiced mind and pre-supposed guilt of the plaintiff.
It was claimed that during the course of enquiry, the plaintiff was not given a proper opportunity to present his side of the case inasmuch as he was denied the assistance of co-worker as a defence helper.
It was claimed that the department was assisted by a law graduate, whereas the plaintiff being a mere layman himself was engaged in defending his case.
Various other pleas were taken challenging the aforesaid enquiry proceedings.
It was further claimed that the Enquiry Officer had not complied with sub-clauses 10, 11, 16, 17 and 18 of Rule 8 of the Rules.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
Various technical objections were raised.
Additionally, it was claimed that the enquiry proceedings were legal and proper and proper opportunity had been afforded to the plaintiff to defend the charges levelled against him.
3.
The learned trial Court dismissed the suit field by the plaintiff.
4.
The matter was taken up in appeal.
The learned first appellate Court re- appraised the entire evidence.
On such re-appraisal, the learned first appellate Court found that the enquiry proceedings had not been conducted properly inasmuch as reasonable opportunity had not been granted to the plaintiff to defend his case.
He had been denied the assistance of a co-worker to help him in defending the proceedings against him.
It was further held that the mandatory provisions of Rule 8(18) of the rules had not been complied with.
On the basis of aforesaid findings, the learned first appellate Court found that the enquiry proceedings were vitiated and, as such, the punishment order passed on the basis of the aforesaid enquiry proceedings, was liable to be set aside.
Accordingly the appeal filed by the plaintiff was allowed and consequently his suit was decreed with a declaration that he be deemed to be continued in the service of the State of Punjab on the same emoluments and benefits which were admissible to him under the Rules.
5.
The defendant has now approached this Court through the regular second appeal.
6.
I have gone through the findings recorded by the learned first appellate Court.
7.
In my considered opinion, there is no infirmity in the aforesaid findings recorded by the learned first appellate Court.
Nothing has been brought on the record of this case to show that the Enquiry Officer had duly complied with the provisions of the Rules while conducting the enquiry against the plaintiff.
Once the learned first appellate Court had found that the enquiry proceedings were vitiated, then as a natural consequence, the punishment order on the basis of aforesaid enquiry proceedings, was liable to be set aside.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in the present appeal.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, I find no merit in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.