Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The Petitioner being appointed 'Assistant Teacher in the institution namely St Agnes School at 6 Avenue South Side, Post and Police Station Kharagpur, District Midnapur has challenged order of termination dated 3rd April, 1996 and has asked for reinstatement in the said post and other benefit of payment of duty of salary which were payable during her course of employment and also the back wages on reinstatement.
The petitioner's case in short is as follows :  2.
By a letter dated 23rd November, 1993, the petitioner was appointed to the aforesaid post on and from 18th November, 1993 in the scale of pay of Rs. 1425-45-1555-55-1720-65-2000-75-3130 plus Medical Allowances, House Rent Allowance and Government DA as per Government rules then prevailing.
This appointment was made on probation for two years with condition that after which if her works proved satisfactory she might be confirmed, as may be decided by the School Managing Committee.
Further condition was that her services might be terminated at any time with one month's notice on either side, or one month's pay in lieu thereof.
The petitioner completed two years probationary period in terms thereof and during which her services were not terminated.
3.
On 17th November, 1995 on immediately preceding day of expiry of the aforesaid period of two years a purported extension for 6 months was granted from 18th November, 1995.
It is mentioned in the said letter of extension if her services were found satisfactory, she would be confirmed in service.
At any time during probationary period, her services might be terminated without notice and without showing any reason.
If she was not confirmed at or before the expiry of the probationary period, her services stand automatically terminated.
Confirmation in service after completion of probationary period shall be made on recommendation of the Head of the Institution.
However, if during probationary period her services were not found satisfactory the management reserves right to remove her from services.
During this probationary period she will be paid Rs. 946/- per month plus Government DA according to Government rules.
4.
She worked for 6 months after expiry of initial period of two years.
Before expiry of extended period of 6 months she was served with the letter of termination dated 3rd April, 1996 whereby the period of her services were brought to an end on 17th May, 1996.
5.
The challenge of the petitioner in this case is that the petitioner ought not to have been terminated in the way it has been done as on expiry of 2 years of probationary period she is deemed to have been confirmed teacher.
Both the parties have acted treating the petitioner as being confirmed teacher as annual increment was also granted was fitted in regular pay scale as admissible to a permanent teacher, as it will appear in her letter of appointment.
6.
Moreover, it is stated that in the initial letter of appointment it is mentioned if the petitioner's service is not found to be satisfactory then her services shall not be confirmed.
Though the petitioner was not confirmed expressly, she was allowed to continue, therefore, it shall be presumed that petitioner's services were not found to be unsatisfactory.
As a logical consequence, the effect of termination of the petitioner's services is deemed to be on the ground of unsatisfactory performance.
Therefore, by necessary implication the petitioner has been stigmatized with this dismissal.
This has been done without following the norms and spirit of natural justice, as such dismissal effect was got civil consequences.
7.
The learned Lawyer Mr. Chinmoy Paul appearing for the petitioner contends that the second order of extension is wholly invalid and inconsistent with the provisions of Regulation 21(e) namely the Code of Regulations for Anglo Indian and Other Listed Schools, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as the said Regulations).
He submits that aforesaid Regulations provides for keeping a teacher on probation for maximum period of two years even by way of extension.
On expiry of the two years period in the event the teacher concerned is not terminated from the services then the petitioner is appeared (deemed ?)
to have been confirmed.
Therefore, the extension was not warranted under the law and petitioner has served more than two years.
8.
His further argument is that the letter of termination dated 3rd April, 1996 by necessary implication has the effect of order of punishment as she was not confirmed rather terminated because her work was said to have (been) found unsatisfactory.
Therefore, termination in essence has been made on account of punishment.
It is settled position of the law that petitioner cannot be dismissed from service if it is done by way of penal measure without following the principle of natural justice.
In support of this part of his submission he has drawn my attention to a decision of the Supreme Court rendered in VP Ahuja v. State of Punjab, 2000(2) SCT 327 (SC) : 2000(3) JT 1 (SC).
9.
He further submits that the contention of the respondents as for maintainability of the writ is concerned the law is very well settled that when an educational institution is being run under the guidance and regulation of the Government and with grant-in-aid in that case with jurisdiction is amenable, because citizens getting education is a fundamental right.
In support of his contention he has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court reported in K Krishnamacharyulu v. Sri Venkateswara Hindu College of Engineering, 1997(3) SCT 155 (SC) : (1997)3 SCC 571.
10.
He further submits that even during course of her employment she was not paid her salary, which should have been paid under the rules and regulations in terms of the letter of appointment.
Therefore, difference of salary shall be paid.
In order to prove this non-payment of the full salary he has produced a statement of the Bank Account, which was opened for this purpose by the petitioner.
11.
Mr. RN Bag, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, School authority contends that the petitioner has been appointed by the School strictly in accordance with the provision of the Rules framed by the founder of the School and the same is permissible to be done under Clause 21(a) of the said Regulation.
By and under Clause 4.96 being procedure for appointment, an employee appointed against a permanent vacancy will be placed on probation for two years from the date of appointment.
The Managing Committee of the School shall, however, be at liberty to extend the period of probation for 6 months.
In case an employee is appointed on probation letter of termination or confirmation as the case may be of employee in service shall be served upon such employee at least 30 days before end of the probationary term, failing which, the employee will be deemed to have been confirmed in such appointment.
12.
My attention has been drawn by him to the letter of appointment and that of extension as well as termination, and submits that everything has been done in accordance with the aforesaid Rule 49.
This rule is a special procedure and this will override Regulation 21(e).
Since by the aforesaid Regulation the founder has (been) empowered to frame the Rules with regard to the appointment of the teachers.
13.
Therefore, nothing illegality or infirmity as regard termination of services is done.
As far as the difference of salaries is concerned that is incorrect and everything has been paid to the petitioner.
14.
Having heard the respective contention of the learned counsels, the first point is to be decided as to whether the writ petition is maintainable or not.
Since it is a question of law it has to be considered even at the hearing stage even though the respondent has not raised the question at the very first instance.
It is an admitted fact that this School is guided and governed by the aforesaid Regulation and also is receiving grant in aid in the form of Dearness Allowance.
The function of the School is to impart education to the citizens, which is the duty of a public character.
Therefore, I think taking together as a whole the School is amenable to the writ jurisdiction.
I find there is a considerable force on this point in the submission of Mr. Paul.
In the Supreme Court decision reported in (1997) SCC 571, it has been observed amongst other that "in view of the long line of decisions of this Court holding that when there is an interest created by the Government in an institution to impart education, which is a fundamental right of the citizens, the teachers who impart the education get an element of public interest in the performance of the duties."
In my view the Government while granting recognition has entrusted to the School authority to discharge public duty to impart education.
15.
Therefore, the test laid down by the Supreme Court as above is satisfied.
Thus I am unable to accept the contention of Mr.
Bag that writ does not lie in this case.
16.
Next question is whether the petitioner's termination is lawful or not.
In this case this Court has to decide which will govern between the two Rules viz. Rule 49 of the Rule framed by the School in terms of Regulation as above, or the provision as contained in 21(e) of the Regulation.
17.
I am unable to accept the contention of Mr.
Bag that the Rule 49 will be a governing factor in this case, for the simple reason the rule making authority cannot frame any rule inconsistent with the corresponding provision of the Rule under which Rule is authorized to be framed.
On meaningful reading of the provision for appointment on probation, it appears Rule 49 and Regulations 21(e) are slightly at variance.
If the Regulation is treated to a supreme legislation in this case then Rule on being framed thereunder should be termed as subordinate one.
It is well settled principle of law that the subordinate legislation must yield to the supreme one in case inconsistency and/or contradiction on a particular subject.
Therefore, it must be held that in this case Rule 21(e) will be holding the field, which is set out hereunder :  "21(e) Ordinarily, a teacher appointed against a permanent vacancy will be placed on probation for one year from the date of appointment and such probation may be extended by NOT MORE than one year thereafter.
In all cases of teachers appointed on probation, a letter terminating the service or extending the period of probation, as the case may be shall be served to him/her, one month before the end of the probationary period failing which the teacher will be deemed to be confirmed in that appointment."
18.
In this case the petitioner has been appointed by the School on probation with a full period of two years, possibly following its own Rule 49, which enables it to keep a teacher on probation for initial period of two years.
Whatever may be intention of the School authority, a teacher can be kept on probation for a maximum period of two years.
Within this period the teacher concerned either has to be terminated with a notice or to be confirmed.
Factually in this case after expiry of period of two years she was not terminated rather she was allowed to continue in service on the strength of purported extension of 6 months.
19.
Upon careful reading of the letter of extension it appears to me in essence it is not an extension, as I observe essential terms and conditions of the appointment was varied.
The petitioner initially was appointed at pay scale that is higher than the salary given on the extension.
20.
Therefore, I think that the petitioner continued after expiry of two years in the services by virtue of the aforesaid Regulation 21(e) the petitioner is deemed to have been confirmed as she was not terminated either expressly or by necessary implication.
21.
Next contention of Mr. Paul is that the petitioner's letter of termination is bad in law in view of the fact that it has got the effect of punishment.
I find there is force in his argument as in the initial letter of appointment it is mentioned or even in the letter of extension, that the petitioner will not be made confirmed teacher unless her performance was found to be satisfactory.
Therefore, by necessary implication it appears when the petitioner has not been made confirmed, rather her services were terminated such order of termination is passed in effect, on the ground of unsatisfactory performances, as far as the career of the petitioner in teachership is concerned.
22.
Mr. Paul has rightly pointed out to the decision of the Supreme Court (2000)3 JT (SC) 1, wherein considering of the decisions of the same Court in paragraph 7 it has been held that a probationer like a temporary servant is also entitled to protection and his services cannot be terminated arbitrarily nor can their services be terminated in a punitive manner without complying with the principles of natural justice.
Therefore, in the premises above I am of the view the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated to the said post of Assistant Teacher.
Accordingly, I set aside letter of termination.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in the services and the School authority is directed to do so within a period of fortnight from the date of communication of this order.
She shall also be paid 50 per cent of the back wages so far basic is concerned at the rate as mentioned in the letter of appointment, and the full Dearness Allowance if received in this petition from the Government all notional benefit of continuity of services shall be given.
As far as the other reliefs for payment of difference of salary is concerned, I find there are prima facie materials, which need to be gone into.
Therefore, I direct the School authority namely Secretary and/or the Head Mistress to go into the accounts and find out what is the amount of difference of salary, which was not paid during her service period.
Therefore, I hold that on expiry of two year period the petitioner is deemed to have been in the employment as a confirmed teacher.
Consequently, the purported letter of extension is absolutely invalid and void.
23.
If such accounting is not done by the School authority within a period of two months from the date of reinstatement of the petitioner then this shall be done by the officer of this Court.
Accordingly, I appoint Ms. Usha Maity, Advocate of this Court of Bar Association Room No. 2 as a Special Officer to go into the accounts, and in that case the petitioner shall make an application to the aforesaid Special Officer, and she shall do so with prior notice to the petitioner as well as the School authority and shall find out correct figure of the amount due and payable by the School authority together with interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum.
For this purpose she shall be paid consolidated remuneration of Rs. 4000/- by the School authority.
The arrears of salary shall be paid within three months from the date of her assessment.
The school authority shall pay costs of this application assessed at 100 G.Ms.
to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.