JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was inducted into the service of Barara Cooperative Marketing and Processing Society Limited, Barara as a Clerk on 18101970.
His services were terminated on 171985.
Dis-satisfied with the action of the respondent-management in terminating his services, the petitioner-workman issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the dispute raised by the petitioner-workman was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court).
The Labour Court answered the reference in favour of the petitioner-workman on 321988 by holding that the respondent-management had violated the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act while terminating the services of the petitioner-workman.
In the aforesaid circumstances, the Labour Court granted the following relief to the petitioner-workman:  "Once the retrenchment is held illegal workman is entitled for reinstatement with continuity in service and back wages.
But reinstatement of the workman Shri Gulab Singh in the instant case in not possible for the proved reasons that the financial condition of the respondent management is not sound, it has no work, there is no post or vacancy for the workman and the management has experienced lessees.
Under the circumstances stated above, workman Shri Gulab Singh is held entitled to the following relief :- (i) Retrenchment compensation of Rs. 7500/- as required under Section 25-F of ID Act.
(ii) Lump sum amount of Rs. 15,000/- in lieu of retrenchment.
Management is ordered to pay above stated total amount to the workman within three months from the date of publication of this award, failing which the workman shall be entitled to release the same with interest @ 12% per annum from the date of publication of award till the date of his realisation."
It is apparent from the award of the Labour Court extracted hereinabove that the petitioner-workman was not ordered to be reinstated into service.
Both the petitioner-workman as well as the respondent-management impugned the award of the Labour Court dated 321988 by filing writ petitions in this Court.
The said writ petitions were dismissed by this Court through a common order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 3956 of 1988 on 19121996.
2.
After the termination of the service of the petitioner-workman and after the issue of his retrenchment came to be finalised with the dismissal of the writ petitions referred to in the foregoing paragraph, the issue in respect of his retrenchment from the employment of the respondent-management with effect from 171985 attained finality.
3.
The question of re-engagement of the petitioner-workman arose again when the respondent-management appointed one Pardeep Kumar in its employment as a Clerk.
Annexure P4 depicts the deliberations at the hands of the managing committee of the respondent-management showing that the aforesaid Pardeep Kumar was appointed on regular basis as a Clerk with effect from 1101992.
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-workman, that the petitioner-workman had a superior right of engagement under Section 25-H of the Act.
And since his claim was not considered at the time of employment of the afore-stated Pardeep Kumar his rights under the Act were adversely affected.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, he issued another demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act seeking re-engagement under Section 25-H of the Act.
On the failure of the conciliation proceedings, the dispute raised by the petitioner-workman was again referred for adjudication to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court answered the reference against the petitioner- workman on 4102001.
While doing so, the Labour Court based its conclusions on the following factual/legal position.
Firstly that Pardeep Kumar who was appointed against the post of Clerk with effect from 1101992 was engaged against a post separate and distinct from the post from which the petitioner- workman has been retrenched.
Secondly, that the claim of the petitioner- workman was not maintainable under Section 25-H of the Act, because he had accepted compensation in lieu of reinstatement in terms of the award of the Labour Court dated 321988.
4.
It is not possible for us to accept either of the aforesaid as a valid basis for determining the controversy in hand.
It is apparent from the award of the Labour Court dated 321988 that the petitioner-workman was initially appointed against the post of Clerk on 18101970, and at the time of his retrenchment on 171985 he was still holding the post of Clerk.
It is also apparent from Annexure P4 i.e. the Resolution passed in the meeting of the managing committee of the respondent-management, that the aforestated Pardeep Kumar was appointed against the post of Clerk, with effect from 1101992.
In view of the aforestated undisputed factual position, it is not possible for us to accept, that the engagement of the petitioner-workman and that of the aforestated Pardeep Kumar were against different posts.
5.
In so far as the second contention is concerned, the same in our view is equally unjustified.
The controversy earlier determined by the Labour Court related to the validity of the termination/retrenchment order dated 171985.
Although the petitioner-workman had been found to be entitled to reinstatement by the Labour Court through its Award dated 321988; he was deprived of the aforesaid relief on account of financial constraints of the respondent- management.
That, however, could not deprive him of the rights which would flow to him under Section 25-H of the Act.
The rights of the petitioner- workman fructified when the respondent-management engaged Pardeep Kumar against the post from which the petitioner-workman had been retrenched.
It is, therefore, apparent that while engaging aforesaid Pardeep Kumar, the claim of the petitioner-workman which was superior in terms of Section 25-H of the Act was not considered.
6.
In view of the above, the impugned award of the Labour Court dated 4102001 is liable to be set aside.
The same is accordingly set aside.
The petitioner-workman is directed to be appointed against the post of Clerk with effect from the date Pardeep Kumar was appointed as such.
He shall also be entitled to back-wages with effect from the date of issuance of the demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act i.e. with effect from 2011997.
Petition allowed.