Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner, Sampuran Singh, who was serving as Signalman in 57 Wireless Experimental Unit in the Indian Army, has approached this court through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The claim made in the petition is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders dated November 6, 1986, whereby the petitioner was ordered to be discharged from the Indian Army and the orders dated May 7, 1987 whereby his statutory appeal filed before the Chief of the Army Staff was dismissed.
The aforesaid orders have been appended as Annexures P1/A and P/3, respectively, with the present petition.
2.
The facts, which emerge from the pleadings, are that the petitioner had joined the Indian Army on March 18, 1983 and after his initial training, was posted as Signalman (Mess Waiter) in 57 Wireless Experimental Unit.
On August 23, 1985 one Mess Havildar KB Bhatt hanged himself in Officer's Mess guest- room.
On October 28, 1985 one Signalman P Mathunni was found dead, hanging from a tree about 50 yards away from the Officer's Mess.
A court of enquiry was held against the present petitioner and four other persons.
After taking into consideration the evidence recorded before the aforesaid court of enquiry, the guilt of none of the persons aforesaid, was proved.
Accordingly, they were held not guilty of the charges.
A subsequent court of inquest was held which also took into consideration the entire circumstances with regard to the aforesaid death of Signalman P Mathunni.
A report was submitted by the aforesaid court of inquest on October 30, 1986.
The petitioner was still found not involved in the aforesaid occurrence and, as such, the charges against him were dismissed.
After the conclusion of the aforesaid proceedings, the petitioner was returned to his unit and resumed his duties on October 31, 1986.
On the very next day i.e. October 31, 1986, the petitioner was served with a show cause notice by Officiating Commandant requiring him to show cause as to why he should not be discharged from service.
In the aforesaid show cause notice, it was mentioned that while the petitioner was working in the officer's mess of the Unit along with Sigmn (Cook Mess) P Mathunni, the aforesaid P Mathunni had hanged himself.
It was further mentioned in the show cause notice that it was strongly suspected that the petitioner was not only in the know of the causes and the circumstances resulting in the death of the aforesaid deceased but was also, perhaps, responsible for the same.
Accordingly, it was conveyed that the Sub Area Commander had formed an opinion that the retention of the petitioner in service was not desirable and, therefore, the petitioner was required to show cause as to why his services be not terminated under Army Rule 13 Table III(V).
The petitioner submitted a reply to the aforesaid show cause notice on November 1, 1986.
Thereafter, the order dated November 6, 1986 was passed by Officer Commanding issuing a discharge certificate, discharging the petitioner from service.
A copy of the show cause notice dated October 31, 1986 has been appended as Annexure P/1 whereas the discharge certificate dated November 6, 1986 has been appended as Annexure P1/A with the present petition.
The petitioner, thereafter, submitted a statutory petition to the Army Headquarters against the aforesaid order of termination.
A communication dated May 7, 1987 was received by the petitioner, from the Army Headquarters communicating the dismissal of the aforesaid petition.
A copy of the aforesaid communication dated May 7, 1987 has been appended as Annexures P/3 with the present petition.
3.
The petitioner has approached this court through the present petition impugning the aforesaid discharge certificate Annexure P1/A as well as the rejection of the statutory petition Annexure P/13.
4.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
In the written statement filed by them, the facts, as pleaded by the petitioner have not been seriously disputed.
However, the respondents have averred that since the petitioner was living in the Officer's Mess, which is just opposite the room where late Mathunni P was living and although there was no direct evidence to show his involvement in the death of the aforesaid person but it was strongly suspected that the petitioner was connected with the case in one way or the other or at least knew about the case which he as a normal citizen should have brought to the notice of the authorities.
On account of the aforesaid conduct of the petitioner, his further retention in the service was considered undesirable.
5.
I have heard Shri Ashwani Chopra, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner and Shri Anil Rathee, Advocate, appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
6.
Shri Ashwani Chopra, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the petitioner had, in fact, been made a scape goat for the incident of the death of P Mathunni.
According to the learned senior counsel, once the court of enquiry had exonerated the petitioner from the charges with regard to the cause of death of the aforesaid deceased person and even subsequently a court of inquest had been held which had also not found the petitioner guilty in any manner, then there was absolutely no justification nor any cause with the respondent-authorities to have ordered the discharge of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was in the knowledge of the circumstances of his death and that he was perhaps responsible for the same.
The learned senior counsel has further argued that in fact the order of discharge passed under Rule 13 of the Army Rules, although was styled as an innocuous order but the show cause notice Annexure P/1 as well as communication Annexure P/3 would show that the same had been passed on the basis of an alleged misconduct of the petitioner.
On that basis, the learned senior counsel has argued that since the order of discharge was not a simplicitor order of discharge but was stigmatic in nature and was in fact based upon alleged misconduct of the petitioner, therefore, the procedure as required under the Army Act as well as the Army Rules and regulations was required to be followed.
The learned counsel maintains that this court should in fact lift the veil and examine the circumstances which led to the passing of the aforesaid order Annexure P1/A Those circumstances, counsel argues are available from the perusal of the show cause notice Annexure P1/A, order Annexure P/3 and even the stand taken by the respondents in their written statement.
7.
On the other hand, Shri Anil Rathee, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has with equal vehemence supported the orders Annexures P1/A and P/3 passed against the petitioner.
Shri Rathee has also tried to justify the aforesaid orders on the ground that once the authorities had developed a distrust against the petitioner and although the charge against him was not proved but still it was thought desirable by the competent authority not to retain the petitioner in service.
The learned counsel, thus, argues that the aforesaid order was passed upon the satisfaction of the competent authority and no grievance against the aforesaid order can be made by the petitioner.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
In my view the present petition deserves to the allowed.
9.
It is not in dispute that after the death of Signalman P Mathunni on October 28, 1985 a court of enquiry was instituted.
The proceedings in the court of enquiry were held and the petitioner along with four other persons was tried.
The evidence was recorded in the aforesaid court of enquiry as per the rules and regulations.
On consideration of the aforesaid evidence, the court of enquiry found the petitioner and the other four persons not guilty of the charges against them.
Subsequently, the court of inquest was also held for examining the circumstances leading to the death of P Mathunni.
The Court of inquest also did not find any direct evidence connecting the petitioner with the death of aforesaid P Mathunni.
In these circumstances, once the two enquiries had been held against the petitioner in accordance with the rules and regulations, then there was absolutely no justification for the authorities to still continue to maintain a suspicion against the petitioner with regard to his involvement in the death of P Mathunni.
A perusal of the show cause notice Annexure P/1 would further show that it was mentioned therein that "it is strongly suspected that you are not only in the know of the causes and the circumstances resulting in the death of No. 14219920P Sigmn Mathunni P who was working with you but were also, perhaps, responsible for the same...." It is on the basis of the aforesaid fact that an opinion was formed by the Sub Area Commander that the retention of the petitioner in service was not desirable.
Even after the order of discharge, when the petitioner filed a statutory petition to the Chief of the Army Staff, a communication Annexure P/3 was received by the petitioner.
The aforesaid communication also mentioned that the case of the petitioner "has been examined and it is intimated that you were one of the prime-witnesses in connection with the death of 141219920P late Signmn Mathunni P of 57 WEU.
On finalisation of the court of Inquiry-cum-Inquest and Summary of Evidence, it was considered necessary by the Commander 71 Sub Area to order your discharge....".
A similar stand has been taken by the respondents in their written statement.
In the written statement, respondents have maintained that although there was no direct evidence to show the involvement of the petitioner in the death of P Mathunni but it was strongly suspected that the petitioner was connected with the case in one way or the other.
Thus it is clear that the order Annexure P1/A, discharging the petitioner from service, although appears innocuous, but has been passed because of an alleged misconduct of the petitioner.
This course was not permissible to the respondents.
If the authorities had wanted to initiate action against the petitioner and remove him from service on account of a misconduct, then the proper procedure as envisaged in the rules and regulations was required to be followed.
10.
It is settled by now that court while examining an order of discharge, though worded innocuously, is entitled to find out as to whether the aforesaid order was merely a camouflage for an order of punishment which was intended to be awarded to an employee.
11.
Certain observations made by the Apex Court in Annop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, AIR 1984 SC 636 may be noticed with advantage :  "The form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment and that even an innocuously worded order terminating the service may in the fact and circumstances of the case establish that an enquiry into allegations of serious and gave character of misconduct involving stigma has been made in infraction of the provision of Article 311(2).
It is, therefore, now well settled that where the form of the order is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal for misconduct, it is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak for an order of punishment, the Court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee."
A similar view was taken by the Apex Court in the case of Dipti Prakash Banerjee v. Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and others, 1999(1) SCT 861 (SC) : 1999(1) RSJ 632.
Following the aforesaid dictum of law, this court in the case of Ram Dyal Pahuja v. The Punjab State Leather Development Corp Ltd and another, 2001(1) SCT 858 (P&H) : 2000(4) RSJ 658 held as follows :  "15.
The proposition of law which emerges from the above decisions is that if an order terminating the service of an employee is challenged on the ground that it is punitive in character, then notwithstanding its facial innocuousness, the Court is duty-bound to look into the preceding and attending circumstances and lift the veil of innocuousness to find out the true and real character of the impugned order."
12.
Keeping in view the aforesaid law and the facts and circumstances noticed by me above, I have no hesitation in holding that the order Annexure P1/A discharging the petitioner from Army service was in fact passed by way of punishment and since the procedure as envisaged under the Army rules and regulations was not followed, therefore, the aforesaid order cannot be legally sustained.
Accordingly, the petition is allowed and the order dated November 6, 1986, Annexure P1/A and the order dated May 7, 1987, Annexure P/3 are quashed.
As a result thereof, the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.