VK Bali, J (Oral) - Plaintiff, in the original lis, who joined as a constable in the Punjab Police on November 5, 1969 and was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1975-76 and then to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector vide orders dated July 6, 1985, successfully challenged order dated May 14, 1987 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police Amritsar, vide which he was dismissed from service.
In consequence of setting aside the original order dismissing the plaintiff from service, the appellate and revisional orders dated December 24, 1987 and October 14, 1980 respectively were also set aside.
The judgment and decree dated November 17, 1992 passed by the learned trial Court was confirmed by Shri Harbhajan Singh, Additional District Judge, Amritsar, vide judgment and decree dated June 9, 1993.
The State of Punjab, aggrieved of the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court, as confirmed by the learned Appellate Court, as mentioned above, has filed the present Regular Second Appeal.
2.
While filing his suit, Kulwant Singh plaintiff averred that during the span of his service from 1969 till such time he was dismissed from service, he had earned commendation certificates as also cash awards for good services.
He was also associated with the activities against terrorists and successfully participated in certain encounters against the terrorists.
He was, however, suddenly shown the exist door when order dated May 14, 1987 came to be passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, by dispensing with departmental enquiry.
This order was styled by him to be totally illegal, void and against the mandatory provisions of the law as also rules of natural justice.
3.
The matter was contested by the State by, inter-alia, pleading that the plaintiff joined the police department in 1969 and was promoted as Head Constable on March 1, 1975 and then as an officiating ASI on July 16, 1985.
He was dismissed from service on May 14, 1987.
Plaintiff was posted at Police Station Khalra, District Amritsar in the year 1987 and was reported to be in league with terrorists and extremists and was passing secret and classified information of vital importance to the terrorists and as such his retention in service was not desirable.
Holding of enquiry in his case was dispensed with.
4.
On the respective pleadings of the parties, trial Court framed the following issues :-  "1.
Whether the order dated 14.5.1987 passed by SSP, Amritsar, dismissing plaintiff from service and the subsequent orders dated 24.12.1987 and dated 14.10.1988 passed by DIG Police and the IG Police in appeal and in revision respectively are illegal, arbitrary, void etc. as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 3.
Whether the notice served under Section 80 CPC is not legal and valid ?
OPD 4.
Whether plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD 5.
Relief".
The resultant trial, as mentioned above, culminating into judgment and decree that was passed in favour of the plaintiff, which, as mentioned above, has since been confirmed by the learned Appellate Court.
5.
Learned courts below invalidated order of dismissal of the plaintiff as also orders passed by the Appellate and Revisional authorities primarily on the ground that the provisions of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules have not been followed in the present case.
The case was not sent to the District Magistrate, who could only order dispensation of the enquiry as per the provisions of the rule aforesaid.
Learned courts below, for the aforesaid proposition, relied upon judgment of this Court in Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab & ors, 1991(1) SCT 533 (P&H) : 1990(2) RSJ 209 as also judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Delhi Administration v. Chanan Singh, 1969 SLR 217 as also another judgment in Union of India v. Ram Kishan, 1972(2) SLR 11.
It was further held by the learned Appellate Court that as many as 29 commendation certificates were given to the plaintiff during his service and last commendation certificate was issued 15 days earlier to the impugned order and it is suddenly that the plaintiff, who was very good, became worst.
6.
Finding no escape route from the findings returned by the learned courts below and judgments relied upon to invalidate the orders impugned in the civil suit, Mrs. Bhatia, when the matter came up for hearing on May 13, 2002, urged that the impugned orders could be justified on the dint of provisions contained in Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and that provision was independent of the Punjab Police Rules and could be resorted to in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
After hearing the contention of learned counsel, as mentioned above, this court passed following order on May 13, 2002 :-  "After hearing the arguments at some length, learned Sr. Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, seeks time to place service record of the plaintiff- respondent on the file from where, according to her, it will be possible to gather what were the reasons/material for which enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India was dispensed with".
Thereafter, the State had sought number of opportunities to produce the confidential file of the plaintiff and yet failed to do so.
On December 13, 2002, Mr. DV Sharma, Additional Advocate General, Punjab, who appeared in the matter, stated that the desired records were not available.
Order dated December 13, 2002 reads thus :-  "Mr. DV Sharma, on instructions received by him in writing, states that the records desired to be made available by this Court, are not available.
List again for hearing on 10.1.2003".
No records have been produced till date.
7.
Mr. Laddar, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, who today appears in support of this appeal, has only referred to the impugned order, Ex.P1, dated May 14, 1987 and on the basis thereof, it is urged that order itself contains material by virtue of which enquiry against the plaintiff was dispensed with.
With a view to appreciate the contention of learned counsel, it would be useful to reproduce order, Ex.P1.
Same reads thus :-  "Whereas, officiating ASI Kulwant Singh No. 1235/ASR posted at Police Station Khalra Distt.
Amritsar has been reliably reported to be in league with terrorists and extremists of the area and whereas the said ASI had been passing on secret and classified information of vital importance and also had been providing monetary help and assistance to carry on their terrorist activities".
A bare perusal of the order, reproduced above, would manifest that but for mentioning that there were facts and circumstances, nothing more has been mentioned.
What were the facts and circumstances, on the basis of which an opinion was formed to dispense with the enquiry, are completely missing.
In Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab & Ors., 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 385, Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution held as under :-  "The decision to dispense with the departmental enquiry can not be rested solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned officer.
In the instant case it was alleged that the delinquent Police Officer instead of replying to the show cause notices, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the superiors.
It was also alleged that he threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, if any departmental enquiry was held against him.
No particulars were given.
It was not shown on what material the concerned authority came to the conclusion that the delinquent had thrown threats.
The satisfaction of the concerned authority was found to be based on the ground that the delinquent was instigating his colleagues and was holding meetings with other police officials with a view to spreading hatred and dissatisfaction towards his superiors.
It was not shown that the concerned authority had verified the correctness of the information leading to the said allegation.
Therefore, it could not be said that the subjective satisfaction of the concerned authority as to dispensation of departmental enquiry against the delinquent was fortified by independent material.
Thus, the order of dismissal passed against the delinquent would not be sustainable".
8.
A Division Bench of this Court in Darshan Jit Singh Dhindsa v. The State of Punjab & ors, 1993(1) SCT 338 (P&H) : 1993(2) RSJ 650, while dealing with Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India as also Rule 16.1 of the Punjab Police Rules, held that there was nothing on record from which one could come to the conclusion that holding of an enquiry was not practicable and further that the charge of petitioner's having links with the extremists was too vague, particularly in view of the service record of the petitioner prior to his dismissal, whereby commendation certificates were issued for the courageous acts performed by him in curbing the terrorist activities.
It was further held that mere reproduction of the words of the statute was not sufficient to justify the finding of fact with respect of the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
9.
Single Bench of this Court in Ex-HC Kuljit Singh v. State of Punjab through Director General, 1999(3) SCT 212 (P&H) : 1999(1) RSJ 513, held that even if it was considered that the impugned order was passed under Article 311(2)(b), the same is bad in law and not sustainable as it did not record the reasons which satisfied the Senior Superintendent of Police to pass impugned order without holding an enquiry on the ground that it was not reasonably practicable".
In view of the discussion made above, this Court finds no merit whatsoever in this appeal which is dismissed, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
At this stage, learned AAG, Punjab, states that the appellants should be granted liberty to hold enquiry.
They may do so if permissible under law.
Appeal dismissed.