JS Khehar, J - (Oral) - Learned counsel for the petitioner has handed over to the learned counsel for respondent-workman a cheque drawn on the State Bank of Patiala, Mall Road, Patiala, in the sum of Rs. 4,771/-, constituting wages payable under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), for the period from 1412003 upto June 2004.
2.
The respondent-workman Darbara Singh was inducted into the service of the petitioner-management, as a daily wage worker from 811988 till 29.2.1988.
An office order depicting the aforesaid factual position has been placed on record of this case as Annexure P1.
The same is being extracted hereunder for ready reference :  "Punjab State Electricity Board Office Order Office Order No. 35  Dated : 421988  Deputy Director/TIC Harsha Chhinna is given sanction to engage Darbara Singh son of Sh. Shyam Singh from 811988 till 29.2.1988 on contract basis as daily wages worker.
In case the work of the daily wager is not found satisfactory or on the joining of regular employee, the services of the daily wager worker shall be deemed to be terminated without any notice.
The payment of wages shall be made to the daily wager as per the DC rates.
The daily wager is appointed against the vacant post which is totally temporary.
Sd/-  Deputy Director Training  Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala.
Dated : 421988."
3.
Similar orders were given to the respondent-workman appointing him for specified periods of time from 171988 to 31101988, 1111988 to 29.2.1989 and finally from 131989 to 3061989.
4.
From a perusal of the order extracted above, which is the first letter of appointment issued to the workman, in respect of his employment respondent- workman, it is clear that his services could be terminated if his work was not found satisfactory.
Further, that he was to be continued in service only till such time, as a regular employee is selected, so as to occupy the post held by him substantively.
5.
When the services of the workman were dispensed with on 661989, as a consequence of the appointment of a regular incumbent, to the post occupied by the respondent-workman, he challenged the action of the management by issuing a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act.
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the claim raised by him was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court) on 571999.
6.
Before the Labour Court, the contention of the respondent-workman was, that his retrenchment with effect from 661989 was in violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, because he had neither been paid retrenchment compensation nor wages in lieu of notice period envisaged under Section 25-F of the Act although, he had rendered service in excess of 240 days in the 12 calender months preceding his termination.
The claim of the petitioner-management before the Labour Court was that it was not open to the respondent-workman to invoke the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, since his services had never been terminated.
To substantiate the aforesaid plea the petitioner-management relied on Section 2(oo) (bb) of the Act, to assert that the respondent-workman was employed under specified terms and conditions, and that, his services had been dispensed within terms of the conditions of his appointment letter.
His termination, therefore, according to learned counsel, did not constitute retrenchment under the provisions of the Act.
7.
The Labour Court by its award dated 1412003 answered the reference in favour of the respondent-workman.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner-management has approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition so as to impugn the award of the Labour Court dated 1412003.
8.
Solitary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management, while challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 1412003 is, that Annexure P.1 i.e. the order dated 421988 by which the petitioner was appointed, and all further orders by which his employment was extended, expressly incorporated that his services were liable to be dispensed with as and when a regular employee was appointed against the post held by him.
It is submitted that a regular incumbent having been appointed on 661989, his services came to be dispensed with.
The Labour Court while adjudicating upon the issue in hand, arrived at the conclusion, that the communication dated 421998 (already extracted hereinabove) and all further communications which were similar in nature, were never communicated to the respondent-workman, and even his signatures were never obtained thereon.
In other words, the respondent-workman was not even aware of various communications by which he was appointed as a daily wage worker from time to time nor the conditions of his employment.
In fact, the Labour Court has arrived at the conclusion that the various orders, including the one extracted hereinabove, are in the nature of sanctions for appointment of the respondent-workman.
Thus, the conclusion drawn by the Labour Court is, that communications relied upon by the petitioner-management, cannot be described as contracts between the petitioner-management and respondent-workman.
In our view, so as to invoke Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act, there must be a contract between the management and the workman.
A contract essentially envisages an offer by one party and an acceptance by the other.
A valid contract cannot unilaterally be executed by the management, as in the instant case, by itself.
In view of the above, we find no infirmity in the aforesaid conclusion drawn by the Labour Court.
9.
In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position it clearly emerges that the respondent-workman had rendered service in excess of 240 days in twelve calendar months preceding his retrenchment.
It also emerges that the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not followed, while his services were dispensed with on 661989.
We, therefore, find no infirmity in the conclusion drawn by the Labour Court that the retrenchment of respondent- workman was in clear violation of mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
10.
Besides the merits of the case, as has been noticed hereinabove, learned counsel for the petitioner-management, vehemently contends that although the services of the respondent-workman, were dispensed with on 661989, he had issued a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act, only on 141997 i.e. after a period of about 8 years after his services had been dispensed with.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management is, that a reference should not have been made of a dispute raised by the respondent- workman after a delay of 8 years.
In so far as issue of making reference is concerned, it is highly belated.
As and when the Government made a reference of the dispute raised by the respondent-workman for adjudication to Labour Court, it was open to the petitioner-management to impugn the same by filing a writ petition.
However, having failed to do so, it cannot now be permitted to assail the validity of the reference order made by the appropriate Government.
In any case, we are satisfied, that delay in filing the demand notice, has been kept in mind by the Labour Court, inasmuch as, the Labour Court while granting relief to the respondent-workman has held him to be entitled to only 25% back-wages, and that too only with effect from 141997.
11.
We find no apparent infirmity in the award of the Labour Court calling for interference at our hands, in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.