JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The respondent-workman Joginder Singh was inducted into the service of the Punjab Roadways, Batala, as a helper on 161989.
His services were terminated on 1491990.
The respondent-workman raised an Industrial Dispute under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act'), contesting the action of the petitioner Management in terminating his services.
On the failure of the conciliation proceedings, the dispute raised by the respondent-workman was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur, (hereinafter referred to as the `Labour Court), by an order of the appropriate Government dated 1711997.
The Labour Court answered the reference in faovur of the respondent-workman through its award dated 182000.
The aforesaid award is subject matter of challenge before this Court through the instant writ petition.
2.
The first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that there is no evidence worth the name, led by the respondent-workman, which would entitle him to a determination at the hands of the Labour Court under Section 25-F of the Act.
In this behalf, it is pointed out that the Labour Court relied solely on the testimony of the respondent-workman Joginder Singh in arriving at the conclusion that he had rendered service for a period in excess of 240 days in 12 calendar months preceding his termination and further that he had not been paid retrenchment compensation and/or wages in lieu of the notice period.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in Range Forest Officer v. S.T.
Hadimani, 2002(3) SCT 382.
We have perused the aforesaid judgment.
We are, however, satisfied that the same is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
In the aforesaid case the onus to establish that the workman therein had satisfied the conditions entitling him to the benefit under Section 25-F of the Act, have been placed on the Management whereas according to the Apex Court, the aforesaid onus should have been placed on the workman.
The Apex Court in the aforesaid case also arrived at the conclusion that the solitary oral testimony of the workman which had been disputed by the Management was not sufficient to shift the onus from the workman to the Management.
Insofar as the present controversy is concerned, the respondent-workman has appeared as a witness before the Labour Court and reiterated the factual position, namely, that he had rendered service from 161989 to 1491990 uninterruptedly as a helper.
The aforesaid testimony has not been controverted in any manner, whatsoever, and in fact no witness was produced by the petitioner Management before the Labour Court.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, the testimony of the respondent-workman in the instant case had remained unrebutted.
Accordingly, it was fully justified for the Labour Court to record conclusions on the basis of the unassailed testimony of the respondent-workman.
We, therefore, find no infirmity in the determination by the Labour Court to the effect that the respondent-workman had rendered service in excess of 240 days and further that he had not been paid retrenchment compensation and/or wages in lieu of the notice period at the time when his services were dispensed with and in recording a conclusion thereupon, that the termination of the respondent-workman on 1491990 was in violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
3.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the services of the respondent-workman, Joginder Singh were terminated on 1491990, and that, he had issued a demand notice after a lapse of about 6 years i.e. on 341996.
Despite the aforesaid lapse on behalf of the respondent-workman, the Labour Court had awarded full back wages to him.
So as to rebut the aforesaid contention, learned counsel for the respondent- workman points out, that after the services of the respondent-workman were terminated on 1491990, he had preferred an appeal before the Director, State Transport, Punjab, contesting the validity of the termination order dated 1491990.
Since no order was passed by the Director, State Transport, he issued reminders on 13101990, 3111991, 591992, 361993, 451994 and 111996.
Despite the aforesaid reminders, since no order was passed by the Director, State Transport, Punjab, the respondent-workman was compelled to issue a demand notice on 341996.
If the respondent-workman had not moved the aforesaid reminders, the dispute may have been stale and a dead dispute in terms of the decision rendered by the Apex Court in The Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty and others, 2000(1) S.C.T.
1088 : AIR 2000 Supreme Court 839.
In the aforesaid circumstances, it may not have been open to the respondent-workman to initiate proceedings under the Act.
However, the very fact that the respondent-workman was repeatedly approaching the authorities seeking reinstatement into service, the dispute remained alive and came to be processed after the respondent- workman issued a demand notice on 341996.
Be that as it may, for having initiated proceedings under the Act after a lapse of about 6 years, the respondent-workman is definitely blameworthy of delay, and therefore, cannot be entitled to wages for the period he did not initiate proceedings in accordance with law.
We are satisfied that the ends of justice would be met if the order of Labour Court holding the respondent-workman entitled to full back wages is modified, so as to make him entitled to back wages, only with effect from the date when he issued the demand notice (i.e. w.e.f.
341996).
4.
In view of the above, the award of the Labour Court is hereby held to be fully justified in all aspects except to the extent of back wages.
Respondent-workman Joginder Singh will be entitled to back wages only w.e.f.
341996.
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Petition disposed of.