Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - In both these Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 4 of 1998 and 416 of 1997, the challenge is to the common judgment of the learned single Judge dated 141997 passed in CWP Nos. 7121 of 1987 and 3291 of 1988.
The learned single Judge had dismissed both the writ petitions viz. CWP No. 7121 of 1987 filed by the Bhakra Beas Management Board and CWP No. 3291 of 1988 filed by 17 workmen against the order of the Labour Court dated 1991985.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the present appeals are that Iqbal Singh and 36 other workmen filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act') before the Labour Court for refixation of their pay.
It was alleged in the application that the workmen had joined as fitters etc., on work-charge basis in the then Punjab State Electricity Board (for short `the PSEB') and by virtue of Section 79(4) of Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 they were made to join Bhakra Beas Management Board (for short, `the Board') with effect from 1111966 as the services of the workmen along with other employees were taken over by the Board.
It is thus claimed that on the revision of the pay-scales from 161967 by PSEB, the Board which used to follow and grant the pay-scales and other facilities which were granted to the employees of the PSEB, should have granted the same to the employees of the erstwhile PSEB employees who were taken over by the Board.
It was further claimed that they were entitled to refixation of their salaries on the principle of protection of pay which was being drawn by them at the time of conversion from work-charge to regular staff.
But, the said respondent-workmen were appointed afresh in regular capacity in the year 1972 by the Board after paying them the terminal benefits like retrenchment compensation and gratuity for the period of service rendered by them in the work-charge capacity.
Therefore, in 1983 the workmen-respondent Nos. 2 to 17 in LPA No. 4 of 1998 along with others filed application after a gap of 11 years under Section 33-C(2) of the Act alleging that their pay was reduced on their appointment as regular employees and claimed arrears of wages from the date of appointment as regular employees upto 30111983.
3.
The Board resisted the claim of the workmen by contending that the Board had never adopted the pattern for the fixation of pay-scales of PSEB or Punjab Government and, therefore, the pay-scales were not liable to be fixed thereunder.
It was also contended that the workmen had accepted the retrenchment compensation/gratuity etc. at the time of conversion from work- charge to regular staff and thus, the pay of such workmen was not liable to be refixed.
4.
The Labour Court recorded a finding that 17 workmen had accepted the retrenchment compensation and gratuity voluntarily for the past service rendered by them in work-charge capacity and had accepted regular appointments on fresh basis.
The Labour Court consequently declined to grant relief to those 17 workmen who had received retrenchment compensation and/or gratuity.
The Labour Court accepted the principle that the protection of pay would be admissible only to those workmen who, on conversion from work-charge to regular staff, did not receive any retrenchment compensation for the period of service rendered as work-charge employees.
5.
As noted earlier, the writ petitions challenging the order of the Labour Court were dismissed.
The parties aggrieved by the judgment of the learned single Judge have assailed the said judgment in these Letters Patent Appeals.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
Shri DS Nehra, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant-Board in LPA No. 4 of 1998 raised twofold submissions.
7.
Firstly, the learned counsel assailed the judgment of the learned single Judge on the ground that application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act was not maintainable as adjudication was required in the matter and that the application was filed after a lapse of about 12 years.
Shri Nehra placed reliance upon the two decisions of the Apex Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited v. The Workmen and another, 1974 Lab.IC 1018 and Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ganesh Razak and another, 1995(1) SCT 408 (SC) : 1995(1) SCC 235.
In the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited case (supra), the Apex Court held in para 12 of the judgment as under :-  "It is now well-settled that a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) is a proceeding generally, in the nature of an execution proceeding wherein the Labour Court calculates the amount of money due to a workman from his employer, or if the workman is entitled to any benefit which is capable of being computed in terms of money, the Labour Court proceeds to compute the benefit in terms of money.
The calculation or computation follows upon an existing right to the money or benefit, in view of its being previously adjudged, or, otherwise, duly provided for.
In Chief Mining Engineer, East India Coal Co Ltd v. Rameshwar, 1968(1) SCR 140 : AIR 1968 SC 218, it was reiterated that proceedings under Section 33-C(2) are analogous to execution proceedings and the Labour Court called upon to compute in terms of money the benefit claimed by workmen is in such cases, is in the position of an executing Court.
It was also reiterated that the right to the benefit which is sought to be computed must be an existing one, that is to say, already adjudicated upon or provided for and must arise in the course of and in relation to the relationship between an industrial workman and his employer."
Following the above decision, the Apex Court reiterated the above legal position in Ganesh Razak's case (supra).
8.
Mr. Nehra, on the strength of the aforesaid decisions, vehemently contended that since an adjudication by the Labour Court was required with respect to whether the workmen were entitled to the protection of pay or not, therefore, the Labour Court did not have the jurisdiction to decide the question of protection of pay and payment of arrears of pay to the workmen in proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
9.
Mr. Vinod Sharma did not dispute this legal proposition laid down in the aforesaid judgments.
He, however, submitted that in view of circular dated 2951980 (Exhibit W-12) and circular dated 2351984 (Exhibit W-13) issued by the Board, the claim of the workmen who were drawing pay of Rs. 131/- in the pay-scale of Rs. 105-180/- at the time of absorption in the Board had to be protected, but the Board has reduced their pay and fixed at Rs. 110/-.
Thus, he contended that they are entitled to protection of pay and also arrears of pay from 1972 to 30111983.
10.
He then submitted that the right of the workmen was called on the basis of these two circulars which were issued by their employer and this did not require any adjudication regarding the rights of the workmen.
11.
He placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Union of India through the General Manager, Northern Railway, New Delhi and another v. Shri SR Sethi, Special Ticket Examiner and another, 1979(3) SLR 601.
In SR Sethi's case (supra), following the decisions in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation's case (supra), this Court held as under :-  "It is evident from the above that the right to stepped up salary to senior employees in order to remove the obvious anomalies was given by the aforesaid decision itself.
At the highest, therefore, what the respondents were claiming was an implementation as also execution of that existing right already conferred upon them by the decision of their employer.
It is significant to recall that the relationship of the employer and the employee is not even remotely in dispute.
The Labour Court, therefore, was only interpreting and giving effect to an existing right vested already in the workman.
At best any adjudication which might be involved for the purpose of interpretation and computation of the benefit would be, therefore, purely incidental to the implementation of that right.
Consequently, rather the tall claim made on behalf of the petitioners that the Labour Court was bereft of jurisdiction or that the claim of the respondents does not rest on any existing right, is wholly untenable and has to be rejected."
12.
We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and are in agreement with the submissions made by counsel for the respondent- workmen.
There is no dispute that the proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act are in the nature of execution proceedings and the Labour Court is not empowered to determine the rights of the parties with regard to their entitlement under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The Labour Court on the basis of entitlement of workmen can compute the benefits which are available to them in terms of money.
In the present case, the circulars Exhibit W-12 and W-13 clinch the issue because the Labour Court vide order dated 1991985 held that they explicitly and unequivocally provide the basis to the Board to protect the salary of the workmen which they were drawing at the time of conversion from work-charged to regular staff.
In these circulars, there is only one rider which provides that where the workmen had accepted the retrenchment compensation/gratuity for the services rendered as work-charge employees, were not entitled to any protection of pay.
The Labour Court as well as the learned single Judge granted the benefit of protection of pay and arrears of salary for that period to those workmen only who had not taken the retrenchment compensation and/or gratuity.
Thus, the aforementioned contention of Shri Nehra cannot be accepted.
13.
The next contention of Shri Nehra is that the Board had paid retrenchment compensation to all the workmen and the case of all the workmen were similar.
The Labour Court as well as the learned single Judge had erred in drawing distinction between 17 workmen of the Board to whom protection of pay and arrears of pay was awarded.
14.
The Labour Court as well as the learned single Judge have recorded a finding of fact on the basis of material on the record that the Board had not paid the retrenchment compensation and/or gratuity to the workmen (respondent Nos. 2 to 17).
The said findings of fact are not open to challenge in Letters Patent Appeal.
Moreover, the counsel for the Board has not been able to pin- point as to how these findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court and the learned single Judge are erroneous or perverse.
Thus, the second submission of Mr. Nehra is also rejected.
15.
Mr. Vinod Sharma, learned counsel for the appellants in LPA No. 416 of 1997 submitted that the case of the appellants therein is similar to the workmen (respondent Nos. 2 to 17) in LPA No. 4 of 1998 but has not been able to address any meaningful argument to challenge the judgment of the learned single Judge.
No other point has been urged.
Consequently, both the appeals are dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeals dismissed.