Surya Kant, J - The petitioner, Hashni Kumar, has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer to issue a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the selections made by the Departmental Selection Committee to the posts of Naib Tehsildars Class `A' under the category of riot/terrorist victims as the same were allegedly made without holding any interview; and also to quash the selections made under the reserved categories which according to the petitioner exceeded 50% of the advertised posts.
The petitioner also sought a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the official respondents to select and appoint him to the post of Naib Tehsildar `A' Class.
2.
Vide advertisement dated December 21, 1987 (Annexure P-1) 40 posts of Naib Tehsildar `A' Class were advertised by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee, the petitioner was fully eligible and he applied for the afore- mentioned posts under general category; the petitioner appeared in the written examination conducted on October 22, 1989 under Roll No. 31172 and having qualified the same was called for interview; out of the 40 advertised posts, result of 20 posts was declared in May, 1990 and published in the daily newspaper `The Tribune' (Annexure P-3); The result of another 16 posts was thereafter declared in June, 1991 (Annexure P-4); in this manner, 36 candidates were selected against 40 advertised posts and thus 4 posts still remained vacant, out of which two were meant for the general category candidates; respondent No. 2 selected two candidates bearing Roll Nos. 10412 and 13063 though they were never called for interview.
Thus, according to the petitioner, declaration of the result in piecemeal was in a totally arbitrarily and mala fide manner and there was a strong possibility of some extraneous considerations having prevailed upon in making these recruitments.
Besides, the number of candidates selected under the different reserved categories having exceeded 50%, the same was illegal too.
3.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
While taking preliminary objection of non-impleading the selected candidates against whom the petitioner has made allegations, it has been averred that the selections were made in a valid manner.
A perusal of the written statement reveals that most of the averments are devoted to justify the selection of private respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in the categories of handicap and terrorist victims.
4.
The record of the case reveals that the present writ petition was taken up for final hearing along with a bunch of other writ petitions and vide Judgment dated August 19, 1996, a learned Single Judge dismissed all the writ petitions.
The petitioner thereafter moved a review application No. 310 of 1996, inter alia, taking total somersault when he came out with the plea that in fact he was seeking appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar `A' Class under the reserved category of scheduled castes only, and that only 36 posts out of 40 advertised posts were filled and out of the remaining 4 posts, one post was meant for the reserved category of scheduled castes, therefore, the petitioner as per his placement in the merit-list, was entitled to be accommodated against the aforementioned post.
Upon notice in the aforementioned review application, written statement by way of affidavit dated August 17, 1998 of Shri BK Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, was filed on behalf of the official respondents.
In the aforementioned reply, it was mentioned that the petitioner in fact was considered by the Selection Committee as a scheduled caste candidate as he belongs to the said reserved category, however, he stood no chance of appointment even if two more candidates belonging to the scheduled castes category were to be appointed, inasmuch as, all the posts in the reserved category were filled and there was no shortfall.
From the perusal of the order passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court on November 27, 1998, it transpires that Shri BK Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar had got registered an FIR No. 27 dated September 6, 1996 under Sections 465, 467, 120-B IPC read with Sections 7 and 12 of the Prevention of Corruption Act at Police Station, Division No. 4, Jalandhar against certain candidates as well as a few government officials who were alleged to have conspired to tamper with the records of selection and manipulated selection of certain candidates.
These facts having been brought on record through the affidavit of Shri BK Srivastava, the learned Single Judge issued the following directions :-  "After having perused the affidavit of Shri Srivastava, I am prima facie satisfied that selection of some of the candidates may be vitiated due to interpolation in their marks.
However, before any conclusive opinion is expressed on the subject, I deem it appropriate to direct that a thorough enquiry be made in the cases of all candidates, who were considered for selection.
It is hoped that the learned Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, will personally look into the matter and assist the Court by sending his report in the matter within a period of two months.
The case be now listed for further consideration on February 12, 1999."
Pursuant to the aforementioned directions, Shri BK Srivastava looked into the entire selection record with a view to assist this Court by way of a self explanatory report.
Shri Srivastava thereafter filed an affidavit dated February 9, 1999 in which he gave elaborate findings in respect of manipulated selections of at least 6 candidates.
The petitioner also filed an additional affidavit highlighting certain irregularities alleged to have been committed in the selection.
In the light of these subsequent events and the fact that the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar himself came out with an affidavit that the selection and consequently appointments of at least 5 candidates were the outcome of a total fraud committed by tampering with the selection report in connivance with certain officials, the learned Single Judge vide his Order dated February 16, 2001 allowed the review application filed by the petitioner, recalled his judgment dated August 19, 1999 and restored the writ petition for a fresh hearing.
This is how the matter has now been listed for final hearing before this Court.
5.
I have heard Shri Ravi Kapur, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mrs. Rupinder Wasu, Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the official respondents and have perused the record.
6.
In the light of the subsequent factual averments made in the view application which are obviously in contradiction with the averments made in the writ petition, it has now been conceded by Shri Kapur that the petitioner in fact belongs to the reserved category of scheduled castes and he had applied for selection in the aforementioned reserved category only.
This fact has also not been disputed by Mrs. Wasu representing the official respondents.
It is also not disputed that respondent No. 3, namely Rajinder Singh had applied under the reserved category of physically handicapped persons wherein he was considered and selected.
Similarly, respondent No. 4, Brijinder Singh, applied in the reserved category of victims of terrorist and he too was considered and selected under the said reserved category only.
That being so, the petitioner has no locus standi to question the selection or appointment of respondent Nos. 3 and 4, and his writ petition qua these respondents is liable to be dismissed for this reason alone.
Coming to the claim of the petitioner for appointment in the reserved category of scheduled castes, Shri Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar in his reply to review application No. 310 of 1996 has categorically stated that the petitioner was duly considered by the Selection Committee in the reserved category of scheduled caste but the vacancies reserved for this category having been filled and there being no shortfall in making appointments against their prescribed quota, the petitioner cannot claim appointment as a matter of right merely because he participated in the selection process and was called for interview having qualified the written examination.
In the absence of any contrary material on record, I am inclined to accept the stand taken by the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, as stated above, and find no merit in the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar `A' Class in the reserved category of scheduled castes candidates.
It is not the case of the petitioner that any candidate lower in merit in the aforementioned reserved category or in the open category has been appointed.
It is well settled law that mere selection does not confer an absolute right to seek appointment upon a selected candidate.
In the present case, the petitioner has not even been selected.
There is not even an officially released waiting list figuring the name of the petitioner and thus he is not even a wait-listed candidate.
The petitioner thus has no right much less a legally vested right to seek appointment in the reserved category of scheduled castes on the premise that he had competed or was called for interview.
7.
Shri Kapur, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that as per the fact finding report submitted by Shri BK Srivastava, the selection and consequential appointment of 5 candidates, having (been) obtained by them by adopting fraudulent means, stands vitiated.
Shri Kapur further contends that out of these 5 candidates, one Bhupinder Singh belongs to the reserved category of scheduled castes and that his appointment is also liable to be set aside and in place thereof, the petitioner has a superior right as it is the petitioner alone who belongs to the aforementioned reserved category and has approached this Court.
I am afraid, even this contention of Shri Kapur cannot be accepted.
Mrs. Wasu has stated at bar that the name of the petitioner figures at Serial No. 17 amongst the scheduled castes candidates whereas only 10 posts were reserved for them.
According to her, even if the selection of one of the appointed candidate belonging to the aforementioned reserved category is set aside, yet the turn of the petitioner does not come for appointment as per merit.
8.
I find merit in the submission made by Mrs. Wasu.
The petitioner cannot seek appointment over and above the candidates higher in merit in the reserved category to which he belongs merely because he has approached this Court.
No direction can be issued which runs contrary to the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
That apart, it is true that Shri Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar in his affidavit dated February 9, 1999 has found the selection of one Bhupinder Singh, a scheduled caste candidate, vitiated by fraud and fabrication of record.
However, the said candidate has not been impleaded in the array of respondents.
In the absence of the selected candidates being party to the present petition, I am not inclined to set aside the selection of Bhupinder Singh without affording him an opportunity of being heard.
For the reasons stated above, I find no merit in the claim of the petitioner and the same is accordingly rejected.
9.
The matter, however, does not rest here.
Pursuant to the directions issued by this Court vide Order dated November 27, 1998, Shri Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division held a fact finding enquiry and found that the selection of at least five candidates was an outcome of the alleged tampering and fabrication of the record in connivance with some officers/officials of the department.
10.
It has been stated at the bar that out of these five candidates, only four candidates, namely, Raj Kumar, Gurmeet Singh, Amarjit Singh and Bhupinder Singh were actually appointed.
11.
The fraud which appears to have been committed by the four candidates in getting the record tampered with to get increased their marks in the written examination is very well explained by Shri Srivastava in his affidavit dated February 9, 1999.
There remains hardly any doubt that these four candidates could not have even been called for the interview but for the alleged fabrication of the record.
Their selection, prima facie, is a result of fraud played by them in connivance with certain officials.
Fraud vitiates everything.
It is quite unfortunate that despite the fact finding enquiry conducted by a responsible officer and without suggesting even remotely that the findings recorded by Shri Srivastava are vitiated in law or otherwise are factually incorrect, the State Government has slept over the matter, merely awaiting some directions from this Court.
Having come to the notice of the authorities that some of the candidates alleged to have managed their selection and consequential appointments through fraudulent and dishonest means, it was imperative upon the State Government to act promptly and to take appropriate action not only against the candidates so selected, but also against those officers/officials who were found guilty of conniving with them for extraneous considerations.
No such action has been taken so far, rather the candidates who allegedly managed to enter into public employment through fraudulent means have been allowed to continue for the last over seven years.
It is true that none of these candidates has been impleaded as a party respondent and in absence thereof, I am not inclined to quash their selection and consequential appointments.
It can also not be overlooked that they have not been confronted with the findings recorded against them by Shri Srivastava.
12.
In these peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I deem it appropriate to direct the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Government of Punjab to consider the fact finding report of Shri BK Srivastava, the then Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order and to take action which the competent authority may deem appropriate in the facts and circumstances of this case including the termination of services of those who are found guilty of securing public employment through dubious means.
However, penal action, if any, shall be taken against these candidates in accordance with law and after observing principles of natural justice.
It is needless to say that each and every officer and official who was involved in the gross malpractices will be identified and strict disciplinary action will be taken against them within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
13.
The final action taken against the officers/officials as well as against the candidates who are, prima facie, found guilty of securing appointments through illegal means, shall be reported to this Court as well.
With these observations, the writ petition stands disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.