Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Haryana Civil Service (Executive) on 26th September, 1976.
He was given Super Time Scale.
The Union Public Service Commission selected the petitioner in IAS Cadre and he was placed in the select list for the year 1995-1996, on the basis of his service record.
There were certain disputes between the petitioner's father and respondent No. 2-Chief Minister, Haryana.
The father of the petitioner was ex-minister in the Haryana and there was a political rivalry between the two.
According to the petitioner because of this political rivalry and animosity, the name of the petitioner was placed on provisional basis and the petitioner was being harassed by the authorities.
A charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner.
In certain inquiries, he was exonerated, while in the other punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect was imposed upon him.
The petitioner being served with different charge-sheets, submitted a notice for voluntary retirement on 192003.
This request of the petitioner was rejected by the respondents, vide their order dated 8th September, 2003.
The petitioner made another request to relieve him from service and to retain his entire retiral benefits to be paid only on conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings pending against him.
However, this request of the petitioner was also declined vide letter dated 21st October, 2003.
2.
The disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner was pending, according to the respondents, whereas, according to the petitioner, they have been concluded.
Vide order dated 8th September, 2003, the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement/resignation has not been accepted by the State despite the request.
3.
Relying upon the rules, the case of the petitioner in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is that the orders dated 8th September, 2003, 21st October, 2003 and 8th December, 2003, Annexures P/3, P/5 and P/7 respectively to the writ petition be quashed and the notice dated 1st September, 2003 Annexure P/1 sent by the petitioner for voluntary retirement be accepted or in alternative the same be treated as a letter of resignation in accordance with the service rules.
4.
The prayer of the petitioner before this Court was contested by the State primarily on the ground that the departmental proceedings were pending and thus, it would not be obligatory on the part of the State to accept the request of the petitioner for resignation or voluntary retirement.
5.
During the pendency of this writ petition, learned counsel for the State has submitted before the Court that the State would be willing to expedite the conclusion of the departmental inquiry pending against the petitioner and would pass appropriate orders provided he cooperates and does not delay the proceedings.
6.
In response to this, the petitioner, in fact, filed two affidavits before this Court on 29th April, 2004 and 6th May, 2004.
Affidavit dated 652004 clearly states as under :-  "I the above named deponent do solemnly affirm and state as under :- That besides the pleadings and the affidavit dated 29042004 already filed by the deponent in the case, the deponent hereby states that the three charge- sheets dated 27102003 under Rule 7 regarding the criminal case for defying the order issued by the then City Magistrate, Karnal under Section 146 Cr.PC; dated 23122003 under Rule 8 regarding alleged absence from duty for 5 days for which otherwise leave has been sanctioned and salary also paid and dated 13012004 under Rule 7 regarding participation in political activities etc., issued after the date of submission of the notice for voluntary retirement by the deponent and after the expiry of the notice period, at the instance of respondent No. 2, have already been replied by the deponent immediately on its receipt.
Written submissions have also been made before the Enquiry Officer.
Beyond that the deponent has nothing to say in any of the aforesaid three charge-sheets and the deponent does not intend to associate any more in these so called enquiries in the charge-sheets under Rule 7 which are meaningless being initiated after the submission of the notice for voluntary retirement and expiry of the notice period.
These proceedings are purposely kept pending in order to delay the matter inspite of the deponent repeatedly saying that he was nothing more to say in this connection.
Place : Karnal DEPONENT Dated : 06.05.2004.
VERIFICATION Verified that the contents of my above affidavit are true and correct to my knowledge.
No part of it is false.
Nothing material has been concealed therefrom.
Place : Karnal DEPONENT Dated : 06.05.2004.
Filed through :  (KK Gupta and Mrs. Uma Gupta)  Advocates,  Counsel for the Petitioner."
7.
After the said affidavits were filed, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner stated before the Court that his client is not even interested in cross-examining the witnesses which the State would like to produce in support of the charge-sheets served upon him.
He has already submitted the reply, which according to him, may be considered by the authority and pass order in accordance with law.
Thereafter, counsel appearing for the State placed on record letter dated 18th May, 2004 addressed to the Advocate General, Haryana, wherein its has been stated as under :-  "....In this regard, it is stated that two regular inquiries have been instituted against the petitioner for certain acts of omission and commission.
Sh. SP Sharma, IAS, Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government, Haryana has been appointed Inquiry Officer and the inquiries are underway.
Sh. Sharma had been appointed as an Observer in Lok Sabha Elections, 2004 for 9-Murshibad Constituency in West Bengal.
He returned from election duty on 15th May, 2004.
Sh. Sharma on his return has been consulted.
He has disclosed that at least three months time is required for an ex-parte decision of the mater.
Once the inquiry report is received by the State Government, three months time is also required for taking the final decision after the consultation of matter with Haryana Public Service Commission.
Hence, approximately six months time on the whole for finalisation of the enquiry against the petitioner is required.
This position may kindly be brought to the notice of Hon'ble Court."
8.
In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case, hardly any controversy arises for adjudication before the court in the present case.
The petitioner is practically not interested being contesting the departmental proceedings which have been initiated against him by serving two charge- sheets, which has resulted in continuation of two departmental inquiries.
The petitioner has submitted his reply to the charge-sheets and does not want to participate in the departmental inquiry any further.
The department obviously would be at liberty to take ex-parte proceedings against the petitioner as he has also stated that he is not interested in cross-examining the witnesses or examining any documents during the course of departmental inquiry.
9.
The petitioner is interested in conclusion of the departmental inquiry whatever that to be and whatever punishment the Disciplinary Authority may impose upon him.
10.
In the letter submitted in Court on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that they would require nearly a period of six months from today to complete the departmental inquiry.
This period is prayed for as the Government has also to consult the Haryana Public Service Commission.
11.
I find the period demanded by the respondents is at the face of it unreasonable.
Why so much of time should be taken in conclusion of the departmental inquiry, particularly in view of the stand taken by the petitioner in that regard.
Expeditious conclusion of departmental inquiries is the need of the hour.
Thus, I direct that the departmental inquiries should be concluded within one month from today.
The Inquiry Officer should submit his report to the concerned authorities within 15 days thereafter.
The Haryana Public Service Commission shall be consulted and it should respond to the Government within 15 days of the receipt of such communication.
The competent authority shall pass appropriate orders in accordance with law within one month thereafter and communicate the same to the petitioner.
12.
It is expected that the competent authority shall deal with the matter i.e. punishment as well as request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement.
13.
Mr. HN Mehtani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, who is present in Court, at the direction of the Court, has agreed to inform the Commission of the present order and its strict adherence.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of in the above terms.
The concerned authorities shall comply with the directions of the Court and pass appropriate order with the period stipulated above.
The parties shall bear their own costs.
Copy of the order be given dasti.
Petition disposed of.