JS Narang, J. (Oral) - The services of the workman-respondent are stated to have been terminated with effect from 2961981.
Against the order of termination, a demand notice had been sent and in pursuant thereto, the dispute had been raised under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The claim statement was filed by the workman which has been contested by the employer-petitioner upon various grounds set up therein.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, the issues had been framed and that the ocular and documentary evidence was led before the Labour Court.
2.
The Labour Court has come to a categoric finding that the order of termination has been passed by the management without holding any enquiry into the alleged misconduct of the workman.
Resultantly, it has been held that the order of termination is not sustainable under law.
It has also been observed that the plea of the management is that the workman had joined the illegal strike and therefore his services had been terminated.
Alternatively, the plea of abandonment has also been set up.
3.
However, it has been observed that the management is well within its right to prove the misconduct before the Labour Court as well after adopting the appropriate course in accordance with law.
Admittedly, no such course was adopted, as such, the alleged misconduct on the part of the workman has not been established.
Resultantly, the order of termination of the workman had been declared unjustified and not sustainable under law.
The Labour Court while making the award has declined to grant the back wages.
The management being dissatisfied with the award dated 24121985 has filed the present petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that infact the reference is bad as no violation can be said to have been committed of Section 25-F and G of the Act as the petitioner has not completed 240 days as is statutorily required to be completed in pursuant to Section 25-B of the Act.
It has also been argued that against the order of termination, a right of appeal is available to the petitioner and that the said right having not been exhausted, the reference was not sustainable and that the award made by the Labour Court suffers from the inherent jurisdiction.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the plea of non-compliance of Section 25-B of the Act has not been taken by the petitioner before the Labour Court and that the question of fact cannot be raised before this Court at this stage.
It is further contended that the plea of jurisdiction has also not been raised before the Labour Court or before the Competent authority at the time of making the reference to the Labour Court.
She has further pointed out that the perusal of the pleas taken before this Court does not show that the jurisdiction of the Labour Court has been impugned in any manner except for the fact that an appeal is maintainable against the order of termination, the jurisdiction of the Labour Court has not been impugned.
Apart from this, she has argued that if no such plea has been taken, the petitioner is not entitled to the impugned award on the plea now being sought to be set up orally in this regard.
Reliance has been placed upon a Division Bench Judgment of this Court rendered in Re : Bhuna Co-operative Sugar Mill, Bhuna, District Fatehabad v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hissar and another, 1999(3) RSJ 202 : 1999(3) SCT 133 (P&H).
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that no interference is called for in the award rendered by the Labour Court.
Admittedly the petitioner did not take up the plea of non-compliance of the condition envisaged under Section 25-B of the Act and so also the jurisdiction of the Labour Court has not been impugned before the Competent authority when the reference was made and so also before the Labour Court.
Even before this Court, the jurisdiction of the Labour Court has not been categorically questioned.
7.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.