Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - This Letters Patent Appeal has been filed challenging the orders dated March 29, 2001, passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 6065 of 1986, vide which award dated December 15, 1985, (Annexure P-1) passed by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court was set aside and the respondent-workman was reinstated in service with 30% back wages.
Even though the respondent-workman had not completed 240 days preceding the date of termination of his services, the order of retrenchment was, however, invalidated on the ground that persons junior to him were retained in service, whereas he was shown the exit door.
The learned Single Judge thus held the orders of retrenchment to be vitiated in view of the provisions contained in Section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act').
2.
The Letters Patent Appeal was admitted on January 4, 2004, on the contention recorded by the learned counsel representing the State-appellants and following order was passed :-  "Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, states that in view of the fact that respondent-workman had not completed 240 days, no relief could be granted in the given facts and circumstances of the present case.
Admit.
C.M.
No. 1 of 2002 Notice for 11.2.2002.
Meanwhile, stay operation of impugned judgment."
3.
Pursuant to the notice issued by this Court regarding stay, reply was filed by the respondent-workman, wherein it was, inter alia, pleaded that requirement of 240 days' service is necessary only in case of complaint of violation of provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
For this averment, reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Central Bank of India v. S Satyam, Judgments Today 1996(7) Supreme Court 181 : 1996(4) SCT 143 (SC).
Vide orders dated February 11, 1002 passed by this Court, ex parte stay granted on January 4, 2002, was vacated keeping in view the contention of the learned counsel representing the respondent-workman and the aforesaid judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
4.
During the course of arguments, Miss Nirmaljit Kaur, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, could not dispute the proposition of law recorded in order dated February 11, 2004, and also the applicability of judgment in S Satyam's case (supra), in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held thus :-  "Section 25-G prescribes the principle for retrenchment and applies ordinarily the principle of `last come first go' which is not confined only to workmen who have been in continuous service for not less than one year, covered by Section 25-F" 5.
A Division Bench of this Court in State of Haryana and another v. Shiv Charan and another, 2001(1) SCT 103 (P&H), has also held that completion of 240 days is not necessary to attract the provisions of Section 25-G of the Act and that if the juniors were retained, termination of senior will not be sustainable.
The law enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in S Satyam's case (supra) and a Division Bench of this Court in Shiv Charan's case (supra) is applicable to the facts of the present case.
6.
A categoric finding of fact has been recorded by the learned Single Judge in the present case that persons junior to respondent-workman were retained in service, whereas he was retrenched and that finding is not under challenge.
Finding no merit in this appeal, the same is dismissed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.