JS Narang, J - The plaintiff-respondent was employed as Conductor with the Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur.
He was on duty on bus No. 5762 running between Amritsar and Bada Johar.
The bus was checked by the inspecting staff on that date and it had been detected that 23 passengers were travelling without tickets.
The matter was reported to the concerned quarters and the plaintiff- respondent was placed under suspension and thereafter was served with a charge-sheet by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur.
The reply furnished by the plaintiff-respondent was considered, which was found unsatisfactory, as a sequel thereto, regular departmental inquiry was ordered which was conducted and that the plaintiff-respondent was held guilty by the Inquiry Officer.
A show cause notice was served upon the plaintiff-respondent by the competent punishing authority and thereafter the order dated December 5, 1977, was passed vide which the services of the plaintiff-respondent stood terminated.
The statutory appeal was filed which was rejected by the statutory authority vide order dated 1611981.
2.
The plaintiff being dissatisfied with the aforestated impugned orders filed civil suit and maintained various grounds for holding that the impugned orders are illegal, ultra vires, capricious and without jurisdiction, as such, the same deserve to be declared null and void and that the plaintiff-respondent continues to be in service of the State and that he shall be entitled to the emoluments and all consequential benefits admissible to the plaintiff- respondent.
Inter alia it has been averred that the Inquiry Officer did not record the statement of the plaintiff and that he was not given the opportunity to cross examine the prosecution evidence.
Resultantly, a grave prejudice has been caused to the rights of the plaintiff-respondent in conducting of the inquiry by the Inquiry Officer, which has resulted in miscarriage of justice.
Apart from this, it has been averred that the punishing authority did not apply its mind before passing the impugned order of termination.
3.
The suit has been resisted by the defendant-appellant and the averments contained in the plaint have been categorically refuted.
It has been averred that the plaintiff-respondent had been given full opportunity to defend himself and that he had been given the opportunity to question the credibility of the prosecution witnesses and that he had given the opportunity to produce evidence for and on his behalf, inter alia, it has been averred that the civil Court does not have the jurisdiction to try the suit and that the suit is bad for want of notice under Section 80 CPC.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, the issues had been framed and the respective parties led documentary as well as oral evidence in support of their pleas and to prove the issues, the onus of which has been casted upon them.
4.
The trial Court has returned a finding that the procedure as prescribed under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") has not been followed and a pointed reference has been made to rule 8(11) of the aforestated rules, which reads as under :-  "8.
Procedure for imposing major penalties :  (1) to (10) xxxxxx xxxx (11).
The inquiring authority shall if the Government employee fails to appear within the specified time or refuses or omits to plead, require the Presenting Officer to produce the evidence by which he proposes to prove the articles of charge, and shall adjourn the case to a later date not exceeding thirty days after recording an order that the Government employee may, for the purpose of preparing his defence - (i) inspect within five days of the order or within such further time not exceeding five days as the inquiring authority may allow, the documents, specified in the list referred to in sub-rule (3); and (ii) submit a list of witnesses to be examined on his behalf; Note : If the Government employee applies orally or in writing for the supply of copies of the statements of witnesses mentioned in the list referred to in sub-rule (3) the inquiring authority shall furnish him with such copies as early as possible and in any case not later then three days before the commencement of the examination of the witnesses on behalf of the punishing authority.
(iii) give a notice within ten days of the order or within such further time not exceeding ten days as the inquiring authority may allow for the discovery or production of any documents which are in the possession of Government but not mentioned in the list referred to in sub-rule (3).
Note :- The Government employee shall indicate the relevance of the documents required by him to be discovered or produced by the Government."
5.
The rule has been interpreted to the effect that after the plea of the delinquent employee had been recorded the Inquiry Officer was mandatorily required to adjourn the proceedings for 30 days for the purpose of granting opportunity to the delinquent official for preparing the defence.
It is on April 19, 1977, instead of granting opportunity the statement of the witnesses of the prosecution were recorded.
Thus, the appropriate opportunity to defend had not been granted, as such, the report of the Inquiry Officer is not sustainable and resultantly, the order of the competent authority vide which the services of the plaintiff have been terminated, is also not sustainable.
The cumulative effect is that the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent had been decreed vide judgment and decree dated November 10, 1982.
6.
The defendant-appellant being dissatisfied with the aforestated judgment and decree, filed an appeal before the lower appellate Court.
The appeal has been dismissed vide judgement and decree dated November 9, 1983.
The observation of the trial Court has been affirmed and that the interpretation of the aforestated rule, as observed by the trial Court, has been concurred with.
7.
The defendant-appellant being still not satisfied has filed the present appeal.
8.
Learned Assistant General has argued that the Courts below have misinterpreted the aforestated rule, as the essential ingredient that the proceedings were required to be adjourned for 30 days, would be required to be adhered to only if the Government employee failed to appear within the specified time or refused or omits to plead before the Inquiry Officer.
In the case at hand, it is the admitted case of the plaintiff that he had been served with the charge sheet and that he had submitted the reply thereto and that the allegations levelled against him have been emphatically denied.
It is also the admitted case that the delinquent official was present before the Inquiry Officer on 7th April, 1977 but the witnesses of the prosecution were not present and, therefore, the hearing was adjourned to April 19, 1977 and that the delinquent official had been bound down for the said date.
It is on that date i.e. April 19, 1977, the witnesses as notified to the delinquent official vide communication dated March 22, 1977 had been examined and he had been given the opportunity to cross-examine the said witnesses and that the said witnesses had been duly cross-examined on that date.
It is on that date the delinquent official had been given the opportunity to produce his evidence and it is on his request the hearing had been adjourned to April 28, 1977, as he had undertaken to produce the defence witnesses on that date.
However, on that date he could not produce any evidence but in the interest of justice one more opportunity was granted and the hearing was adjourned to My 11, 1977.
Again on the date fixed, the delinquent official did not bring any evidence yet another opportunity was granted by fixing the date on June 14, 1977.
It may be noticed that the delinquent official was not present on that date and it had been directed that he should be intimated the date vide a communication through registered AD cover.
Perhaps on the date fixed, again no one was present and that the date was fixed as July 20, 1977, on which date the delinquent official was present and he had brought one witness namely Kartar Singh son of Niranjan Singh, whose statement was recorded and he was cross-examined by the prosecution.
The delinquent official addressed a communication to the Inquiry Officer that he has produced the aforestated witnesses and apart from him he does not want to adduce any evidence and he has further stated in the said communication that he would not like to seek assistance of any Presenting Officer and that his case be decided accordingly.
It may also be noticed that before addressing such communication the delinquent official presented himself as his own witness on that date i.e. July 20, 1977, and his statement was recorded and he was duly cross-examined by the prosecution.
The factum of the communication presented by the delinquent official in writing has also been noticed in the order of the Inquiry Officer recorded in the proceedings on July 20, 1977.
It is thereafter that the Inquiry Officer submitted his report and finally the competent authority issued the show cause and passed the order of termination.
It has been argued that the Courts below have misinterpreted the rule and have also not perused the file of the Inquiry Officer in which the proceedings have been recorded succinctly.
Thus, grave error has been committed while decreeing the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent.
He has placed reliance upon a judgment of this Court rendered in the re : Ghanshyam Dass v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala, 1998(2) SCT 184 (P&H) : (1998-2) PLR 105.
9.
On the other hand, learned counsel of the plaintiff-respondent has argued that a categoric finding of fact has been returned by the trial Court and that in view of the law laid down by the apex Court, the same can not be interfered with.
It has been found as a matter of fact that the plaintiff-respondent had not been given adequate opportunity to defend himself as envisaged under the rules.
It was mandatorily required by the Inquiry Officer to have adjourned the proceedings for 30 days after the delinquent official had pleaded not guilty, which could have enabled the delinquent official to prepare his defence.
It is the admitted case that no such opportunity had been granted to the delinquent official, therefore, the Courts below have correctly decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the pleadings and the evidence brought on record and so also the judicial precedent relied upon by the defendant-appellant, I am of the view that the appeal deserves to be allowed.
The perusal of the aforestated rule shows that the Inquiry Officer was obligated to adjourn the proceedings for 30 days for enabling the delinquent official to bring his defence only in the eventuality if he was not present or he failed to appear within the specified time or he had refused or omitted to plead, but, in the present case, the delinquent official has categorically admitted that he had been served with the charge-sheet and he had submitted the reply and he was present on April 7, 1977, as is borne out from the record and that on that date the prosecution witnesses, as had been intimated to him earlier vide communication No. 5051 dated 2231977, were not present and, therefore, the hearing was adjourned to April 20, 1977 and on that date the statements of the said witnesses were recorded and that the delinquent official had been given the appropriate opportunity to cross- examine the said witnesses.
After recording the evidence of the prosecution, the delinquent official had been granted opportunity not once but a number of times and even when he did not appear, a communication had been sent to him and that he brought his defence witnesses before the Inquiry Officer on July 20, 1977, and he appeared himself as his own witness on that date.
Both had been cross-examined by the prosecution.
It is, thereafter, on that date i.e. July 20, 1977, he had given in writing that apart from Kartar Singh and himself he does to wish to examine any other witness and he also does not require the assistance of a Presenting Officer, which fact has been recorded by the Inquiry Officer in the order passed on July 20, 1977.
I am convinced that the Court below have fallen into error in disregarding the evidence which had been brought on record.
It is nowhere the case of the plaintiff-respondent that he has asked for the opportunity but the same has been declined.
In fact, the rule relied upon by the Courts below is not at all applicable.
The delinquent official was present all along and he had been given appropriate and ample opportunity to defend himself.
It can also be observed that there is no prejudice which has been caused to the delinquent official even if for argument sake, it is accepted that the proceedings were required to be adjourned for a period of 30 days though the same was not required to be done, even then, no prejudice has been caused as he has cross-examined the prosecution witnesses and he has produced his own defence witnesses and has also stepped into the witness box as his own witness.
I find no infirmity in the procedure which had been followed and adopted by the Inquiry Officer.
No meaningful argument has been addressed before the trial Court nor before this Court vis-a-vis the legality of the order of termination passed by the competent authority.
Resultantly, the appeal is accepted and the judgment and decree of the Courts below are set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff- respondent is dismissed throughout with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.