MM Kumar, J - By this order two writ petitions, namely, C.W.P.
No. 15371 of 2000 and C.W.P.
No. 4579 of 2002 are proposed to be disposed of because the relief claimed by the petitioner relates to his service career involving different stages.
The petitioner approached this Court by filing first petition with a prayer for releasing him revised pay scale of Rs. 12000-420- 18300 with a pay fixation of Rs. 14940/- w.e.f.
1.1.1996 at par with other Assistant Professors of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (respondent No. 4).
He also claimed arrears on account of pay revision which were wrongly denied to him alongwith interest @ 18 percent pa from 1121999 asserting that similarly situated Assistant Professors in the Regional Engineering College (respondent No. 4) were paid the same pay scale.
Further direction was sought to respondents to confirm the petitioner as Assistant Professor by placing reliance on Bye-law 11 of the Bye-laws framed by the Regional Engineering College (Kurukshetra) Society as the petitioner had already completed three years period probation and accordingly to include his name at the appropriate place in the inter-departmental seniority list of the College.
2.
The second petition came to be filed on 2822002 when one month's notice was issued to the petitioner for dispensing with his services in the Enterpreneurship Development Cell (for brevity the ED Cell) w.e.f.
3132002.
A prayer has been made for quashing the afore-mentioned notice with all consequential benefits.
A further prayer has been made for quashing the decision taken by the Board of Governors on agenda item No. 9426 in its meeting held on 19112001.
According to the afore-mentioned decision, the Board of Governors had dis-agreed to merge the ED Cell with the College and had authorised the Principal to terminate services of the petitioner.
The petitioner has also prayed for a direction to the respondents to merge ED Cell with the College in terms of the guide-lines issued by the Ministry of Science and Technology (National Enterpreneurship Development Board Division), New Delhi, respondent No. 1.
3.
Brief facts of the case are required to be examined by referring to the background which led to establishment of ED Cell at the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (respondent No. 4) :  Enterpreneurship Development Cell  4.
There is an Enterpreneurship Development Board working under the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Union of India (for brevity, "the NSTEDB").
A Scheme was framed by NSTEDB for establishing ED Cell in various technical institutions including Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
It is appropriate to mention that the object of establishing ED Cell is to utilise the potential expertise and enthusiasm which has been shown in the field of enterpreneurship development by the technical institutions so that adequate infrastructure facilities may be created which may require to promote the activities of the NSTEDB on regional basis.
In order to establish ED Cell a Advisory Committee was constituted under the NSTEDB and guide-lines were framed for establishing the ED Cell.
A photo-copy of the guide-lines have been placed on record as Annexure P.8.
A glance at the guide-lines (Annexure P.8) would show at the first instance that the Department of Science and Technology was to provide financial support to ED Cell on yearly basis and thereafter the responsibility was to shift on the educational institutions/Regional Engineering Colleges to arrange funds for running the ED Cell and to absorb the faculty and staff in the normal stream of the College/University after the period of assistance has expired.
There is a requirement specified in the guide-lines that a certificate/affidavit in the form of Appendix "A" was required to be furnished to that effect.
According to Clause 5 of the Certificate it is required to be undertaken by the educational institution/Regional Engineering College where ED Cell is established that it would be their responsibility to absorb ED Cell established alongwith its staff and arrange funds for the same after the expiry of period of assistance from the Department of Science and Technology, Union of India.
One such ED Cell was established at the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
Brief Facts :  5.
On 141989, respondent No. 4 issued an advertisement in the English Daily, Hindustan Times (Annexure P.1) for appointment to the post of Chief Project Coordinator in the pre-revised scale of Rs. 1500-2500 (revised to Rs. 4500- 7300).
The petitioner has a meritorious academic record.
He has done Master of Engineering (System Engineering and Operations Research) from the University of Roorkee with Gold Medal by securing 88 percent marks in the year 1978 after he acquired the degree of B.Sc.
Engineering (Electrical) from the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh in 1975 by securing 677 percent marks in the first division.
It is claimed by the petitioner that he possessed professional training and experience in his field by undergoing courses with reputed companies like Suzuki Motor Company Ltd, Japan and Steel Authority of India Ltd. Durgapur Steel Plant, TATA Burroughs Ltd etc. etc.
The petitioner fulfilled all the essential qualifications mentioned in the advertisement (Annexure P.1) and applied.
Alongwith the application the petitioner sent all the necessary certificates showing his qualifications and his detailed bio- data explaining his experience and other abilities.
He was interviewed in pursuance of the letter dated 861969 and was selected for appointment to the post of Senior Project Leader as is evident from the letter of appointment dated 981989 (Annexure P2).
The appointment letter provided that he would be allowed basic pay of Rs. 1600/- in the unrevised pay scale of Rs. 1200-1900 and his total emoluments would be Rs. 4630/- excluding HRA.
It was further indicated that it would be equivalent to the stage of Rs. 3700/- in the revised scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
The revision was to follow shortly as it was awaiting the approval of the State Government, respondent No. 3.
The petitioner was asked to join his duties by 1621990 which he accordingly joined.
The nomenclature of the ED Cell was changed into Centre for Industrial Liaison and Technical Developments (for brevity "the Centre") by the Board of Governors of respondent No. 4 in its meeting held on 2321991.
It was resolved to approve the staff structure of the Centre and the pay scales.
The name of the post of Senior Project Leader, to which the petitioner was appointed on 981989 was re-designated as Assistant Professor in the Centre in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting has been placed on record as Annexure P.3.
His pay scale was also revised by respondent No. 4 in the scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
On 5111999 (Annexure P.4) a notification was issued with regard to the revision of pay scales of teachers in the various Colleges and other Degree level Technical Institutions in the State of Haryana and pay scale of Assistant Professor was revised from Rs. 3700-5700 to Rs. 12000-420-18300.
On the completion of five years of service in the grade the pay was required to be fixed at Rs. 14,940/-.
However, the petitioner was not granted the afore-mentioned revised scale despite the fact that other similarly situated Assistant Professors working in respondent No. 4 College had been granted the pay scale of Rs. 12000-18300 w.e.f.
1121999.
The petitioner submitted a representation in this regard dated 1121999 (Annexure P.5) to the Principal of respondent No. 4 requesting him that necessary steps may be taken to pay him the salary and the allowances in the revised scale of pay of Rs. 14940-18300 (as he has already completed five years of service in that grade).
The inaction on the part of respondents No. 3 and 4 resulted into issuance of reminder and a representation to respondent No. 3 on 3052000 (Annexure P.6).
In order to verify whether the benefit of revised pay scales have been extended to the teachers working in the ED Cell of other Colleges, respondent No. 4 wrote a letter to the Calicut Regional Engineering College.
In response thereto the Calicut Regional Engineering College has replied on 2452000 affirming that revised pay scales have been given to the staff working in the ED Cell.
It is also pertinent to mention that respondent No. 4 was required to merge the ED Cell into the normal stream of the institution and the expenses were to be met from their sources or from the income generated by the ED Cell after the period of three years of financial assistance received from the Department of Science and Technology.
At this stage, the petitioner filed the first writ petition claiming the benefit of revised pay scale alongwith the prayer for some other relief.
6.
After the receipt of notice of the first writ petition, it is alleged that respondent No. 5 namely Shri NP Mehta, Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra developed a prejudice against the petitioner because he started taking steps to wind up ED Cell in order to succeed in dispensing with the services of the petitioner.
Certain other allegations have also been levelled against respondent No. 5.
Various steps as listed in the writ petition reads as under :  i) Firstly, the petitioner was in line to be allotted House No. BB4 in the campus of the college.
On 24th March, 2001 that house was allotted to another Assistant Professor 7 years junior to the petitioner.
ii) An order was made by respondent No. 5 on 162001 completely stopping the salary of the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted representation on 162001 and a reminder on 562001 requesting respondent No. 5 to release his salary.
In response to the said letter, however, respondent No. 5 asked the petitioner to arrange the non-plan funds for his salary himself and the salary for the month of May 2001 was released on 2162001 as "a goodwill gesture".
A copy of the representation dated 162001 and reply dated 1862001 is annexed as Annexure P.9 and P10 respectively.
iii) That apart from the above, other letters were written for the return of equipment etc. worth Rs. 1898 lakhs of the ED Cell and regarding occupation of rooms of the building of the ED Cell.
The building was constructed out of the funds provided by the Government of India for the ED Cell.
These rooms were/are meant fo the ED Cell only.
The letters were written to make the ED Cell viable for its own self.
The amounts as claimed are of the ED Cell and if the same are credited to its accounts, the Cell would have its own resources.
iv) That thereafter the petitioner was not paid salary for the month of July, 2001.
On account of non-receipt of salary and other biased attitude of the Principal of respondent No. 4 College, he suffered heart attack and was admitted in the local Hospital on 1582001.
He was referred to PGI, Chandigarh on 1682001 and he was admitted in PGI on 18.8.2001.
The petitioner underwent Open Heart Bye Pass Surgery on 28.9.2001. v) That the petitioner, thereafter, rejoined his duty after 50 days leave on 9.10.2001 and it was found that he has not been paid salary for the months of August and September, 2001.
The petitioner submitted his medical bills also for a sum of Rs. 74,49271 to respondent No. 4 on 31102001.
What to talk of the reimbursement of medical bills, the petitioner was not paid salary for the months of October, 2001 even.
The petitioner then sent SOS representation to respondent No. 4 on 7112001.
Thereafter, a week before the meeting of the Board of Governors, the petitioner received five months salary i.e. from July to October, 2001 on 13112001.
However, now again from January 2002 onwards no salary has been released to the petitioner."
7.
It has further been averred that respondent No. 5 presented an agenda (Annexure P.11) before the Board of Governors to consider the absorption of faculty of the ED Cell with the main stream of respondent No. 4 i.e.
Regional Engineering College.
The agenda is alleged to be factually incorrect.
It has also been pointed out by the petitioner that the Committee on 2592000 had already recommended (Annexure P12) that ED Cell should be merged with respondent No. 4 in accordance with the mandatory directions of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as per the specific undertaking furnished by respondent No. 4.
Even respondent No. 1 in a communication dated 1791999 (Annexure P.3) has insisted for continuation of ED Cell after 3132002 when the financial assistance was stopped.
It is alleged that in the agenda (Annexure P.11) presented to the Board of Governors factually incorrect information was given by stating that except for the petitioner two posts of Junior Stenographer and Peon were never filled up.
It is alleged that one Shri Prem Kumar was appointed as Steno-typist in the ED Cell on a consolidated salary vide order dated 1591989 and he had been absorbed in the main stream of the College vide order dated 121991.
Thereafter one Shashi Bala was appointed as Steno- typist in the ED Cell on 781995 who has been absorbed on 781995 vide Annexure P16.
Another case cited is that of Davender Singh who was alleged to have been appointed as Stenographer in the Cell on 1141997 and thereafter he was transferred to the main stream by posting him in the office of the Principal vide Annexures P17 to P19.
8.
The petitioner has also pointed out vide his representation dated 1222002 that number of posts were vacant and the petitioner could have been sent to the Electrical Engineering department as Assistant Professor because he had been given teaching load of the regular academic course to teach students of respondent No. 4 College.
A certificate issued by the Chairman Electrical Engineering Department of respondent No. 4 College dated 2092000 shows that petitioner has been given teaching load of 12 periods per week which is equivalent to the teaching periods of an Assistant Professor.
The same was withdrawn lateron at the instance of respondent No. 4 for which a representation (Annexure P23) was filed by the petitioner.
9.
The Board of Governors in its meeting held on 19112001 refused to merge the ED Cell with the College advising that efforts should be made to secure some more Scheme or Project sponsored by the College where the petitioner might be adjusted.
As a consequence one month's notice was served on the petitioner on 2822002 stating therein that the financial assistance to the ED Cell was available only upto 3132002 and his services are liable to be dispensed with w.e.f 3132002 (Annexure P24).
10.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 the stand taken is that after the assistance by the Department of Science and Technology and NSTEDB had come to end it was the responsibility of respondent No. 4 to continue the ED Cell and arrange funds for the same.
It has been further averred in para 12 of the written statement that ED Cell should merge into the normal stream of the institute for running on a continuing basis.
The expenses were to met from the sources of the institute or from the income generated by the ED Cell through consultancy etc.
Similar stand has been taken in paras 16 and 17 of the reply.
11.
In the written statement filed by respondents No. 4 and 5 the stand taken with regard to creation of posts and change of nomenclature of the post by the Board of Governors in its 77th meeting is that the posts which were created could not be materialised on account of paucity of funds and the petitioner was never offered the post of Assistant Professor.
It is asserted that the petitioner continues to hold the post of Senior Project Leader in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
It is further stated that the Department of Science and Technology sent a letter dated 1791999 (Annexure R/4/1) that respondent No. 4 was to ensure continuation of ED Cell after the financial assistance by the Department of Science and Technology was to come to end on 3132002.
A Committee was constituted to look into the details with regard to the continuation of ED Cell and its merger with respondent No. 4.
The Committee submitted its report dated 2592000 (Annexure R.4.2) favourably recommending merger in view of the mandatory directions issued by the Department of Science and Technology and the undertaking given by the College.
However, it has been asserted that the Board of Governors in its meeting held on 19112001 vide agenda item No. 9426 did not agree to merge the ED Cell with respondent No. 4 and advised to make efforts to get some Scheme/Projects sponsored from All India Council of Technical Education where the petitioner could be associated with that Scheme-Project/Cell.
Copies of agenda item and its minutes are appended as Annexures R/4/3 and R/4/4 respectively.
12.
On the question of revision of pay scales, the stand taken is that the petitioner was never appointed as Assistant Professor by respondent No. 4 and there was no question of grant of any revised pay scale being given to the incumbents to the posts of Assistant Professors.
It is further asserted that respondent No. 4 sent the case of the petitioner for grant of revised pay scale to the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, which declined the request of the petitioner on the ground that ED Cell was being promoted by the Department in a project mode and no revision is to be given.
A copy of the communication has been placed on the record as Annexure R/4/5.
13.
It is appropriate to point out that the Department of Science and Technology had advised respondent No. 4 to consider the payment of arrears to the petitioner from its own funds as the petitioner was never merged with the faculty of the college.
The example of Calicut Engineering College has also been ignored where the staff of ED Cell was merged into College.
It is pertinent to mention that evasive reply has been filed with regard to the filing of affidavit by respondent No. 4 in the form of Appendix "A" to the guide-lines (Annexure P.8) wherein the undertaking is required to be given that after the financial assistance from the Department of Science and Technology is stopped, then the institution/College was to absorb the ED Cell with its faculty staff in the usual academic stream of the institution/College.
In other words, the afore-mentioned stand of the petitioner has to be accepted as correct.
It is claimed by respondents No. 4 and 5 that even if it is assumed that certificate in the form of Appendix "A" was filed the merger of ED Cell was not automatic and the Board of Governors was still to take a decision to which the Board of Governors never agreed.
14.
That with regard to absorption of other staff it has been stated that Prem Kumar was initially selected as Steno-typist in the ED Cell and he joined as such on 1891989.
Lateron the College issued advertisement to fill up two posts of Steno typists on regular basis against which Prem Kumar also applied and called for interview/test.
Junior Staff Selection Committee on 511991 recommended his case and he was offered appointment as Steno-typist vide appointment letter dated 121991.
With regard to Shashi Bala it has been asserted that she was already holding a substantive post of Clerk in the College and was merely posted in the ED Cell.
Subsequently, she was sent back to her substantive post on which she was lateron selected on regular post.
Similar stand has been taken with regard to Davender Singh who was initially appointed as Senior Stenographer in the ED Cell and lateron he was selected by the Junior Staff Selection Committee on 24121998.
It is claimed that there is no provision for accommodating the petitioner on a vacant post.
The teaching duties performed by the petitioner were assigned to him in response to his request as well as to keep him apprised that teaching is part of his duties in the ED Cell.
However, it has not been denied that there are number of vacant posts for which the petitioner is duly qualified and his services could be accommodated as Assistant Professor like the Department of Electrical Engineering.
15.
On 1092003, a doubt has arisen about the maintainability of the writ petition as reliance was placed on the bye-laws framed by respondent No. 4.
It was directed that copy of the Rules known as Regional Engineering College (Kurukshetra) Society Rules be placed on record with a copy to the counsel for the petitioner.
Accordingly, a copy of the Memorandum of Association and the Rules relating to the establishment of respondent No. 4 has been placed on record.
The question about the amenability of the respondent No. 4 to the writ jurisdiction of this Court shall be considered at the appropriate stage.
Submissions of petitioner :  16.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that respondent No. 4 is under a legal obligation to merge the ED Cell with the College.
To substantiate his argument, the learned counsel has placed reliance on the advertisement Annexure P.1 to show that although the post of Chief Project Coordinator was temporary but it was likely to continue.
He has also placed reliance on the recommendations of the Advisory Committee of the College comprising of Dr. SK Sharma, Chairman, Professor in charge ED Cell, REC Kurukshetra, Dr. SK Chakarvarti, Member, Professor in charge, Academic Affairs, REC Kurukshetra and RK Arora, Member, Deputy Registrar (Accounts) REC Kurukshetra.
Reliance has also been placed by the learned counsel on agenda item No. 7730 where the Board of Governors has considered the establishment of Centre at the College and the nomenclature of the post of Senior Project Leader/Coordinator was changed to Assistant professor.
Learned counsel has also made a pointed reference to agenda item No. 9426 by arguing that entirely incorrect facts were placed before the Board of Governors because it was stated that two posts of Junior Stenographers and Peon were never filled up in the ED Cell which have now been admitted in the written statement to be filled up.
Learned counsel has maintained that on 1791999 the Department of Science and Technology has infact directed respondent No. 4 to ensure continuation of ED Cell beyond 3132002 when the financial assistance to respondent No. 4 was to be finally stopped.
17.
Another argument raised by the learned counsel is that a discriminatory attitude has been adopted by respondent No. 5 by absorbing members of the staff like Stenographers and Peons except the petitioner.
He has referred to the averments made in para 18 of the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 4 and 5 admitted that Prem Kumar and Davender Kumar were appointed as Steno typist and Senior Stenographer respectively in the ED Cell on a consolidated salary.
However, before the Board of Governors, respondent No. 5 placed incorrect facts by stating that the post of Stenographer and Peon were never filled up.
Learned counsel then argued that while considering agenda item No. 7427 for establishing Centre at the respondent No. 4 College it was resolved to integrate the activities of ED Cell and the decision was taken to absorb the staff of ED Cell.
18.
Learned counsel in the end has referred to mala-fide intention of respondent No. 5 on account of the fact that petitioner has filed a writ petition claiming revised pay scale.
Mr. Patwalia has referred to the action of respondent No. 5 in the allotment of the house, stopping the salary of the petitioner and return of equipment worth Rs. 1,89,000/- belonging to ED Cell and regarding occupation of rooms of the building of the ED Cell.
He has also referred to non-payment of salary for the month of July, 2001 and the biased attitude of the Principal which caused such a stress to the petitioner that he suffered a heart attack and was eventually admitted to PGI and underwent open heart bye-pass surgery on 28.9.2001.
His medical bills were not paid nor the salary for the month of October, 2001 onwards was paid.
However, he received the salary before the meeting of the Board of Governors for a period of five months from July, 2001 to October, 2001 which was paid on 13112001 and again from January 2002 onwards no salary has been paid.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487 and argued that the Regional Engineering Colleges are the instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and therefore there is an obligation on them to act fairly.
He has also placed reliance on two judgments in the cases of Pant Raj Sachdev v. The Indian Red Cross Society and ors., 1988(1) RSJ 719 and JN Gahlaut and ors. v. Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana and others, 2002(2) RSJ 719 : 2002(3) SCT 328 (P&H).
Learned counsel has been placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of G Govinda Rajulu v. The Andhra Pradesh State Construction Corporation Ltd and another, AIR 1987 SC 1801 and Haryana Tanneries Employees Union v. State of Haryana and another, 2002(2) RSJ 619.
Submissions of Respondent No. 4 :  19.
Shri AS Virk, learned counsel for respondent No. 4 has argued that the petitioner has never been an employee of the Regional Engineering College and in the absence of any absorption he cannot be imposed upon on the College.
He has made a reference to Annexure P.11 wherein the decision has been taken by the Board of Governors refusing to merge the ED Cell with the College.
Learned counsel has drawn my pointed attention to the suggestion made by Dr. PN Rajdan, a representative of All India Council of Technical Education to make various efforts to get some scheme/project sponsored for the College from AIEECT and associate the petitioner with such scheme/project.
Referring to Annexure P.3 wherein establishment of Centre was approved, the learned counsel has argued that on account of paucity of funds the same could not materialise.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Rajendra and ors. v. State of Rajasthan and ors., (1999) 2 SCC 317 : 1999(3) SCT 294 (SC) and argued that in cases where there is paucity of funds resulting into abolition of posts it has been held that no mandamus could be issued.
The learned counsel has also argued that merely because there is a clause in the advertisement that the post was likely to continue the incumbent to a temporary post co-terminus with the project would not acquire any additional right.
He has also placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of K Shekar v. V Indiramma and ors., 2002(2) RSJ 165 : 2002(2) SCT 381 (SC).
Findings :  20.
Before adverting to the controversy on merit, it would be appropriate to clear a doubt with regard to maintainability of the writ petition which has arisen on 1092003 resulting into placing on record a copy of memorandum of association and rules leading to the establishment of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (respondent No. 4).
A similar controversy had arisen in respect of the Regional Engineering College, Sri Nagar before the Supreme Court in the case of Ajay Hasia (supra).
According to the judgment in Ajay Hasia's case (supra) there are 15 Engineering Colleges in the country sponsored by Government of India.
The Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (respondent No. 4) is one of them.
After detailed examination, the Supreme Court has found in paragraph 15 of the judgment that a writ would be maintainable against a Regional Engineering College because the memorandum of association and the rules of the Society showed that the composition of the Society is dominated by the representatives appointed by the Central Government and the State Governments with the approval of the Central Government.
The finances required for running the College were provided entirely by the Central Government and the Government of Jammu & Kashmir.
The rules made by the Society were required to have the prior approval of the State Government and the Central Government.
The accounts of the Society have to be submitted to both the Central Government as well as the State Government for their scrutiny and satisfaction.
Therefore, it has been found that the control of the State and the Central Government is all pervasive and the College will have to be amenable to writ jurisdiction.
21.
Now the first question which requires determination by this Court is as to whether respondent No. 4 is under an obligation to merge the ED Cell with the College.
A perusal of Annexure R-1 containing general information and guide- lines on the establishment of Enterpreneurship and Development Cell in Education Institution shows that the ED Cells were established by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India to utilize the potential expertise and enthusiasm which has been shown in the field of Enterpreneurship Development by the Technical institutions so that sufficient infrastructure facilities be created which may require to promote the activities of the NSTEDB on regional basis.
To start with financial support was provided by the Department of Science and Technology on yearly basis and thereafter the financial responsibility was to shift on the Regional Engineering Colleges for running the ED Cells and to absorb the members of the Faculty/staff in the main stream of the College/University after the period for financial assistance has expired.
Accordingly, the ED Cell was established and on the basis of advertisement, the petitioner was appointed on the post of Senior Project Leader on 981989 vide Annexure P2.
He discharged his duties to the entire satisfaction of the respondents and the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 2321991 changed its name to Industrial Liaison and Technical Development and the name to the post of Senior Project Leader was re- designated as Assistant Professor.
It is appropriate to mention that a certificate/affidavit in the form of Appendix A has been furnished by respondent No. 4 undertaking that after the financial assistance from the Department of Science of Technology, Government of India was stopped, the faculty members of the ED Cell along with the staff were to be adjusted in the Institution/College to become part of the main stream.
In this regard the College Advisory Committee on ED Cell submitted a report.
The committee was comprised of Dr. SK Sharma, Chairman and Professor-in-charge of ED Cell, Dr. SK Chakarvarti, Member, Professor-in-charge, Academic Affairs, REC, Kurukshetra and Shri RK Arora, Member, Deputy Registrar (Accounts), REC Kurukshetra.
In report Annexure P12, it has been specifically mentioned that a mandatory undertaking has been given by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (respondent No. 4) that ED Cell was to merge into main stream of the institution for running on a continuous basis.
The undertaking furnished by respondent No. 4 has been duly acknowledged by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.
The aforementioned report would itself prove that the ED Cell was required to be merged with the main stream and even the Advisory Committee had made recommendations to that effect.
The two paras report of the Advisory Committee reads as under :-  "Background Enterpreneurship Development Cell at Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra was established along with other RECs in accordance with the guide-lines issued by DST on "Establishment of Enterpreneurship Development Cells in Educational Institutions" published in Nov 1986.
According to these guide- lines, DST provides financial support on a yearly basis for 3 to 5 years.
Afterwards, the Parent Institute takes responsibility to continue the Cell.
Accordingly, EDC merger into normal stream of the Institution for running on a continuing basis.
To this effect, a mandatory undertaking has been given by our Institute which has been acknowledged by DST vide their letter No. 11/3/89 (NEB) Vol. V dated 17999.
Request for merger of EDC with the Host Institution has been received from DST vide their letter No. 11/3/89(NEB) Vol. V dated 17999.
DST has regulated the financial assistance of our EDC @ 75% during 2000-2001 and @ 50% during 2001- 02.
The financial assistance by DST will continue only till March 31, 2002.
Recommendations In the light of mandatory directive by DST and the undertaking given by the College, it is recommended that the EDC be merged with the Institution under the defined terms and conditions."
22.
It is further appropriate to mention that even the Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India vide communication Annexure P13 had made it clear to respondent No. 4 that the financial assistance to the ED Cell would be available upto 3132002 and necessary steps were to be taken by respondent No. 4 to ensure the continuation of ED Cell after that period.
It is further pertinent to mention that in the advertisement Annexure P.1, it was specifically mentioned that the post on which the petitioner was appointed was temporary but the same was likely to continue.
From a perusal of the documents mentioned hereinabove, it becomes evident that there is an obligation on respondent No. 4 to absorb the faculty members and other staff of ED Cell.
Respondent No. 4 had given an undertaking in the form of Appendix "A" which is to the effect that after financial assistance by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India was over then the staff and the faculty members were to be adjusted in the Regional Engineering College, respondent.
It is evident that for over 12 years respondent No. 4 enjoyed financial assistance.
Once respondent No. 4 has taken benefit of an undertaking it is impermissible to shun its responsibility.
It cannot approbate and reprobate.
It is infact estopped to go back from its obligation.
23.
Another related aspect which requires determination is whether the Board of Governors was apprised with correct facts leading to the passing of resolution on item No. 9426 declining to merge the ED Cell with the College.
The answer to this question would be dependent on the analysis of various documents placed on record by the parties.
The agenda item No. 9426 (Annexure P.11 continued) or Annexure R-4/3) has indicated that the ED Cell required (i) Chief Project Coordinator (ii) Sr. Project Leader (iii) Jr. Stenographer (iv) Peon.
It reveals that Shri RK Singal had worked as Chief Project Coordinator and joined on 181989 but lateron left the College.
On 1621990, the petitioner is stated to have joined as Senior Project Leader of ED Cell in the pre-revised scale of Rs. 3700-5700/- who was continuing as Incharge of the ED Cell.
However, misstatement occurred when it was stated that two posts of Junior Stenographer and Peon were never filled up.
As a matter of fact, one Shri Prem Kumar was appointed vide Annexure P14 on 1591989 as Steno-typist but later on he was appointed as such in the College vide Annexure P.15 on 121991.
Similarly, Smt. Shashi Bala was appointed as Steno-typist in the ED Cell on 781995 vide Annexure P16 and Shri Devinder Singh was appointed as Junior Scale Stenographer on 1141997 vide Annexure P17 and granted extension vide Annexure P18.
Shri Devinder Singh, however, was transferred from the ED Cell to the Principal's office on 5122000 vide Annexure P19.
The detailed averments have been made in paragraph 18(a), (b) and (c) of the writ petition with regard to appointment of Shri Prem Kumar, Smt. Shashi Bala and Shri Devinder Singh.
In the corresponding para of the written statement filed by respondent No. 4, it has been stated that after appointment in the ED Cell, Shri Prem Kumar had applied against an advertised post by respondent No. 4 and he was selected.
About Smt. Shashi Bala it has been stated that she was holding the substantive post of Clerk with respondent No. 4-College and was simply posted to cope with the administrative work of ED Cell.
She was repatriated to the College lateron.
The stand with regard to Shri Devinder Singh is that on 24121998, he was selected for the post of Clerk in the College and he joined as such on 24121998.
It is thus evident that the Board of Governors was wrongly informed that the two posts, namely, Junior Scale Stenographer or Peon were never filled up.
The posts were filled up at one time by appointment of Shri Prem Kumar and at another time Shri Devinder Singh was appointed.
24.
I am further of the view that once the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700/- has been revised to Rs. 12000-18300/- w.e.f.
1.1.1996 and the same scale has been given to the Assistant Professors working in the College w.e.f.
1121999, then there was no reason for denying the same pay scale to the petitioner.
The Board of Directors in its meeting held on 2321991 has redesignated the post of Sr. Project Leader as Assistant Professor.
In other words there was equation.
It may be true that the afore-mentioned recommendations were not implemented but the post was declared equivalent to that of Assistant Professor.
That itself is sufficient to conclude that the petitioner is entitled to the pay scale of Assistant Professor.
This view is fully supported by a judgement of this Court in the case of Dr. Sukhdev Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SLR 336 : 1991(2) SCT 209 (P&H) and a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India v. UOI, 1991(2) SLR 131 : 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC).
In fact an impression has been created that after filing of Civil Writ Petition No. 15371 of 2000, seeking payment of revised pay scale, respondent No. 5 Shri NPMehta who is Principal of the College has taken many steps which led to the filing of second petition, namely, Civil Writ Petition No. 4579 of 2002.
It is appropriate to mention that notice of motion was issued in the first petition on 11.1.2001.
Various steps which respondent No. 4, the Principal of the College has taken against the petitioner have already been detailed in the preceding paras of this judgment.
As a consequence, the petitioner suffered heart disease in August, 2001 and underwent open heart by-pass surgery on 28.9.2001.
His medical bills were not reimbursed nor his salary was paid.
However, he received his salary from July to October, 2001 on 13112001.
The petitioner appears to have passed through very hard time.
At this juncture, I am reminded of a judgment of the Supreme Court in PK Ramachandra Iyer and others v. Union of India, 1983(3) SLR 495.
In that case, the benefit of the revised pay scale was not granted to the incumbent already working on the post of by drafting some additional qualification which was found to be wholly irrational.
The posts of Professor of Animal Pathology, Animal Genetics and Veterinary Parasitology were advertised to fill up by direct recruitment.
The Supreme Court allowed the writ petition and noticed in paragraph 16 of the judgment the domestic atmosphere at the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and suicide committed by the Agriculture Scientists.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :-  "........Unfortunately, since its inception, the domestic atmosphere has not proved congenial to the flowering of the genius of the country's best talent in agricultural research.
This came to light when on May 5, 1972, newspapers all over the country flashed the tragic news that a young agricultural scientists, Dr. VH Shah who was working as Senior Agronomist and Associate Projector Co-ordinator in the IVRI had committed suicide by hanging himself in his residence the previous night.
There was a commotion in the Parliament and purring (during) the debate in the House, Members of Parliament regretfully referred to previous suicides committed by agricultural scientists, one such being of Dr. MI Joseph, Teaching Assistant, Division of Entomology, IARI who had committed suicide on January 5, 1960.
These were not stray incidents but the outcome of presecution, torture and harassment emanating from the polluted environment in ICAR and its affiliates.
The Chief Minister for Food and Agriculture stated in the Parliament that the Government of India was not happy with the procedure of selection of personnel in the ICAR and proceeded to inform the House that they have not been too happy with the present system of recruitment which necessitates a scientist applying for posts and being interviewed by selection committees throughout his working career because the system inevitably provides frequent occasions for disappointment leading to frustration.
Two decades thereafter we are constrained to note that the things have not improved at all.
The ICAR and the Institutes seem to be so backward in their approach to the members of the staff that as late as in 1983 considerable time of this Court was frankly wasted in disposing of the preliminary objection on behalf of the ICAR that it is not amenable to this Court's writ jurisdiction which would imply that they had skeletons to hide and shun their exposure to the Court's examination of the internal affairs....." The situation revealed by this case is also alarming and it appears that the petitioner has been harassed and haggard.
That does not augur well with our system.
The post of Assistant Professor (Electrical Engineering) is available with the College and the petitioner was given teaching load of regular academic course as is evident from the certificate Annexure P22 issued by the Chairman of the Electrical Engineering Department.
It reveals that the petitioner has been delivering eight lectures in three subjects and taking four tutorial periods.
25.
In view of the above discussion, both the writ petitions are allowed.
The petitioner is held entitled to the revised pay scale w.e.f.
1.1.1996 for the purposes of pay fixation in the pay scale of Rs. 12000-18300/- and the payment be made w.e.f.
1121999 as has been given to the Assistant Professors working in the Regional Engineering College-respondent No. 4.
The order dated 2822002 (Annexure P24) and the decision of the Board of Directors dated 19112001 on item No. 9426 (Annexure P.11) are quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to absorb the petitioner on the vacant post of Assistant Professor (Electrical Engineering).
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the writ petitions which is quantified at Rs. 10,000/- in each petition.
The needful shall be done within a period of two months from the date a copy of this order is received by the respondents.
Petitions allowed.