Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The challenge in this appeal is to the judgment and decree dated 2621983 passed by the Additional District Judge, Barnala, vide which the order of termination of the service of Smt. Ravinder Kumari respondent was held to be illegal and she was declared to be continued in service and entitled to all the benefits and privileges attached to the post of Lecturer.
2.
The short question that arises for determination by this Court is to the following effect :-  Whether the father could appoint his own daughter (respondent herein) on a post in the respondent-College, which was affiliated to and the grant to which were released by the Punjab University ?
3.
Indisputably, the facts of the case are that Smt. Ravinder Kumari plaintiff-respondent, was appointed as a Lecturer in Zoology vide letter dated 1171976 (Ex. P1) issued by the Principal of SD College, Barnala (for short `the College') on the basis of the selection made by the Selection Committee, and she joined the duties on 13.7.1976 and she was confirmed with effect from the said date.
She continued to work on the post of Lecturer until her services were terminated vide letter dated 1531979 by the Principal of the College.
She challenged her termination by filing a suit.
The defendants contested the suit.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Sub- Judge Ist Class, Barnala, framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff was appointed as a Lecturer in Zoology on 1171976 by the Selection Committee of the Managing Committee of the SD College, Barnala ?
.. .. .. .. OPP.
2.
Whether the order of termination of the plaintiffs services is null and void and is illegal and without jurisdiction ?
.. .. .. .. OPP.
3.
Whether the suit in the present form is not maintainable ?
.. .. .. .. OPP.
4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of parties ?
.. .. .. .. OPP.
5.
Whether the Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit ?
.. .. .. .. OPP.
6.
Relief.
4.
All the issues except issue No. 3 were decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants by the trial Court.
Ultimately, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the Sub Judge Ist Class, Barnala, as under issue No. 3 it was held that the suit for permanent injunction was not competent, particularly, when no specific relief to the effect that the plaintiff continued to be in service and was entitled to all the benefits, privileges and emoluments was claimed by her.
The appeal filed by Smt. Ravinder Kumari plaintiff was allowed by the Additional District Judge, Barnala, vide judgment and decree dated 2621983 and thus, issue No. 3 was also decided in favour of the plaintiff, and, consequently, the suit filed by the plaintiff was decreed in her favour.
Now the Managing Committee of the College has filed the present appeal to challenge the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, Barnala.
5.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of the respondents.
Smt. Ravinder Kumari Sain (respondent No. 1) was proceeded against ex parte vide order dated 991985 passed by this Court.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and have gone through the evidence adduced on record.
7.
It has been contended by Mr. LS Sidhu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, that in the present case Mr. Raghubir Parkash, who was the President of the Managing Committee of the College at the relevant time, appointed his own daughter, i.e., the plaintiff (Smt. Ravinder Kumari), as a Lecturer of the College.
The action of Mr. Raghubir Parkash in appointing his own daughter on the post of Lecturer is against the principles of natural justice and, on the basis, the appointment of Smt. Ravinder Kumari was void ab initio.
Further objection raised by the learned counsel is that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been barred under Section 8 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services of Employees) Act, and, thus, the Courts below have erred in deciding issue No. 5 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
Another objection raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the suit filed by the plaintiff was bad for non- joinder of necessary parties.
According to him, the Punjab University shared 90 per cent of the salary of the plaintiff-respondent, and, thus, it was a necessary party to be impleaded as a defendant.
Lastly, it has been argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that the suit for injunction was not maintainable and only a suit for declaration could lie against the defendant- appellant.
8.
I find merit in the conclusion raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
It has come on record that Shri Raghubir Parkash was the President of the Managing Committee of the College at the relevant time.
The appointment of the plaintiff-respondent was made by the Selection Committee headed by him.
Thus, the selection and subsequently the appointment of the plaintiff as a Lecturer is hit by the principles of natural justice.
It amounts to, that the selection and appointment of the plaintiff as a Lecturer was void ab initio.
The action which was void at the very initial stage could not be rectified subsequently.
9.
Moreover, the Punjab University did not consider the appointment of the plaintiff as valid as is clear from letter dated 9.12.1977, which has been adduced on the record as Ex. D6.
The relevant portion of the said letter is reproduced as under :-  "I am to inform you that the appointment of the said teacher (Mrs. Ravinder Kumari Sein) has not been made by the management of the College in line with the University rules and as such would not be considered valid....." 10.
Thus, the selection and appointment of the plaintiff as a Lecturer made by the Selection Committee of the College was illegal and cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
11.
There is also no dispute that 90 per cent burden of the salaries of the staff of the college is shared by the Punjab University.
The plaintiff had not impleaded the Punjab University as a defendant in the present suit.
The impleadment of the Punjab University as a defendant was necessary in the suit filed by the plaintiff.
Thus, the suit filed by the plaintiff was bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
Both the Courts below have erred in deciding issue No. 4 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
12.
Still further, it is the settled principle of law that where a statute provides a special remedy and bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, the remedy provided in the statute could only be availed of.
In the present case the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was specifically barred under Section 8 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services of Employees) Act, 1974.
When the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been barred under the said Act, the finding of the Courts below on issue No. 5 cannot be sustained.
13.
Lastly, the services of the plaintiff were terminated on 1531979.
She filed the present suit for issuing permanent injunction on 1931979; meaning thereby that when the suit was filed, the plaintiff was no more in the service of the College.
Thus, the suit for issuing permanent injunction was not maintainable and only a suit for declaration would lie.
As the suit for declaration had not been filed by the plaintiff, the findings of the lower appellate Court on issue No. 3 also cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
Consequently, I allow the present appeal and set aside the judgment and decree dated 2621983 passed by the Additional District Judge, Barnala.
The suit filed by the plaintiff stands dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.