HR Panwar, J - By the instant writ petition, petitioner seeks quashing the impugned order dated 10-11-1997 (Annx6); directing respondents to declare the result again after counting the name of Dr. RL Dayma in General Category and treat the petitioner to have been selected on the post of Assistant Professor in Orthopaedics in terms of the judgment of this Court dated 3011996 (Annx.5).
2.
Petitioner, who is a member of Scheduled Caste, has to his credit the qualifications of MBBS Degree and Master's Degree in Orthopaedics.
After being selected by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission (for short, "the Commission"), petitioner was appointed as Civil Assistant Surgeon in May, 1990.
Thereafter, in pursuance to the advertisement issued by the State Government, he applied for the post of Assistant Professor and on being selected, vide order dated 1841991 (Annx1), petitioner was appointed as Assistant Professor on urgent temporary basis and his term of appointment was extended upto 30695.
The Commission issued the advertisement dated 10121993 (Annx2) for selection to nine posts of Assistant Professors including two posts reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates; however the Commission did not hold the selections.
The Commission again issued an advertisement dated 29794 (Annx2) inviting applications for ten posts of Assistant Professors and it was specifically made clear that those who had applied in pursuance to earlier advertisement Annx2, need not apply again.
Vide notice Annx.4 dated 23895, the Commission fixed the date of screening as 1101995.
Petitioner challenged the order Annx.4 by way of filing SBCWP No 3101 of 1995 and this Court passed an interim order directing respondents to consider petitioner's case for selection on the post of Assistant Professor in Orthopaedics without subjecting him to screening.
Petitioner appeared for interview and his result was kept in sealed cover.
The result of the petitioner was produced in the Court on 30196 and it was found that he was selected and his name was placed in the merit list, therefore, the said writ petition was allowed vide order dated 30196 (Annex.5) and the respondent Commission was directed to declare the result of the petitioner and forward his name to the State Government for making appointment in accordance with law.
The special appeal filed by the respondents against the order Annx.5 stood dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 1751996.
On filing Special Leave Petition by the respondents, initially the Hon'ble Supreme Court granted interim order which was vacated on 2491997.
In terms of the order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Commission declared the result of those candidates which was withheld.
By that time, the number of posts increased to 15 and as per 16% reservation in favour of Scheduled Caste candidates, 3 posts were to be filled up by giving appointment to the candidates belonging to scheduled caste.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the respondent Commission, vide impugned order Annx6 dated 10111997, recommended the names of Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma and Dr. Babu Lal Khojiti as Scheduled caste candidates in the main list and Dr. Banwari Lal Chopra in the wait list as Scheduled Caste candidate and ignored the name of the petitioner.
Hence this writ petition.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4.
The main contention raised by the petitioner is that the total number or posts were 15 and as per reservation policy, 3 posts were reserved for scheduled caste candidates by applying roster system.
Petitioner's grievance is that the respondents have committed serious illegality in mentioning the name of Dr. RL Dayma in the impugned order Annx6 as a scheduled caste candidate whereas he was required to be adjusted as General Category candidate as he secured position in between the candidates placed at Serial No. 7 and 8 of the section list and on account of inclusion of name of Dr. RL Dayma in the list of reserved category candidates instead of General Category candidates, the name of the petitioner has wrongly been excluded from the select list.
5.
In reply, the respondents have come with the case that the petitioner was placed below Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma, Dr. Babu Lal Khajoti and Dr. Banwari Lal Chopra and as such he was not entitled to be selected.
The another stand taken by the respondents is that at the time of passing the order Annx.5 by this Court, the result of Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma and Dr. Babu Lal Khajoti were not available and as such the petitioner is not entitled to claim any benefit from the said order of this Court.
6.
There is no dispute to the factual matrix that the petitioner is a member of scheduled caste and possesses requisite qualification for appointment on the post of Assistant Professor in Orthopaedics.
Further, there is an order dated 3011996 (Annx.5) passed by this Court treating the petitioner as a selected candidate for the post in question and that order attained finality in view of the decisions of the Division Bench and the Apex Court and as such, the said finding would operate as res judicata in subsequent matters as held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Pawan Kumar Gupta v. Rochiram Nagdeo, 1999(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 646 : 1999(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 483 : AIR 1999 SC 1823.
Once the petitioner has been held validly selected, there could not be any departure from the said mode without any valid justification as held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Baba Charan Dass Udhasi v. Mahant Basant Das Babji Chela Baba Laxmandas Udasi Sadhu, (2000) 6 SCC 1.
Therefore, it was incumbent upon the respondents to strictly comply with the directions given by this Court vide order Annx.5, which became final and the same was not liable to be questioned by the Commission or the State Government.
Moreso, the stand taken by the respondents that they were not aware about the comparative merit of the petitioner vis-…-vis other candidates, is not easily gulpable as the results are placed in sealed cover after the same is prepared and not prior to that and at the time of preparation of result, merit of such candidates are definitely known to the Commission.
Thus, the respondents have committed serious illegalities in not appreciating the case of the petitioner in right perspective and on one pretext or the another, they have tried to over-look the judicial verdicts given in favour of the petitioner regarding his valid selection on the post of Assistant Professor in Orthopaedics.
7.
A perusal of impugned order Annx6 dated 10.11.97 shows that the merit list and reserve list declared on 20.12.95 had been modified and the names of Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma and Dr. Babu Lal Khajoti have been shown as selected candidates from main merit list of scheduled caste candidates and the name of Dr. Banwari Lal Chopra has been shown as a selected caste candidates.
A perusal of para 11 of the reply filed by the Commission shows that the marks secured by Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma, Dr. Babu Lal Khajoti and Dr. Banwari Lal Chopra were 54, 53 and 52 respectively whereas the petitioner secured 51 marks.
The respondents have come with the specific case that the name of petitioner stands after the names of these three persons.
There is no dispute that 3 posts were reserved for scheduled caste candidates.
The grievance of the petitioner is that Dr. RL Dayma secured position in between the candidates placed at serial number 7 and 8 of the General category but his name has been shown against the select list of scheduled caste candidate and had his name been shown in General Category, the petitioner would certainly be entitled for appointment in question.
8.
The respondents have not disputed the fact that the merit of Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma stands in between 7 and 8 of the list of General Category and had his name been shown in General Category, the petitioner would have been entitled for appointment.
The pertinent question arises for consideration is : whether the respondents were justified in placing the name of Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma in the select list of scheduled caste candidates?
9.
In RK Sabharwal & ors. v. State of Punjab & ors, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1371, a Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court held that reserve category candidates can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts, their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
The Hon'ble Apex Court further held that the prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of reserved class have already been appointed/promoted against general seats and despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the reserved category against the general category posts, the given percentage has to be provided in addition.
10.
In Union of India & ors. v. Virpal Singh, 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC) : JT 1995(7) SC 231, the Supreme Court held that while determining the said number of candidates belonging to the reserved category but selected/promoted on their own merit (and not by virtue of rule of reservation), shall not be counted as reserved category candidate.
11.
A coordinate Bench of this Court, in Mahesh Kumar & Anr. v. State of Rajasthan & Anr., 1998(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 125 : WLR 1998 Raj.
49, held that candidates belonging to O.B.C., if found to have been appointed as per seniority, he is to be treated to have been promoted/appointed from amongst general category, even though he belongs to O.B.C.
12.
In para 17 of the reply, the respondents have stated that since Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma belonged to scheduled caste, his selection was made against the post reserved for scheduled caste and according to the respondents, the mere fact that Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma was able to secure higher merit, he could not be treated as a candidate belonging to general category and thus his name could not have been placed in the list meant for general category.
There is no stand taken by the respondents that Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma did not stand in the merit, rather there is an admission to this effect that Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma was standing in merit.
Thus, there is an apparent error of law committed by the respondents in treating Dr. Ratan Lal Dayma as a selectee of reserved quota, whereas as per the merit secured by him, he ought to have been treated as a selectee under general category.
Since the merit of Dr. RL Dayma stood in between 7 and 8, he ought to have been promoted on his own merit in General category instead of reserved category for scheduled caste candidates.
If the name of Dr. RL Dayma is deleted from reserved category and placed in general category then indisputeably the petitioner can be appointed against reserved category posts.
The respondents have erred in law in treating Dr. RL Dayma as a selected candidate from amongst the reserved category candidates and on this count also, the impugned order Annx6 is liable to be quashed.
13.
There is yet another aspect of the matter, in pursuance to the interim order passed by this Court in earlier writ petition, petitioner appeared for interview and his result was kept in sealed cover.
The sealed cover was open and even as per the admission of the respondents' counsel, the petitioner was found duly selected and consequently the order Annx.5 was passed by this Court which stood affirmed even upto the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Respondent No. 2 was a party in the earlier writ petition and was well conversant with the order Annx.5 passed by this Court.
In view of the order Annx.5 dated 30196 passed by this Court holding petitioner validly selected and directing the Commission to recommend his name to the State Government for appointment, the petitioner did not apply for the post in question in subsequent recruitments held by the Commission vide advertisement Annx.7 dated 171997.
Since the Commission did not dispute and challenge the order Annx.5 on the ground that the petitioner has not been selected, in view of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Surya Narain Yadav & ors. v. Bihar State Electricity Board & ors., (1985) 3 SCC 38, now the respondents are estopped by the principles of equitable and promissory estoppel in saying that petitioner has not been selected for appointment to the post in question.
14.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed; the impugned order Annx6 is quashed and the respondents are directed the modify the select list in the light of above observations and provide appointment to the petitioner on the post of Assistant/Professor if he is otherwise eligible for the same, there shall be no order as to costs.
Stay petition stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.