GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for partially quashing award dated 9.1.1984 passed by Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana in Reference No. 3 of 1983.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Clerk under Kurali Urban Cooperative Bank Limited, Kurali, District Ropar (Respondent No. 1) some time in 1981.
His service was terminated on 1.11.1982 on the allegation of remaining absent in the month of July of that year.
He challenged the action of the employer on the ground of violation of the rules of natural justice and non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
3.
Vide award Annexure P.1, the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana declared that termination of the petitioner's service was illegal and ordered his reinstatement but without back wages.
Paragraph 8 of award Annexure P.1 and its operative portion which are relevant to the decision of this petition are reproduced below :-  "8.
The main point to be seen is that the workman was appointed by Shri Chattar Sain.
It was for the Department to take action against the said Shri Chattar Sain for making wrong appointment.
Once he had issued orders, then the appointment of the workman was legalised and regularised.
He could not be terminated in an arbitrary manner.
MW1 has not given the date when the workman joined his duty.
He has only mentioned the dates when he remained absent from duty.
Ex.W1 is the appointment order dated 17th October, 1981 issued to the workman by Shri Chattar Sain, Administrator of the respondent bank.
The workman had written to the management on 6th March, 1982 :- vide Ex.W2 his termination was illegal.
Ex.W3 is the letter issued to the Administrator by the respondent bank by the Labour Officer, Mohali and Ex.W4 is the copy of the settlement dated 19th April, 1982.
Ex.W9 is the termination order dated 2nd September, 1982 issue by Chattar Sain, Administrator of the respondent bank.
This conduct of the Chattar Sain, Administrator is inexplicable in such as he had firstly appointed the workman then entered into a statement before the Labour Officer and finally passed his termination order.
The reasons given in order Ex.W9 dated 2nd September, 1982 are that he was absent from duty.
It was as a measure of punishment.
The management was required to hold proper inquiry in the matter before terminating the services of the workman.
It appears that Administrator wanted to cover up his own lapse as the matter came up before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies that the Administrator was not competent to settle the dispute.
On this account he proceeded to terminate the services of the workman on flimsy grounds, without holding proper enquiry.
The workman has submitted his explanation Ex.W8.
Since the allegations had been denied, so the matter was required to be looked into through domestic enquiry before terminating his services.
The management did not pay him any compensation or notice pay while terminating him."
Relief : It is ordered that the workmen shall be reinstated with continuity of service, but he shall not be paid any back wages.
He shall report for duty within ten days of the enforcement of the award."
4.
The petitioner has averred that his service was terminated by respondent No. 1 without complying with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act') and even though this was proved before Labour Court, Ludhiana, the learned Presiding Officer while ordering his reinstatement denied the relief of back wages without assigning any reasons whatsoever.
5.
Notice of the writ petition has been duly served on the respondents, but no reply has been filed to controvert the averments contained in the writ petition.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
In my opinion, the petitioner is right in contending that the Labour Court has denied him back wages without any reasons and, therefore, to that extent, the impugned award should be quashed.
7.
In M/s Hindustan Tin Work Private Limited v. The Employees of M/s Hindustan Tin Works Private Limited, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 75, their Lordships of the Supreme Court considered the question whether the workman can be denied back wages even though the employer had not pleaded and proved that he was gainfully employed and held :  "Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
This is the normal rule.
Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer."
8.
This view was reiterated in GT Lad v. Chemicals and Fibres India Limited, 1979 Lab.IC 298.
9.
In Hari Palace v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala, 1979(3) PLR 720, a Full Bench of this Court considered the question whether back wages can be denied to a workman whose services are terminated in violation of the mandatory provisions contained in the Act and held that the relief of back wages which is necessary corollary to a declaration that termination of the services of the workman is illegal cannot be denied.
10.
In view of the law laid down in the above-mentioned decisions, it must be held that the learned Presiding Officer of Labour Court, Ludhiana committed a serious legal error by declining the relief of back wages to the petitioner and that too by ignoring the fact that respondent No. 1 had neither pleaded in the written statement nor any evidence was produced before the Labour Court that the petitioner was gainfully employed in the intervening period.
11.
Hence, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned award is set aside in so far as the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana declined the relief of back wages to the petitioner and it is held that he shall be entitled to full back wages for the period between the date of termination of service and the date of award.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to pay back wages to the petitioner within a period of 3 months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.