Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - This judgment shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2985 of 1984 and 434 of 1985 as they arise out of the same award of the Labour Court dated 30121983 by which reinstatement of the workman was ordered but back wages were denied.
2.
The Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (for short PRTC) has filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2985 of 1984 challenging the reinstatement of the workman whereas Civil Writ petition No. 434 of 1985 has been filed by the workman questioning the denial of back wages to him.
3.
The facts which led to the filing of the aforesaid two petitions are that the PRTC suspended the workman from the service of bus driver on the basis of complaints and thereafter he was charge-sheeted.
The workman had been found guilty of misbehaviour during working hours while he was under the influence of liquor.
The workman was also found guilty of wilfully slowing down the performance of work in the workshop and of failure to observe safety instructions.
It is further the allegation of the PRTC that the workman was found in possession of a knife while he was present in the premises of the said Corporation.
A departmental inquiry was held and charges against the workman were proved and consequently his services were terminated.
4.
The workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred under section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act') to the Labour Court, Patiala for adjudication.
The terms of the reference were as under :-  Whether termination of services of Sunder Singh, workman, is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?
5.
The Labour Court on the pleadings of the parties framed the following issues :-  (1) Whether the services of the workman were terminated after holding a fair and proper enquiry ?
(2) Whether the order of termination of the services of the workman is justified and in order ?
(3) Relief.
6.
The Labour Court recorded a finding that the workman had intentionally avoided to join enquiry and the Inquiry Officer was thus justified in holding an ex parte enquiry and the enquiry was held in a fair and proper manner.
However, by invoking the provisions of section 11-A of the Act, the Labour Court held that the order of termination of services of the workman was not justified and in order.
The Labour Court further held that the workman was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service but without back wages.
This is how, both the sides, feeling dissatisfied, have impugned award of the Labour Court in their respective petitions as indicated above.
7.
A perusal of the record shows that the matter was referred to the Lok Adalat in this Court for settlement between the parties.
The order dated 29102001 passed by the Lok Adalat reads as under :-  "CWP No. 2985 of 1984 is filed by PRTC against the award of the Presiding officer, Labour Court dated 30121983, by which reinstatement of the workman-respondent No. 2 was ordered but payment of backwages to him was denied.
PRTC questions the order of reinstatement.
CWP 434 of 1985 has been filed by the workman-petitioner questioning the same so far as denial of backwages to him is concerned.
It is not in dispute that the workman was reinstated in service way back in the year 1984.
There is no ground whatsoever of re-opening the matter to deal with the question of reinstatement of the workman.
However, as regards payment of backwages, we feel that in the interest of justice PRTC - the management petitioner in CWP 2985 of 1984 should agree to payment of 50% of backwages to the workman.
The matter is adjourned to 17.1.2001 to enable Mr. Harsh Aggarwal to get instructions with regard to the above proposal and also to let us know to what compromise PRTC is agreeable and what are its terms.
A copy of this order be supplied to Mr. Harsh Aggarwal for necessary action."
8.
It may be observed that the Lok Adalat in order to amicably settle the dispute between the parties had recorded that 50% of the backwages would meet the ends of justice, without going into the merits of the case.
However, on 1712002, as the learned counsel appearing for the PRTC had not agreed to the proposed order dated 29102001, the matter was back to this Court for decision.
It is, thus, the matter is before me for adjudication on merits.
9.
At the commencement of the hearing, Mr. Vikas Singh, learned counsel for the workman pointed out that the workman had been working in view of the status quo order dated 3081984 passed by this Court and he had since retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
He claimed that Civil Writ Petition No. 2985 of 1984 filed by the PRTC has thus, been rendered infructuous.
Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, learned counsel appearing for the PRTC has not been able to controvert the said assertion.
Accordingly, Civil Writ Petition No. 2985 of 1984 in view of the changed circumstances, as indicated above, is disposed of as infructuous.
10.
So far as Civil Writ Petition No. 434 of 1985 is concerned, Mr. Vikas Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner-workman therein contended that once the Labour Court had set aside the order of termination of service of the workman, it should have awarded backwages to the workman.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 P.L.R.
720 in support of his this contention.
11.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the PRTC submitted that the Labour Court had rightly denied the backwages to the workman in exercise of power under Section 11-A of the Act.
The findings recorded during inquiry proceedings were upheld by the Labour Court but the order of termination was set aside as in the opinion of the Labour Court, the punishment awarded to the workman was not commensurate to the act of his proved misbehaviour.
The counsel supported his argument on the strength of a decision of the Supreme Court in Zila Sahakari Kendriya Bank Mariyadit v. Jagdischandra and others, (2001) 3 Supreme Court Cases 332 : 2001(2) SCT 402 (SC).
12.
I have carefully examined the rival contentions of the parties.
It would be expedient to advert to the provisions contained in Section 11-A of the Act, which are to the following effect :-  "11A.
Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of discharge or dismissal of workman.
-- Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct re-instatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case may require : Provided that in any proceeding under this section the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall rely only on the materials on records and shall not take any fresh evidence in relation to the matter."
13.
The Labour Court by invoking the aforesaid provisions had reduced the quantum of punishment awarded to the workman i.e. from termination of his service to reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service, but without backwages.
The Labour Court was of the opinion that the punishment awarded to the workman was not commensurate with the charges against the workman.
The Labour Court had nowhere recorded any finding exonerating or absolving the workman of the charges proved against him by the inquiry officer.
On the other hand, the findings of the inquiry officer have been affirmed by the Labour Court.
14.
In Hari Palace case (supra), it was held that where services of the workman were held to be illegally terminated, then he would be entitled to full back wages except for the period he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That was not a case where provisions of section 11-A of the Act were attracted.
The Full bench in the above case was not considering the matter where by invoking the provisions of Section 11-A, the order of termination of services of the workman was converted into that of reinstatement.
In the instant case, the workman had not been absolved from the charges levelled against him but only the quantum of punishment of termination of service had been reduced and converted into that of reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service but without back wages.
The Full Bench decision in Hari Palace case (supra) is thus of no help to the workman.
15.
On the other hand, in Zila Sahakari Kendriya Bank Mariyadit's case (supra), the Supreme Court has held that where termination was set aside only on technical ground, the direction for granting back wages could not be legally sustained.
Thus, in the facts of the present case, the workman had been rightly denied the grant of back wages.
16.
No other point has been urged.
Resultantly, Civil Writ Petition No. 434 of 1985 is dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs in both these petitions.
Order accordingly.