JS Narang, J - The petitioner was appointed on December 5, 1981 as a mate on work-charge basis and as alleged continued to work as such upto February 1985.
His services had been changed from that of work charge to daily wage basis with effect from February 1985 but without any intimation or notice to the petitioner.
A representation was sent by him in the month of September 1985 to the Chief Engineer, Canal Department, Haryana, Chandigarh, and a prayer had also been made that his services be regularised as he has been working on work-charge basis.
The representation was not dealt with as no reply was received by him.
However, the Chief Engineer directed vide communication dated July 31, 1986 that the Executive Engineer, Rohtak, may settle the grievance of the petitioner and in pursuant thereto the Sub- Divisional Officer, Canal Lining Sub-Divisional and ADE Rohtak was directed by the Executive Engineer vide communication dated September 8, 1986, to look into the grievance.
2.
The petitioner was surprised to find that his services had been terminated with effect from August 7, 1987 without any notice or any retrenchment compensation or any enquiry having been conducted by the management.
Against this act, the representation was filed on August 25, 1987 and that the petitioner continued to represent to the authorities with the request of reinstatement and back wages accordingly.
3.
It is an admitted fact that a demand notice dated 1122000, under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), was served upon the management which was contested.
However, a reference was made by the Competent Authority to the Labour Court vide order dated September 26, 2000.
4.
The petitioner filed a statement of claim which has been duly contested by the management by way of submitting a detailed written statement.
The stand of the management is that the petitioner has not worked continuously for 240 days in 12 calendar months preceding to the date of alleged termination i.e., August 7, 1987.
The detail of his working period has been spelt out in para 1 of the written statement.
The parties led documentary as well as ocular evidence before the Labour Court.
The stand taken by the management is that even if the alleged statement of the workman is accepted as correct to the effect that he had worked continuously with effect from October 1, 1986 to August 5, 1987 but the industrial dispute has been raised after a period of about 13 years.
Thus, by no stretch of imagination the claim can be entertained as the demand has become absolutely stale and is not worth consideration.
Thus, in view of the dicta of the apex Court, the reference deserves to be rejected and the claim of the petitioner dismissed accordingly.
This argument has weighed with the Labour Court and resultantly by virtue of award dated October 14, 2003, the reference has been answered in the negative i.e. against the workman.
5.
The petitioner being dissatisfied has made the afore-stated award subject matter of challenge before this Court.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the Apex Court has expressed its opinion on a number of occasions that the provisions of Limitation Act, are not applicable to the proceedings under the Act and that even if the claim of the workman suffers from delay and laches the relief should be moulded accordingly, such as by way of declining the back wages.
He has placed reliance upon the following judgments :  1.
Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society and another, 1999(2) RSJ 407 : 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC); 2.
Mahavir Singh v. UP State Electricity Board, 2000(1) SCT 353; and 3.
Gurmail Singh v. Principal, Government College of Education and others, 2000(2) RSJ 147.
7.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has argued that the Apex Court has categorically opined vide a judgment rendered in re : The Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty and others, AIR 2000 Supreme Court 839 : 2000(1) SCT 1088 (SC) whereby it has been held to the effect that the stale demands should not be entertained especially when the act and conduct of the workman does not justify the reasons for the delay which has occurred.
He has also drawn our attention to a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in re : Parkash Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(2) SLR 95, wherein it has been observed that if no justifiable reasons have been given by the workman for explaining the delay, the stale demands should not be entertained.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the pleadings and also the documentary evidence appended as annexures, we are of the view that the petition merits dismissal.
The petitioner has not been able to explain the delay of 13 years, which stands admitted on the face of it from the facts which have been averred.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show to us any explanation must less reasonable explanation rendered by the petitioner before any forum i.e. while issuing demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act and also while filing the statement of claims before the Labour Court, as such, we are unable to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
9.
In view of the dicta of the apex Court and judgments of this Court, we find no reason to interfere in the award dated 14102003 impugned before us.
Resultantly the petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.