Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of two revision petitions being Civil Revision Nos. 1992 and 1993 of 2003 as both the revision petitions have arisen out of identical facts and similar orders passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are taken from Civil Revision No. 1992 of 2003.
2.
Respondent-workman Nasib Singh was working as a Peon with the management.
He was appointed in the aforesaid capacity for a period of 89 days on daily wage basis vide order dated January 27, 1995.
His services were terminated with effect from October 4, 1997.
He claimed that the aforesaid termination of his service was illegal and as such raised an industrial dispute.
The matter was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala.
3.
During the course of reference proceedings, the workman filed his claim statement.
The management filed its reply.
Issues were framed.
Thereafter, workman concluded his evidence.
The management failed to produce its evidence despite large number of opportunities given to it.
Subsequently, one Balwinder Singh who was a Clerk to the Block Development and Panchayat Officer appeared before the Court and stated that Block Development and Panchayat Officer had refused to appear in the court and give his statement.
On the aforesaid statement of Balwinder Singh, the defence of the management was struck off vide order dated October 1, 2002.
4.
Subsequently, the management filed an application before the Labour Court to recall the order dated October 1, 2002.
It was averred in the application that the aforesaid Balwinder Singh Clerk who had been deputed to follow the proceedings in the case had connived with the workman and had never informed the concerned officer about the pendency of the case and the fact that the same was fixed for evidence of the management.
It was also specifically averred that, at no stage, the Block Development and Panchayat Officer had refused to appear in the Court and the aforesaid statement had been made by the Clerk of his own.
On coming to know the aforesaid fact, an application was filed for recall of the order.
The aforesaid application was duly supported by an affidavit of Shri Balbir Singh, Block Development and Panchayat Officer.
It was averred in the application that departmental proceedings would be initiated against the defaulting person.
The aforesaid application was contested by the workman.
It was claimed by the workman that not even a single witness had been examined by the management inspite of many opportunities having been given to the management.
5.
The learned Labour Court vide its order dated January 23, 2003 has dismissed the application filed by the applicant-management.
6.
The management has now felt aggrieved and has approached this Court through the present revision petitions.
7.
I have heard Ms. Mamta Singla, the learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana and Shri R.P.
Vig, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 and with their assistant have also gone through the record of the case.
8.
A detailed narration of the facts noticed above would clearly show that a specific averment was made by the BDPO, which was supported by an affidavit of the Officer concerned, that the Clerk Balwinder Singh had connived with the workman.
Because of the aforesaid fact he had made a statement that the BDPO had refused to appear in the Court as a witness.
The said statement of the aforesaid Clerk not only appears to be improbable but has been specifically denied by the BDPO through the averments made in the application and the affidavit.
It is no doubt true that the BDPO has been negligent in prosecuting the proceedings before the Labour Court.
A question necessarily arises as to whether it was because of the fact that the management i.e. the office of the BDPO itself was not taking any action or because of said connivance of Balwinder Singh.
9.
At this stage, it may not be relevant to go into the aforesaid question.
Suffice it to note that the State Government, like any other litigant, has to be properly and duly defended.
If, at any point of time, the State Government has not been duly defended because of some negligence of its officials or because of connivance of some of its official/officials with the opposite party, then the court has to step in to see that no advantage is allowed to be taken by the other side because of the aforesaid negligence.
It might not be out of place to even state that the position of the State Government is like that of a perpetual minor.
The court has to act as a guardian of such a minor.
Public interest has to be watched by the Court.
As and when some official of the State is found to be remiss in his duty, then for such a default the interest of the State Government cannot be allowed to suffer.
10.
In this view of the matter, the present revision petitions are allowed and after setting aside the order dated January 23, 2003, the order dated October 1, 2002 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court striking off the defence of the management is also set aside subject to payment of Rs. 10,000/- as costs.
The costs would be a condition precedent for permitting the management to prosecute the proceedings before the learned Labour Court.
The aforesaid costs after payment by the management would be recoverable from the official/officials found guilty of negligence/default.
The learned Presiding Officer shall now afford two effective opportunities to the petitioner-management to lead its entire evidence at its own responsibility and without the assistance of the Court.
If the costs are not paid or the evidence is not concluded by the management on the aforesaid two dates, then the present revision petition shall be deemed to have been dismissed.
Petitions allowed.