NK Sud, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Bathinda dated 1781982 dismissing the appeal of the appellants against the judgment and decree dated 30.7.1981 passed by the Sub Judge 1st Class, Bathinda.
2.
The respondent-plaintiff had filed a suit for permanent injunction for restraining the defendant-appellants from effecting recovery from him to the tune of Rs. 988710 in pursuance of orders dated 3071976 and 11.10.1979 passed by appellants No. 2 and 3, respectively.
3.
The respondent was working as an Inspector, Food and Civil Supplies, Ram Pura Phul, District Bathinda.
During his tenure, some theft had taken place in respect of which he was challaned under Sections 457/380/409 of the Indian Penal Code.
In the criminal proceedings, he was acquitted vide order dated 27.10.1973 passed by the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Bathinda as all the prosecution witnesses had resiled from their earlier statements.
Thereafter, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him and he was held responsible for the theft.
Appellant No. 2 vide order dated 3071976 held the respondent responsible for the theft and ordered for the recovery of Rs. 988710 from him.
Respondent filed an appeal which was dismissed by appellant No. 3 vide order dated 24.9.1979.
Respondent in his suit claimed that in view of the fact that, he had been honourably acquitted in the criminal proceedings, no departmental action could be taken against him and therefore, he was not liable to the sum of Rs. 988710 as demanded by the appellants.
This contention was accepted by the trial Court.
The trial Court also overruled the objection of the appellants about the suit being barred by time.
The trial Court was of the view that since the orders imposing penalty on the respondent were void ab initio, they did not need to be set aside and, therefore, had to be ignored.
Thus, according to him, there was no period of limitation prescribed for the present suit.
Not satisfied, the appellants filed an appeal before the Additional District, Judge, Bathinda which has been dismissed vide the impugned order dated 1781982 upholding the findings of the trial Court.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties.
I would first deal with the question of limitation because if the appellants succeed on that ground, nothing else will survive.
5.
The contention of the appellants that the suit was filed after the period of limitation has been rejected on the ground that the order of the Director dated 3071976 was void ab initio and had no legal existence and, thus, the period of limitation was of no consequence.
This finding is clearly contrary to the law laid down by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh, Ashok Kumar, 1991(3) SCT 91 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 2219, wherein it has been held that it cannot be said that there is no limitation for instituting a suit for declaration by a dismissed or discharged employee on the ground that the dismissal or discharge was void or inoperative.
The Court in paras 5 and 6 has observed as under :  " ......... For the purpose of these cases, we may assume that the order of dismissal was void, inoperative and ultra vires, and not voidable.
It an Act is void or ultra vires it is enough for the Court to declare it so and it collapses automatically.
It need not be set aside.
The aggrieved party can simply seek a declaration that it is void and not binding upon him.
A declaration merely declares the existing state of affairs and does not 'quash' so as to produce a new state of affairs.
6.
But none the less the impugned dismissal order has at least a de facto operation unless and until it is declared to be void or nullity by a competent body or Court.
In Smith v. East Ellore Rural District Council, (1956) AC 736 at p. 769 Lord Redcliffe observed :  "An order even if not made in good faith is still an act capable of legal consequences.
It bears no brand of invalidity upon its forehead.
Unless the necessary proceedings are taken at law to establish the cause of invalidity and to get it quashed or otherwise upset, it will remain as effective for its ostensible purpose as the most impeccable of orders."
Similar view has been expressed by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and another v. Amrik Singh, 1999(3) SCT 668 (SC) : (1998) 9 Supreme Court Cases 696.
6.
Mr. Mann, learned counsel for the respondent, fairly conceded that in view of the aforesaid judgments of the Supreme Court, the findings of the courts below on the question of limitation can not be sustained and that the suit was barred by time.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed, the order of the Additional District Judge, Bathinda dated 1781982 and that of the Sub Judge 1st Class, Bathinda dated 30.7.1981 are set aside and the suit of the respondent- plaintiff is dismissed as time barred.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.