SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This order shall dispose of four writ petitions i.e. CWP Nos. 834 of 2003, 4106 of 2003, 8408 of 2003 and 18455 of 2002.
For facility of reference, facts as pleaded in Civil Writ Petition No. 834 of 2003 shall be referred to.
2.
Respondent No. 2 Wazir Singh had been employed in the petitioner-Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar on daily wages as a Chowkidar/Security Guard w.e.f.
21.12.1995 through verbal order on his request.
This appointment was, however, subsequently terminated when it came to the notice of petitioner that Haryana Government had banned the appointment on daily wages.
Respondent No. 2 was subsequently appointed on contract basis for 60 days from 271997 to 3081997 through appointment letter No. EN-11197/29130 dated 2171997.
Even this appointment of respondent No. 2 was a back door entry as the vacancy was never published in any newspaper nor he was employed through the Employment Exchange.
In the meantime, the petitioner advertised the vacancies for all the posts of Security Guard for regular appointment.
Respondent No. 2 applied for the post of Security Guard.
He was not selected for regular appointment.
The regularly selected candidates joined the service.
The services of respondent No. 2 were terminated on the basis of the condition that he is appointed for a fixed period of 60 days or till regular selection is made by the petitioner.
Consequently, on 2981997, the term of appointment of respondent No. 2 ended by efflux of time.
Not satisfied, the respondent No. 2 filed a demand notice on 691997 on the basis of which the appropriate Government by letter dated 15.6.1999 referred the industrial dispute to the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cumn-Labour Court, Hisar.
Respondent No. 1 under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, "the Act").
The Labour Court framed the following issues :-  1) Whether the termination of services of Wazir Singh is justified and in order ?
If not, along with reinstatement, to what amount of back wages, he is entitled to ?
2) Whether the respondent is guilty of unfair labour practice, as alleged ?
3) Whether the petitioner was engaged on contract basis and termination falls u/s 2(oo) (bb) of ID Act ?
4) Whether the respondent is not 'industry' ?
5) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction ?
6) Whether the petitioner has no locus-standi, as alleged ?
7) Relief."
3.
After the parties led their evidence, the Labour Court has come to the conclusion that since the workman had completed 240 days, his services could not have been terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
It has also been held that merely because the respondent No. 2 had accepted the unreasonable conditions contained in the appointment letter would not dis-entitle the workman from claiming the relief under the Act.
In coming to the aforesaid conclusion, the Labour Court relied on the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Bhikhu Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court- cum-Industrial Tribunal, Rohtak, 1998(1) RSJ 703 and held that the petitioner-University had indulged in "unfair labour practice".
The Labour Court has also relied on the judgment delivered in the case of The State of Punjab and others v. Yash Pal and another, 2000(2) SCT 882 (P&H) : 2000(3) RSJ 1 to hold that it was for the petitioner to prove that respondent No. 2 could not be granted any relief as the matter was squarely covered under Section 2(oo)(bb).
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner is a newly set-up University.
At the initial stage some adhoc/temporary appointments had been made.
Respondent No. 2 was one of those employees, who had been appointed on contract basis.
His services had, therefore, come to an end by the efflux of time and no relief could have been granted to him under the Act.
He further submitted that services of a large number of employees, who were similarly situated as respondent No. 2, had been terminated by the petitioner.
In each case, an industrial dispute was raised and the workman had been ordered to be reinstated by the Labour Court.
Therefore, the petitioner had filed a large number of writ petitions challenging the individual awards.
These were 21 writ petitions.
A Division Bench of this Court, by an order dated April 1, 2003 has allowed the writ petitions and the impugned award(s) of the Labour Court have been set-aside.
The main judgment has been delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 180 of 2003, Guru Jambheshwar University, Hissar v. Sat Pal Singh and another, 2003(3) S.C.T.
857.
5.
In Sat Pal's case (supra), the Division Bench of this Court was dealing with writ petitions filed in identical cases.
In those cases, it has been held as under :-  " We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the writ petition and are of the view that the impugned award cannot be sustained.
As is clear from the facts noticed above, the workman had been engaged on daily wages and thereafter on contractual basis pending regular selection to the post of a Clerk.
He participated in the regular selection but failed to qualify even in the typing test.
He was, therefore, not selected.
When the regularly selected persons were appointed the services of the workman were terminated.
We are clearly of the view that such a termination was in accordance with the terms contained in the letter of appointment.
Such a termination falls within exception contained in Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act and, therefore, it did not amount to 'retrenchment' within the meaning of the Act.
In this view of the matter, the Labour Court grossly erred in law in holding that the termination amounted to retrenchment and that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act had to be complied with.
As already observed, the termination of the services of the workman was in terms of the stipulation contained in the letter of appointment and, therefore, it was outside the ambit of retrenchment.
This being so, there was no question of complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
The findings recorded by the Labour Court are contrary to the plain language of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act and cannot, therefore, be sustained."
These observations are fully applicable to the facts of the present writ petitions.
6.
It is a matter of record that the appointment of respondent No. 2 was without following any known procedure for selection and appointment.
He had obviously been given appointment for a fixed period till the regular selections car be made.
The appointment order clearly speaks as under  "Sub : Contractual Appointment.
The Vice-Chancellor is pleased to engage you as Security Guard on contract basis for a period of 60 days w.e.f.
2797 upto 30897 on the rates approved by the Deputy Commissioner.
This engagement shall not entitle you to claim regularisation of service or regular pay scale.
Further, it is made categorically clear that in case of vacancy having been filled up by normal procedure before the expiry of period of above contract, you shall cease to be in position forthwith."
The aforesaid condition makes it abundantly clear that the appointment was on contract basis.
It was also only made till the vacancies are filled up on regular basis.
The appointment itself being contractual in nature was liable to come to an end by the efflux of time or on appointment of candidates on regular basis.
In such circumstances, we are unable to accept the submission made on behalf of respondent No. 2/workman that the termination of service was in violation of Section 25F of the Act.
In view of the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act, the protection of Section 25-F would not be available to respondent No. 2.
In view of the above, these petitions are allowed.
The impugned awards of the Labour Court are set-aside and the orders passed by the petitioner-University terminating the services of the workmen are upheld.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.