NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of nine Writ Petitions Nos. 9652, 9654, 9707, 12304, 12311, 12421, 12442, 13870 and 15712 of 2003 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
Since arguments were addressed in CWP 9652 of 2003, we are taking facts from this case.
2.
Ram Lal-respondent had been working as sweeper with the Municipal Council, Panipat on daily wages.
It is alleged that he was in the employment of the Council from 111988 to 15.8.1996 and that his services were terminated without notice or any charge sheet and that the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act) had not been complied with.
It was further alleged by the workman that he had completed 240 days of service in every calendar year.
The workman also pleaded that after the termination of his services some persons who had been employed after had been retained and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25H of the Act had been violated.
He raised an industrial dispute regarding his termination and the same was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court, Panipat under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
The dispute referred was whether the termination of the services of the workman was in order and justified and if not to what relief was he entitled.
On receipt of the reference notice was issued to the management which put in appearance before the Labour Court and contested the reference.
In its written statement the pleas taken by the workman were controverted and it was alleged that he had not completed 240 days in any of the calendar years and not even in the 12 months preceding the date when his services were terminated.
Pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues :  1.
As per the terms of reference ?
OPP 2.
Whether claim statement is bad on account of mis-joinder and non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPM 3.
Whether the petitioner is estopped by his own act and conduct from filing the preset claim ?
OPM 4.
Relief.
In support of issue No. 1 the workman appeared as his own witness and stated that he had been employed as sweeper on a monthly salary of Rs. 1500/- and that his services had been wrongly terminated and that the provisions of Section 25F of the Act had been violated.
In order to substantiate the plea that he had worked for 240 days in every calender year, he summoned the record from the management.
However, the record was not produced and a statement was made on behalf of the management that the record would be produced at the time when the management produces its evidence.
The fact of the matter is that when the management led its evidence, it did not produce the relevant record.
A witness did appear on its behalf who stated that the workman had worked only for 23 days in the 12 months preceding the dated of his termination and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25F of the Act were not attracted.
No other evidence was led and there is on record only the statement of the workman to the effect that he had worked for 240 days in the 12 months preceding the date of his termination and also statement on MW-1 who stated to the contrary.
The Labour Court drew an adverse inference against the management and recorded a finding that the workman had completed 240 days of service.
The finding recorded by the Labour Court in this regard is in para-8 of the award, the relevant part of which is reproduced hereunder :  "In this case, the workman has claimed that he has worked from 1188 to 16.8.96 continuously in the management and while terminating his services, no notice pay and retrenchment compensation was given after terminating his services, new persons were employed.
On the other hand, witness of the management MW-1 has stated that the workman has not worked for 240 days in the last 12 months and no seniority list was maintained by the management.
There is no doubt that the total working days is to be proved by the workman in this case but the plea of the workman is that after terminating his services, junior person was employed is not specifically denied by the management.
The management has only taken a plea that there is no seniority list of daily wagers maintained by the management.
Witness of the management WW-2 who was summoned with the record by the workman has failed to produce the record despite his undertaking given in his statement WW-2 that he will produce the service record in the evidence of the management but no record has been produced in the evidence of the management."
The Labour Court also found that the provisions of Section 25H of the Act had been violated.
Consequently, the reference was decided in favour of the workman and against the management and the order of termination set aside.
The management was directed to reinstate the workman with continuity of service and full back wages with effect from the date of the demand notice i.e. 25.8.1996.
It is against this award that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  3.
Notice of this petition was issued to the respondent.
Respondent No. 2 is the only contesting respondent who is represented by Mrs. Abha Rathore, Advocate.
She has stated that she does not wish to file any written statement and that she would argue the case on the basis of the findings recorded by the Labour Court.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that the interest of justice requires that after allowing the parties to lead evidence a proper finding be recorded as to whether the workman had completed 240 days or not.
It is true that the management failed to produce evidence before the Labour Court and in the absence of any evidence on the record grave injustice can be said to have been caused because the management along with the writ petition has placed before as the copies of the muster-rolls showing the presence of the workman on days when he worked.
If this is the correct version of the muster-rolls the workman had obviously not put in 240 days of service in any of the calendar years.
Be that as it may, it is not for us to decide this issue.
As already observed, the Labour Court recorded a finding in favour of the workman only on the basis of adverse inference drawn against the management.
We are not satisfied with the findings recorded by the Labour Court only on the basis of adverse inference in the light of the documents which the management has now produced.
We, therefore, set aside the finding of the Labour Court and remand the case to the Labour Court, Panipat with a direction to the management to produce the record which was summoned by the workman during the course of the proceedings.
5.
Before concluding we may also take note of another aspect of the matter.
The Labour Court has recorded a finding that the provisions of Section 25H of the Act had been violated.
This finding, in our opinion, is without any material on the record.
The workman in its statement of claim had made a bald assertion that person junior to him had been retained in service and some had been employed thereafter.
No particulars had been mentioned of the persons so retained or employed and, therefore, the management could not effectively controvert the plea and the Labour Court was not justified in recording the finding without there being any material in this regard.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in setting aside that finding of the Labour Court as well.
Since the case is being remanded, it will be open to the parties to take all such pleas which are available to them and lead evidence in support of their respective claims.
6.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed, impugned awards of the Labour Court, Panipat set aside and the case remanded to the Labour Court, Panipat for deciding the references afresh after allowing the parties to lead evidence in support of their respective pleas.
Since the management was remiss in not producing evidence before the Labour Court, it shall pay costs to the workman which are assessed at Rs. 20000/- in all in this bunch of nine writ petitions which will be proportionately shared by all the workmen.
The parties through their counsel have been directed to appear before the Labour Court, Panipat on 1122003 for further proceedings.
The Labour Court is directed to expeditiously dispose of the reference preferably within six months from the date when the parties appear before it.
Petition allowed.