NK Sodhi, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against the judgment dated 5.4.1984 passed by a learned single Judge allowing Civil Writ Petition 668 of 1982 whereby a direction was issued to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala (for short the Commission) to declare the result of Barinder Singh respondent (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) without taking into account his result of the viva voce test and only on the basis of his performance in the written examination.
The State Government was further directed to consider his case for appointment to one of the posts reserved for the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel (hereinafter called the released personnel) which were lying vacant.
2.
Shorn of the unnecessary details brief facts which are necessary for the disposal of the appeal may first be noticed.
3.
By an advertisement issued on January 20, 1979, the Commission invited applications from eligible candidates to fill up 64 vacancies in the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services through a competitive examination.
13 out of these vacancies were reserved for the released personnel who joined military service after 1111962 but before 10.1.1968 and we are concerned only with these vacancies in the present appeal.
Petitioner who joined the Indian Army on April 24, 1970 and was discharged therefrom on April 26, 1978 on account of a medical disability applied for one of the posts reserved for the released personnel.
Since the petitioner had not joined military service before 10.1.1968, he was not considered eligible for a post reserved for the released personnel and was instead treated as a candidate belonging to the general category.
He then filed Civil Writ Petition 2587 of 1980 in this Court which was allowed by a learned single Judge on April 20, 1981 and a direction was issued to the respondents therein including the Commission and the State Government to consider the case of the petitioner against the posts reserved for the released personnel.
4.
Recruitment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) is governed by the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter called the Rules).
According to these Rules, a candidate has to take the competitive examination in five compulsory subjects namely, English Essay, Punjabi (in Gurmukhi script), General knowledge and viva voce.
The viva voce test carries 200 marks and the total marks for all these subjects including viva voce are 525.
In addition to the compulsory subjects, a candidate is required to take examination in three optional subjects as well.
It is common case of the parties that candidates applying for posts reserved for released personnel are not required to appear in the optional subjects and that they have to appear in the examination only in the compulsory subjects.
Petitioner appeared in the competitive examination in all the compulsory subjects and also in three optional subjects though he was not required to appear in those subjects.
In pursuance to the directions issued by this Court in CWP 2587 of 1980, the case of the petitioner was considered for one of the posts reserved for the released personnel.
Since he did not obtain 45% marks in the aggregate in all the compulsory subjects including viva voce, he was informed by the Secretary of the Commission by his letter dated 2271981 (Annexure P-4 with the writ petition) that he had not qualified in the competitive examination and therefore, the Commission was unable to recommend his name for appointment to the service.
It is against this communication that the petitioner filed CWP 668 of 1982 out of which the present appeal has arisen.
5.
The primary contention that was advanced before the learned single Judge was that the total marks for the compulsory subjects including viva voce were 525 and that 200 marks assigned for the viva voce examination were highly excessive leading to arbitrariness in the selection of the candidates and, therefore, the action of the respondents in not selecting the petitioner was liable to be quashed.
A direction was sought that the case of the petitioner be considered for selection to the service against a post reserved for the released personnel and that the respondents therein (now appellants) be directed to keep a justiciable ratio of the marks between the written examination and the viva voce test.
The learned single Judge relying on the observation made by the Apex Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others, AIR 1981 SC 487 and also on the observations made by a Division Bench of this Court in Subhash Chander Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(1) SLR 165, observed that the allocation of marks for the oral interview was highly excessive leading to arbitrariness.
The learned single Judge also held that the allocation of 200 marks for the viva voce test out of a total of 525 was clearly illegal.
The action of the Committee in not selecting the respondent was held to be unsustainable in law.
The writ petition was allowed and a direction issued to the Commission to declare the result of the petitioner without taking into account the result of the viva voce test and only on the basis of his performance in the written papers.
The State Government was then directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment to one of the posts reserved for the released personnel which were lying vacant.
It may be mentioned that against the 13 posts reserved for the released personnel, only six candidates had been selected and seven seats remained unfilled.
Hence, this appeal by the State of Punjab and the Commission.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the present case and even on the basis of the findings as recorded by the learned Single Judge, the direction issued by him to the State of Punjab and the Commission cannot be sustained.
Clause 4 of Appendix III to the Rules reads as under :-  "No candidate shall be considered to have qualified in the main competitive examination unless he obtains at least 45 per cent marks in the aggregate in all subjects including viva voce except in the case of any main competitive examination for which this percentage has been lowered to not less than 40 per cent by the Commission under the proviso to regulation 3 in which case the qualifying percentage shall be as determined by the Commission."
The compulsory subjects and the maximum marks fixed for each subject at the relevant time when the petitioner took the examination were as under :-  Sr.No.
Compulsory Subjects Maximum Marks 1.
English 100 2.
English Essay 50 3.
Punjab (in Gurmukhi script) 75 4.
General Knowledge 100 5.
Viva Vice 200 Total 525 Even if one were to assume that the total percentage of marks allocated for the viva voce examination was highly excessive and more than the limit prescribed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia's case (supra) and Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, 1985(3) SLR 200, we are clearly of the view that the direction as issued by the learned single Judge directing the Commission to declare the result of the petitioner without taking into account the marks obtained by him in the viva voce test could not be issued.
Similarly, the State Government could not be directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the service against a post reserved for the released personnel when he did not obtain 45% marks in the aggregate of all the compulsory subjects including viva voce.
A reading of Clause 4 of Appendix III to the Rules reproduced hereinabove makes it abundantly clear that no candidate shall be considered to have qualified in the main competitive examination unless he obtains at least 45% marks in the aggregate in all the compulsory subjects including viva voce.
It is common ground between the parties that the petitioner did not obtain 45% in the aggregate and, therefore, he did not qualify in the main competitive examination.
Moreover, when the learned Single Judge recorded a finding that the total marks allotted to the viva voce test were highly excessive so as to be arbitrary, the only direction which could be issued to the Commission and the State Government was to lower the marks in the viva voce test and increase those for the written examination so as to bring the ratio in accordance with the percentage fixed by the Apex Court ion Ajay Hasia's case (supra) and Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) and then a further direction should have been issued to the respondents in the writ petition to hold the examination afresh.
Since this was not done, we have no option but to set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The view taken we have taken finds support from the judgment of the Apex Court in Madhukar Bakru Pingal v. Shri Rajendra D Gaikwad and others, 1995(6) SLR 45.
7.
There is yet another reason why the petitioner should be non-suited.
The advertisement was issued by the Commission in January, 1979 and it was known to all concerned including the petitioner that recruitment would be governed by the Rules which prescribe a total of 525 marks in the aggregate including 200 marks for the viva voce test.
If the petitioner felt aggrieved with the excessive allotment of marks for the viva voce test, he should have approached this Court before the examination was held so that appropriate directions could be given to the Commission and the State Government but instead he sat in the competitive examination and took a chance of being selected therein.
Having failed to get himself selected he turned around to challenge the selection on the ground that the marks allotted for the viva voce test were highly arbitrary.
Since he appeared in the examination and partcipated in the selection process, he cannot be allowed to turn around and challenge the selection.
Reference in this regard may be made to the observations made by the Supreme Court in Madan Lal and others v. The State of Jammu & Kashmir and others, 1995(2) S.C.T.
880 : 1995(2) SLR 209 and Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan & others, 1998(1) SCT 631 (SC) : 1998(1) SLR 612.
8.
Before concluding we may take notice of another submission made by the learned State counsel.
He strenuously urged before us that 200 marks allotted for the viva voce test were not excessive and were reasonable keeping in view the nature of the selection to be made.
He referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in CP Kalra v. Air India through its Managing Director, Bombay and others, 1991(3) SCT 134 (Delhi) : 1993(7) SLR 1, Anzar Ahmed v. State of Bihar and others, 1994(1) SCT 483 (SC) : 1994(1) RSJ 557 and Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan & others, 1998(1) SLR 612.
He tried to distinguish Ajay Hasia's case (supra) by contending that it pertains to admissions to educational institutions and not for selection to administrative services.
Since we have held that the directions issued by the learned Single Judge in the context of the present case were contrary to law and could not be issued, it is not necessary for us to examine the merits of this contention raised by the learned State counsel.
We, therefore, make it clear that we have not examined the issue as to whether 200 marks for the viva voce test in the fact and circumstances of the present case were reasonable or not.
Moreover, the Rules now stand amended.
9.
In the result, the appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge set aside and CWP 668 of 1982 dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.