SS Saron, J - This appeal has been filed by the appellant-State of Punjab against judgment and decree dated 221980 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar, whereby appeal of the State had been dismissed.
2.
Tarlok Singh plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 2741976 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Tarn Taran, whereby his services have been discontinued was wrong, cryptic, capricious and against the principles of natural justice.
3.
The learned trial Court vide its judgement dated 2451978 decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent.
The appellant-State filed an appeal before learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar, which was entrusted to learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar who dismissed the same vide his judgment and decree dated 221980.
It is against the said judgment and decree that the present regular second appeal has been filed.
4.
The facts of the case are that the bus of plaintiff-respondent in which he was a Conductor, was inspected on 9.6.1974 while it was on its way from Tanda to Dasuya on Amritsar-Talwara route.
During the checking of the bus, the Inspector found that as many as 19 passengers to be without tickets.
Six passengers had boarded the bus from Tanda and were to go to Kurala, ten passengers boarded the bus from Tanda and three from Dasuya and each of them had paid .35 paise, Rs. 135 and .70 paise respectively but no tickets had been issued to them by the plaintiff-respondent.
In this way, he had pocketed Rs. 1770 paise.
On the basis of above allegation, charge-sheet was issued to the plaintiff-respondent and after enquiry his services were dispensed with.
The plaintiff alleged that the said charge-sheet was defective, vague, indefinite and illegal.
Accordingly, he assailed the same by way of Civil Suit.
5.
In the written statement filed by the State, objection was taken that the plaintiff was a workman and was covered under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and as such only the Labour Court has jurisdiction to entertain his claim.
Besides, it was averred that no notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was served.
However, it was admitted that the plaintiff was conductor with Punjab Roadways and that his services have been dispensed vide order dated 2741976.
It was contended that the finding of the Enquiry Officer was in accordance with law and every reasonable opportunity had been afforded to the plaintiff.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD  2) Whether the order dated 27.4.76 passed by the General Manager Punjab Roadways, Tarn Taran terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, void etc. and not binding on the plaintiff as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP 3) Relief.
The learned trial Court decided the issues in favour of the plaintiff and decreed his suit.
As already noticed above, aggrieved against the findings of the learned trial Court, appeal was filed by the State.
7.
Before the learned lower appellate Court, learned counsel for the appellant did not assail the findings on issue No. 2.
Accordingly the same were confirmed.
With regard to issue No. 1, it was held on the strength of the judgment in the case of Premier Automobile Ltd v. Kamala Kar Santa Ram Wadhweke and other, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 2238 that the civil Court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit in relation to an industrial dispute.
8.
The appeal was admitted by this Court on 3171980 on the point whether the civil Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit or whether the Labour Court is appropriate forum for declining such matters.
9.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the State and with his assistance gone through the record of the case.
10.
Learned counsel appearing for the State vehemently contended that the civil Court is not the appropriate forum for adjudicating the matter when a workman is covered by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In support of his contention, he relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Banarsi Dass v. State of Haryana and others, 1980(1) S.L.R.
355.
11.
I have considered the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant.
However, I find no force in the same.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of the Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation and another v. Krishna Kant, AIR 1995 Supreme Court 1715, in a reference made by a Bench of two learned Judges, a three Judge Bench considered the question as regards jurisdiction of Civil Court in relation to dispute between employer and employee.
It was enunciated as follows :-  (1) Where the dispute arises from general law of contract, i.e. where reliefs are claimed on the basis of the general law of contract, a suit filed in civil Court cannot be said to be not maintainable, even through such a dispute may also constitute an industrial dispute within the meaning of Section 2(k) or of Section 2-A, of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
(2) Where, however, the dispute involves recognition, observance or enforcement of any of the rights or obligations created by the Industrial Disputes Act, the only remedy is to approach the forums created by the said Act.
(3) Similarly, where the dispute involves the recognition, observance or enforcement of rights and obligations created by enactments like Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 - which can be called sister enactments to Industrial Disputes Act - and which do not provide a forum for resolution of such disputes, the only remedy shall be to approach the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act provided they constitute industrial disputes within the meaning of Section 2(k) and Section 2-A of Industrial Disputes Act or where such enactment says that such dispute shall be either treated as an industrial dispute or says that it shall be adjudicated by any of the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act.
Otherwise, recourse to Civil Court is open.
(4) It is not correct to say that the remedies provided by the Industrial Disputes Act are not equally effective for the reason that access to the forum depends upon a reference being made by the appropriate Government.
The power to make a reference conferred upon the Government is to be exercised to effectuate the object of the enactment and hence not unguided.
The rule is to make a reference unless, of course, the dispute raised is a totally frivolous one ex facie.
The power conferred is the power to refer and not the power to decide, though it may be that the Government is entitled to examine whether the dispute is ex facie frivolous, not meriting an adjudication.
(5) Consistent with the policy of law aforesaid, the Supreme Court thought it fit to commend to the Parliament and the State Legislatures to make a provision enabling a workman to approach the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal directly i.e. without the requirement of a reference by the Government in case of industrial disputes covered by Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
This would go a long way in removing the misgivings with respect to the effectiveness of the remedies provided by the Industrial Disputes Act.
(6) The certified Standing Orders framed under and in accordance with the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act are statutorily imposed conditions of service and are binding both upon the employer and employees, though they do not amount to "statutory provisions".
Any violation of these Standing Orders entitles an employee to appropriate relief either before the forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act or the Civil Court where recourse to Civil Court is open according to the principles indicated above.
(7) The policy of law emerging from Industrial Disputes Act and its sister enactments is to provide an alternative dispute resolution mechanism to the workmen, a mechanism which is speedy, inexpensive, informal and un- encumbered by the plethora of procedural laws and appeals upon appeals and revisions applicable to civil Courts.
Indeed, the powers of the Courts and Tribunals under the Industrial Disputes Act are far more extensive in the sense that they can grant such relief as they think appropriate in the circumstances for putting an end to an industrial dispute."
In the case in hand, it may be noticed that the learned trial Court with regard to the issue No. 2 i.e., whether the order terminating services of plaintiff is illegal, void etc., after considering the evidence on record, held that the whole enquiry stands vitiated.
The Inspector checked the bus gave wrong number of the bus in his statement before the Enquiry Officer.
Similar was the position with regard to another witness.
This finding of the trial Court with regard to the entire enquiry being vitiated was not challenged before the learned lower Appellate Court.
The learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar, in his impugned judgment dated 221980 recorded that the learned Government Pleader has not assailed the findings of the trial Court on issue No. 2 and that, therefore, the same are confirmed.
In these circumstances where the enquiry is held to be vitiated, it cannot be said that a suit filed in the Civil Court is not maintainable even though such a dispute may constitute an "industrial dispute" within the meaning of Section 2(k) or 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In view of the above I find no force in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
There shall, however, be no orders as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.