SS Saron, J - The Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Ltd (for short - the petitioner bank), has filed the present writ petition for quashing the Award dated 2091988 Annexure P-1 passed by the Labour Court, Rohtak.
2.
The facts leading to the case are that respondent No. 2 Hanuman Singh (hereinafter referred to as a workman) was appointed as Clerk purely on ad hoc basis for 89 days vide order dated 2151985.
The contract of service was extended from time to time and its was lastly extended upto 18.8.1986 when his service came to an end automatically after the expiry of the period of contract.
The workman raised an Industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court-respondent No. 1.
The Labour Court vide its Award Annexure P-1 set aside the termination of service/non-renewal of the contract of the workman and he was ordered to be reinstated.
The bank has assailed the Award on the ground that it is a case of non-renewal of contract, which is covered by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act (Act - for short), according to which the termination of services of workman as a result of non-renewal of contract of employment on its expiry does not amount to retrenchment and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act are not attracted.
3.
The other contention of the petitioner bank is that the workman was admittedly not a graduate and had merely passed BA Part I Therefore, he being ineligible for appointment, the order dispensing with his service was, in any case, liable to be sustained.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the workman, however, contends that the services of the workman were terminated without assigning any reason, without notice and enquiry.
Besides, several persons junior to him have been retained in service which is in violation of the provisions of Section 25-G of the Act.
It is also contended that the case is not even remotely covered by the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
6.
In order to appreciate the contention urged by the petitioner bank, the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act may be noticed, which reads as under :-  "2(oo)(bb) retrenchment means termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include :- ----- ----- ------- --------- -------- ----- --------- ----- (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein."
7.
The above provisions show that retrenchment means termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but not does not include as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman.
8.
It is, however, not in dispute that the workman had remained in service for more than 240 days during the last 12 calender months preceding the date of his termination or as the case of the petitioner bank is for non-renewal of contract of service on 18.8.1986.
It is also not disputed that the workman has been continuing in service after 18.8.1986 and is getting his due wages.
9.
After consideration of the matter, I find that the workman had been getting service on 89 days basis from time to time with intermittent notional breaks.
He had continued in service on 89 days basis.
Therefore, when the services were being extended from time to time, it cannot be said that it is a case where the service of the workman had been terminated as a result of non-renewal of contract of employment between the employer and the workman.
The case in hand is one of retrenchment and, therefore, the provisions of Section 25 of the Act would apply.
It is not in dispute that the respondent-workman has not been given any retrenchment compensation in terms of Section 25-F of the Act.
He has admittedly been in service of the bank for more than 240 days in the last calendar year preceding the date of his termination.
This Court in the case of Haryana State Co-operative Land Development Bank Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak and another, 2001(3) S.C.T.
799, CWP No. 11644 of 1988, decided on 1322001 in somewhat similar circumstances found that the workman in the said case by virtue of the various orders of appointment of 89 days had completed 240 days of the service in the last calender year or immediately preceding the date of his termination.
Therefore, there was no legal reason shown as to why he would not be continued thereafter.
It was held that the termination of an employee by such orders amounts to unfair labour practice.
The ratio of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Bhikku Ram v. The Presiding Officer, 1998(1) RSJ 703, was followed and the termination of service of the respondent was set aside.
10.
The other contention raised by the petitioner bank is that the workman was not a graduate but has done BA Part I and therefore, in any case, the Award of the Labour Court is justified.
This aspect has also been considered in Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Ltd (supra), wherein the workman in the said case was not having the required qualifications as he was matriculate and the required qualifications was graduate.
However, it was found that there was a letter of relaxation of the conditions in service which was part of the record of the Labour Court.
It is not disputed that the present case is also outcome of the same recruitment process.
Therefore, the benefit having been extended to a co-workman of the present workman, it would be iniquitous to deny the benefit to the workman.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the just and reasoned Award of the Labour Court and the writ petition is therefore, liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
Learned counsel for the workman however, contends that the workman is entitled to payment of the back-wages with 15% interest in terms of order dated 8.5.1990.
The perusal of the said order shows that in fact the operation of the impugned order Ex.P1 had been stayed subject to the condition that an undertaking is to be filed by the petitioner to the effect that in the event the writ petition is dismissed, the arrears of pay shall be paid with 15% interest from the date due to the date of payment.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner bank however states that despite the stay being granted by the Court, the workman has been working.
In this view of the matter, he has been given work and it would be improper for the bank to now be burdened with 15% interest.
Learned counsel for the workman fairly concedes this position with regard to interest.
However, he states that whatever back wages are due should be paid to the workman.
In view of the fair concession given by the learned counsel for the respondent workman, the petitioner bank is directed to pay back wages to the workman which shall be without any interest.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed in the above terms.
Petition dismissed.