SS Saron, J - The Managing Director, Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Limited has filed the present writ petition for quashing the award dated 4.9.1992 (Annexure P-1) passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Hisar.
2.
The facts leading to the case are that respondent No. 2 Sham Sunder Bhatia (hereinafter referred to as `the workman') was appointed as an Electrician vide order dated 2721985 (Annexure R-2/1).
His post was purely temporary and he was to be on probation for a period of one year from the date of joining.
It was also provided that during the period of probation his services could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
The services of the workman along with others were terminated vide order dated 511988 (Annexure P-2).
The reason given in the said order is that the Board of Directors in the 61st meeting held on 3181987 regarding closure of Tohana plant, services of the officials named therein were dispensed with as no longer required.
The workman is at Serial No. 10 in the said order dated 511988 (Annexure P-2).
The workman raised an industrial dispute against the order dispensing with his services.
The same was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court by the State Government vide reference order dated 15.7.1988 in exercise of powers conferred by Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as, `the Act').
3.
The stand of the Management before the learned Tribunal was that the services of the workman had been dispensed with on the ground of closure of Tohana plant and that the provisions of Section 25-F and Section 25-G of the Act were inapplicable.
The learned Labour Court answered the reference against the Management.
Accordingly the Management has come in writ petition in this Court assailing the said award of the Labour Court.
The Management in its writ petition has urged that the order dispensing with the services of the workman was owing to closure of Tohana plant in compliance with the decision of the Haryana Government with the stipulation that the workman amongst other employees would be paid retrenchment compensation.
It is, however, stated that since the discharge of the workman was due to closure of activities, the same does not amount to retrenchment.
Therefore the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act are inapplicable.
It is also stated that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act have wrongly been applied by the Labour Court.
Reliance has been placed on a Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Sunder Singh and another v. Beas Construction Board, New Delhi, AIR 1979 P&H 1 to contend that closure of an undertaking payment of retrenchment compensation is not a condition precedent in cases falling under Section 25- FFF of the Act.
It is stated that the findings of the learned Tribunal are perverse and are the result of not only misreading of the evidence and material on record but are also based on conjectures and surmises.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent, however, contends that it is not a case of closure of the unit as at the most only part of the plant had been closed.
Therefore, it being not a case of closure, or at the most only part of the unit being closed the principle of last come first go is liable to be followed in compliance with Section 25-G of the Act.
In support of his contention he has relied upon a judgment of this Court in Luxmi Pandit v. Presiding Officer, Faridabad, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 219.
5.
I have considered the averments made in the writ petition and the submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent and with his assistance, I have gone through the records of the case.
In order to appreciate the contention of the parties a reference may be made to the provisions of Section 2 (cc) and Section 2 (oo) of the Act which defines `closure' and `retrenchment' respectively.
The same read as under :  2 (cc) : "Closure" means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof.
2(oo) : "Retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not include -  (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or  (c) termination of the services of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health.
The definition of `closure' shows that closure means permanent closing down of a place of employment or a part thereof.
`Retrenchment' has been defined to mean termination by the employer of the services of a workman for any reason whatsoever otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not include any of the conditions as indicated in the clauses to Section 2(oo) of the Act.
6.
It is on the basis of the above that it is to be examined whether the unit has indeed closed down and if so whether the principle of last come first go has been adopted by the petitioner-Management while dispensing with the services of the workman.
Before the Labour Court, the plea that was raised by the petitioner-Management in the written statement was that the workman was not entitled to reinstatement because his services was terminated due to closure of unit.
However, there is no discussion in the impugned award regarding closure of the unit, which would mean that this contention was not agitated by the petitioner-Management.
Besides, there is no material on record with regard to the said contention regarding closure urged by the Management.
Even the order dated 511988 (Annexure P-2) dispensing with the services of the workman and others only indicates that the Board of Directors in their 61st Meeting held on 3181987 regarding closure of Tohana plant and dispensing with the services of the persons mentioned therein.
Therefore there being no discussion on the point of the closure and the contention as raised being bereft of any material particulars, it cannot be said that the unit has closed down.
Even in this Court a mere bald averment has been made in the writ petition that the unit has been closed.
However, it is not disputed even by the Management that there are other workmen who are still working at the Tohana plant.
From these circumstances what can be gathered is that the Management has failed to show as to whether there is indeed closure of its plant and in any case the entire Tohana plant has not been closed.
What therefore requires to be considered is as urged by the learned counsel for the respondent, whether the principle of seniority has been maintained while dispensing with the services of the workman.
In para 9 of the award of the Labour Court, it has been observed as follows :  "So far as seniority list MW-2 is concerned, it is not signed by any person.
It is only a waste paper because such a seniority list, which is neither signed by any competent officer nor circulated to the official concerned, has no value in the eye of law."
7.
The above shows that the learned Labour Court after appreciating the evidence and material on record found that the seniority list MW-2 was not signed by any person and that it was only a waste paper.
This is a pure finding of fact and this Court in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, does not sit in appeal over the finding of facts recorded by the Tribunal and substitute its decisions for that validly reached at after appreciating the material on record.
The respondent No. 2 in his written statement dated 281999 has taken the stand that the Corporation is a big Corporation and many a thousand workers could be employed therein and number of units of factory are in working conditions and earning profits.
Besides, this, even during the course of arguments, learned counsel for the respondent-workman states that the Tohana plant has not closed down and at the most may be that only part of the unit was close down, however the unit by and large is still working.
In this view of the matter, the principle laid down in Section 25-G of the Act was liable to be followed.
In accordance with the said provision, the principle of last come first go has to be followed.
The Labour Court having found that the same has not been followed, no fault can be found with the award passed by it.
Even in the written statement filed by the respondent a categoric stand has been taken that junior persons have been retained by the petitioner in service whereas the respondent-workman has been retrenched.
Besides, the seniority list produced by the Management has not been believed or relied upon by the Labour Court.
The petitioner has in fact not even challenged that part of the award in the writ petition.
Therefore, in these circumstances, there is no merit in the petition.
The writ petition has been pending in this Court since 1992.
The workman had filed Civil Miscellaneous No. 7513 of 1999, praying for directions to the Management for release of wages in accordance with the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act.
This Court vide order dated 2971999 found no merit to vacate the stay already granted.
Keeping in view above circumstances and the pendency of the petition in this Court, the learned counsel for the respondent states that he would be satisfied if 50% of the backwages are awarded from the date of filing of the writ petition.
Accordingly the writ petition is dismissed.
However, the respondent-workman shall be entitled to 50% of the backwages from the date of filing the writ petition.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.