HR Panwar, J - The instant writ petition has been filed seeking a direction to quash the impugned order Annx.
5 dated 1651998 and reinstate the petitioner in service with all consequential benefits and relief.
2.
The facts and circumstances giving rise to instant writ petition are that in response to the advertisement issued by the respondents to the advertisement issued by the respondents, petitioner, holding the requisite qualification, applied for the post of Physical Education Teacher and faced interview before the Selection Committee.
He was appointed and posted at the Government Upper Primary School, Bida.
Ultimately, vide impugned order Ann.
5 dated 1651998, his services stood terminated without any notice or opportunity of hearing on the ground that the Character Verification was not proper and genuine and there is concealment of material fact in column No. 15 of the Character Verification Form.
Hence this writ petition.
3.
In reply, respondents have come with the case that in column No. 15 of the Character Verification Form, petitioner has used the words "Not Applicable" but at the time of applying for the post in question, one criminal case under Sections 420, 467 and 471 IPC was pending against him; petitioner had joined the duties in a hurried manner though it was stipulated that character verification was an essential condition precedent for joining the duty; petitioner himself had avoided the service of impugned termination order; he is guilty of suppression of material fact and as such he is not entitled for the relief sought in the writ petition.
4.
In rejoinder-affidavit, it has been stated by the petitioner that against column No. 15, petitioner had tick-marked the sign of "yes" and did not use the words "Not applicable" as asserted by the respondents; the criminal case was falsely instituted against him due to political rivalry with his father and ultimately he was discharged in the criminal case vide order dated 8.12.1998 by the learned ACJM for want of sufficient evidence; and he has no connection with political or criminal activities.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.
On the basis of the averments made by the learned counsel for the parties, in the instant case, the following questions arise for consideration and decisions :-  (i) Whether the fact that at the time of filling of Form, pendency of a criminal case against the petitioner is a material fact, the suppression of which would entitle the respondents to dismiss him from defence services on that grounds ?
(ii) Whether the ultimately discharge of the petitioner would condone or wash out the consequences of suppression of the fact that he was prosecuted and tried ?
(iii) Whether the suppression of the material fact would not by itself disentitle the petitioner to remain in service ?
7.
It is difficult to say that information which was required from the petitioner in Column No. 15 of the Character Certificate was in respect of only those offences which were related to moral turpitude.
Suitability for a post has several dimensions.
Even if an offence is not related to moral turpitude, the motive behind commission of the offence, the circumstances in which the offence was committed, the manner of commission of the offence, the consequences arising from commission of the offence, may be relevant for the purpose of assessing the suitability of the candidate for a post.
The fact that the petitioner was prosecuted in a criminal trial is a material fact, suppression whereof, when enquired about, would entitle the employer to inflict penalty in accordance with law.
The petitioner was ultimately discharged by the criminal court, which does not obliterate the fact of pendency of criminal case in the Court.
The suppression of such material fact by itself disentitles the petitioner to remain in services.
All those persons who desire employment under the State must, therefore, be deemed to be under a legal duty to speak the truth to the employer not only while applying for the post but also when appearing in the written examination or during the interview or at any time thereafter.
It is, therefore, absolutely necessary that a person who is desirous to be appointed in Government Service, must consider it his duty to respond and to answer truly without committing "suppressio veri" and "suggestio falsi" while dealing with the employer or with the subjects.
8.
I am fortified by view by the judgment of Larger Bench of this Court in Dharam Pal Singh & 4 others v. The State of Rajasthan & ors, 2000(3) RLR 728 : 2001(1) SCT 130 (Raj.).
In that case, a Larger Bench of this Court observed that the plain language of rule 15 and the consequences of suppression of information read with the Circular which says that wilful suppression of information adverse to candidate comes within the purview of moral turpitude and as such it cannot be said that information sought in Column No. 17 of the application form is not material.
The Court further held as under :-  "In this view, suppression of material information or furnishing it wrongly in column No. 17 of the form is a vital factor, which goes against the candidate.
Rule 15 of the Rules empowers the authorities to deny appointment or debar such candidate for admission to any examination or appearance at any interview either permanently or for specified period.
A careful reading of rule 15 shows that suppressing material information is itself sufficient to deny employment without anything more; in other words, it is not required that suppression of material should be deliberate or wilful.
Further, by the combined reading of Rules 13, 15 and the Circular dated 2941995, there can be no doubt that appointment could be denied on the ground of suppression of material information, which was otherwise required for judging the suitability and desirability of a candidate for direct recruitment in the police department.
The information relating to involvement of a candidate in criminal case is specifically sought in column No. 17 of the application form.
If it is not furnished, the candidate takes the consequences of denial of appointment to him."
The law laid down by the Larger Bench of this Court squarely applies to the facts and circumstances of the case.
Effect of Acquittal in criminal case :  9.
It is, no doubt, true that the trial of the criminal case ended in discharge of the petitioner of the offences under Sections 420, 467, 471, IPC.
The termination order dated 1651998 (Annx.
5) is based on the fact that the petitioner suppressed the material fact regarding pendency of criminal case against him.
His discharge does not make good the conduct of the petitioner in suppressing the aforesaid material fact.
The ground of termination of services of the petitioner was not the pendency of the criminal case rather the ground of termination was suppression of this material fact while filling up column No. 15 of the Character Verification Form.
As such, petitioner's discharge in the Criminal case does not obliterate the effect of his concealing the material information.
Suppression of material fact :-  10.
It is settled proposition of law that when a person approaches for employment, he should approach the employer not only with clean hands but with clean mind, clean heart and clean objective also.
A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Naraindas v. Government of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., AIR 1974 SC 1252, has held as under :-  "Now, there can be no doubt that if a wrong or misleading statement is deliberately and wilfully made by a party to a litigation with a view to obtain a favourable order, it would prejudice or interfere with the due process of judicial proceedings and, thus, amount to contempt of Court."
Similar view has subsequently been reiterated by the Apex Court in The Advocate General, State of Bihar v. M/s. MP Khair Industries & Anr., AIR 1980 SC 946; and Delhi Development Authority v. Skippers Constructions & Anr., (1995) 3 SCC 507.
In Jai Kumar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1999) 5 SCC 1, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed as under:-  "Justice is supreme and justice ought to be beneficial for society so that the society is placed in a better situation.
Law Courts exist for the society and ought to rise up to the occasion to do the needful in the matter and as such ought to act in a manner so as to subserve the basic requirement of the society."
In State of Punjab v. Baldeo Singh, (1999) 6 SCC 172 : 1999(1) SCT 536 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :-  "In every case, the end result is important but the means to achieve it must remain above board.
The remedy cannot be worse than the disease itself."
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on a judgment of this Court in Madan Gopal Ratnoo v. State of Rajasthan & Ors., DGCSA No. 276/1999, decided on 11th December, 2002, wherein a Division Bench of this Court held as under :-  "Learned Single Judge has dismissed that petition by saying that appellant- petitioner had concealed the factual position about the criminal case against him at the time of seeking employment.
We, however, find that at the time he sought employment, the appellant did not conceal any fact nor did he suppress any material information.
It is not even the case of the respondents that at the time he submitted the application for employment, he suppressed material fact which was required to be mentioned.
What the respondents say is that the character verification form was given to the appellant alognwith the appointment letter and in that form Column 15, as quoted above, was there, to which he did not give any reply and, therefore, when they received the letter dated 2441998 from the office of the Collector & District Magistrate, Jaisalmer, they proceeded to pass the order dated 3041998.
Exactly, his ground has been made the basis of the order by which the writ petition has been dismissed."
11.
The facts of the aforesaid Division Bench judgment of this Court were different than the facts of the instant case.
In the instant case, in Column No. 15 of the Character Verification Form, petitioner has used the words "Not applicable" though at the time of applying for the post in question, one criminal case under Sections 420, 467 and 471 IPC was pending against him.
Secondly, in the rejoinder-affidavit, petitioner has stated that against column No. 15, he had tick-marked the sign of "yes" and did not use the words "Not applicable" which is nothing more than a white lie.
Moreso, in view of the judgment of Larger Bench of this Court in Dharam Pal Singh's case (supra), the aforesaid Division Bench judgment of this Court, cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, does not come to his rescue.
12.
In the instant case, the petitioner is guilty of suppressing the material fact that he was prosecuted and tried in a criminal trial.
He has not approached the employer with clean hands, clean mind and clean objective and hence the respondents were justified in dismissing him from services.
Even the petitioner has stressed that he had tick-marked the column No. 15, meaning thereby that he had answered the query in affirmative whereas a perusal of the Character Verification Form (Annx.R/1) produced by the respondents alongwith the reply, reveals that he has used the words "Not applicable" for the query made under column No. 15.
This suggests that he has not only concealed the material fact but also denied the fact clearly established from the record.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the writ petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.