MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a direction to the respondents to release the annual grade increments due to the petitioner on 111992, 111993 and 111994.
Further direction has also been sought that one proficiency step up increment which fell due on 1221994 on completion of 8 years service as Sub Divisional Engineer may also be released to him which has been illegally with-held by the respondents.
As a consequence to the release of aforementioned increments, a prayer has been made by the petitioner to step up his pension and retiral benefits.
The petitioner has also sought a writ of certiorari for quashing order dated 12.7.1994, vide which the Chief Engineer, PWD (B&R), Punjab - respondent No. 2 has withdrawn his one increment which was earlier sanctioned reducing his basic pay to Rs. 3300/- per month which has also resulted in reduction of his pension and retiral benefits.
Another prayer has also been made for quashing order dated 14101994 deducting some amount from the death-cum-retirement gratuity.
The petitioner has claimed interest @ 18% on all the amounts from the date the amount fell due till the date of payments.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Sectional Officer redesignated as Junior Engineer on 2321957 in the Department of PWD (B&R).
On 2111986, the petitioner along with others was promoted to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on purely temporary basis for a period of 6 months which continued till the date of his retirement.
On 7.11.1990, the petitioner was given proficiency step up increments on completion of 8 years and 18 years of service as Junior Engineer raising his basic pay from Rs. 2700/- per month to Rs. 2850/- per month w.e.f.
111986.
He was also given the designation of the Site Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500/-.
Accordingly, his pay was fixed on 20111990 by an order passed by the Executive Engineer.
The petitioner was further granted sanction fixing his pay as Sub Divisional Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000/- on 311991.
On 1451991, he was further granted one increment w.e.f.
111991 and his pay was fixed at Rs. 3400/- per month.
However, thereafter no annual grade increments were granted to the petitioner which fell due on 111992, 111993 and 111994 nor the petitioner was granted proficiency step up which fell due on 1221994.
The increment that was granted on 1451991 w.e.f.
111991 was also withdrawn on 12.7.1994, vide Annexure P-8.
The petitioner retired from service on 3041994.
He made numerous representations and served a legal notice but no action appears to have been taken on the representations and the legal notice.
Two of such representations/legal notice have been placed on records as Annexures P-11 and P-12, which are dated 8.11.1994 and 2141997 respectively.
3.
The stand taken by respondents No. 1 and 2 in their joint written statement is that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of increments after the completion of 3 years service on promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer.
The petitioner having been promoted in 1986 continued drawing increments till 111990.
The increment granted on 111991 was erroneous because it violated rule 152 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II PWD (Building & Roads Branch) Rules, 1965 (for brevity `the Rules').
According to the respondents, there is an obligation on every Sub Divisional Engineer to pass a departmental examination under rule 15(1) and (2) of the Rules for which he has been given a period of 3 years.
If an incumbent fails to pass the departmental examination, then he would not be entitled to earn annual grade increments till such time he passes the examination.
On passing the examination, the increments are to be released retrospectively.
With regard to order dated 12.7.1994 concerning withdrawal of one increment, the respondents have taken the stand that the Accountant General-respondent No. 3, vide its memo.
No. Pen-IX/0-1/94-95/3723-24 dated 17.6.1994 had addressed a communication to the Chief Engineer pointing out that his pay has not been regulated in accordance with the rules and therefore fresh orders were required to be issued.
A copy of the aforesaid memo was endorsed to the petitioner also.
The petitioner failed to submit any representation against the aforementioned letter issued by the Accountant General which led the department to believe that he did not have any thing to say.
Therefore, pay of the petitioner was refixed by withdrawing the increment which was released to him on 1451991 w.e.f.
111991 and a recovery of Rs. 10,915/- was worked out on account of erroneous release of increments.
The aforementioned amount was recovered from the death-cum-retirement gratuity.
According to the respondents, such a course is permissible by virtue of provision made in Rule 916 (2) and (3) of Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. II (for brevity, `C.S.R.').
Similar stand has been taken with regard to order dated 14101994, Annexure P-10 in respect of recovery worth Rs. 10,915/-.
4.
Mr. DS Chanan, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that in accordance with rule 15(1) of the Rules, only that officer who is appointed to the service is legally obliged to pass a departmental examination within three years of his appointment and the period can further be extended.
Learned counsel has pointed out that the expression `Member of Service' has been defined in Rule 2(12) of the Rules to mean an officer appointed substantively to a cadre post.
Relying on the appointment letter dated 2111986, Annexure P-3, learned counsel argued that the petitioner was appointed temporarily on the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer for a period of six months and, therefore, the Rules would not be applicable to the case of the petitioner.
Learned counsel has also placed reliance on a letter dated 461976 addressed by respondent 1 to the Accountant General exempting one Kartar Singh Kang from passing departmental examination wherein it has been directed that failure to pass departmental examination would not warrant the stoppage of increment because the Rules would come in operation when the officer is appointed to Class II service and becomes a member of that service.
5.
In support of his submission the learned counsel has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Kewal Krishan Mahindroo and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1989(2) SLR 363 and also a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Sant Ram Bhal v. State of Haryana, 1992(1) SCT 534 (P&H) : 1992(1) RSJ 761 to argue that under the Rules, if an incumbent is promoted temporarily, he does not acquire any right to hold the post and as such a person does not become member of the service.
On that basis the learned counsel has argued that unless the petitioner is a member of service, the Rules would not be applicable and there could not be any objection to pass departmental examination as envisaged by Rule 15 of the Rules.
He has also placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab and another v. Shamlal Murari and another, AIR 1976 SC 1177 to argue that the failure to pass departmental test by the government servant after having put in more than two decades of service cannot stand in his way of enjoyment the benefit of increment.
Reliance has also been placed on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Bhagwan Shukla v Union of India and others, 1994(4) SCT 406 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2480 to argue that the retrospective reduction of basic pay that too without affording opportunity to show cause is violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
Learned counsel has further urged that earning of annual grade increment is a routine matter and the same is admissible even to an ad hoc employee.
For the aforementioned proposition, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ram Singh and others v. The Commissioner & Secretary to Govt. Haryana and another, 1997(1) SCT 47 (P&H) : 1996(5) SLR 285 and a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC) : 1995 Supp.
(1) SCC 18.
6.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned State counsel, has argued that for all intents and purposes, the petitioner has been treated as a substantive incumbent of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer.
Learned counsel has pointed out that the petitioner was made a member of Class-II Service, vide order dated 13111995, Annexure P-4 by allocating him the year of 1989.
Therefore, he had become a member of service and the Rules were applicable to him.
It has also been pointed out that once the petitioner is covered by the rules, he was under an obligation to pass the departmental examination and the failure to do so would result in stoppage of his increment.
According to the learned State counsel even otherwise expression `appointment to the service' has been defined under rule 2(2) of the Rules to include an appointment made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Rules and also to an officiating vacancy or even an ex-cadre post.
The expressions `appointment to the service' and `becoming member of the service' have been treated differently.
Therefore, the petitioner shall be deemed to have been appointed to the service w.e.f.
2111986 and he became a member of service w.e.f.
1989 when his order of promotion appointing him regularly was issued from the year 1989.
Learned counsel has also relied upon rule 4(3) of the Rules to argue that even otherwise the State has power to appoint an officer to an ex-cadre post not even included in the service in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
The only rider is that such a post is required to be sanctioned.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner cannot escape from the rigour of Rule 15 of the `Rules' and consequences flowing from its application.
Therefore, passing of examination was obligatory and failure would result into loss of increments.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that this petition is devoid of any merit and is liable to be dismissed.
It would be appropriate to refer to Rule 15 of the Rules dealing with the passing of departmental examination and the consequences flowing from failure to do so.
Rule 15 of `the Rules' reads as under :-  "15.
Departmental examination.
- (1) Officers appointed to the Service, unless they have already done so, shall pass a departmental examination within three years of their appointment : Provided further that Government may, for any sufficient cause, extend the period within which may member is required to pass the departmental examination.
(2) If an officer fails to pass the departmental examination within the prescribed period or within the extended period, if any, he shall not earn his future grade increments till such time as he passes it when the increments shall be released retrospectively : Provided that he shall not be entitled to get any arrears of the released grade increments for the period during which he could not pass the examination.
Note.
- The increment of the officer to whom extension is granted beyond 3 years period for passing the departmental examination shall be withheld without cumulative effect for failure to pass the departmental examination."
8.
A perusal of the above-quoted rule shows that any officer appointed to the service is under an obligation to pass departmental examination within three years of his appointment or within the extended period.
If an incumbent fails to pass the departmental examination within the prescribed period or the extended period, then it is also mandatory that he would stop earning future grade increments till such time he passes the examination.
On passing the examination, all the increments are to be released retrospectively.
However, he has not to be paid arrears of the released increments in respect of the period when he could not pass the examination.
In other words, passing of departmental examination is mandatory within a period of three years or further extended period in accordance with the proviso to sub-rule (2).
The officer is to get back all his increments but without arrears if he passes the examination beyond the period of three years or any extended period.
It is further appropriate to notice that sub-rule (2) of Rule 2 of the Rules defines the expression `appointment to the service'.
The sub-rule makes it further clear that officers appointed to the service shall not be deemed to have become members of the service as defined in Rule 2(12) of the Rules.
Rule 2(2) and Rule 2(12) of the Rules read as under :-  2.
Definitions.
- In these rules, unless there is any thing repugnant in the subject or the context otherwise requires :- (1) xx xx xx xx (2) "Appointment to the service" includes an appointment, made according to the terms and conditions of these rules, to an officiating vacancy or an ex- cadre post :  Provided that an officer so appointed shall not be deemed to have become a member of the service as defined in clause (12); xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (12) "Member of Service" means an officer appointed substantively to a cadre post, and includes :- (a) in the case of a direct appointment an officer on probation or an officer who, having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post; (b) In the case of an appointment by transfer, an Officer, who is on probation or who, having successfully completed this probation awaits appointment to a cadre post, provided such officer does not have a lien on a substantive post in any Government Department.
Explanation.
- It is not necessary that a member of Service shall at any given time be actually doing the work of a cadre post.
He may be working in an ex- cadre post for reasons of administrative convenience.
Conversely, an officer officiating against an ex-cadre post may in fact perform the duties of a cadre post."
9.
A perusal of sub-rule (12) would make it absolutely clear that a person appointed to the service is entirely different than the person who has become member of the service.
Rule 15 of the Rules is applicable to an officer appointed to the service whether he has become member of the service or not.
A member of the service in case of direct appointment would be an officer who is on probation and who having successfully completed his service awaits appointment to a cadre post.
Similar is the position with regard to appointment by transfer with one difference that in such a case officer does not have a lien on substantive post of any government department.
Therefore, the passing of departmental examination is not necessarily dependent upon acquiring the status of member of service as sought to be contended by learned counsel for the petitioner.
10.
A Division Bench of this Court in MS Miglani, Executive Engineer v. State of Haryana and another, 1983(1) SLR 421 has considered a similar rule and had reached the conclusion that Rule 2(2) and Rule 2(12) of the Rules operate in different areas.
The view of the Division Bench in this regard reads as under :-  "The framers of rules were alive to the necessity that administrative exigencies any require creation of ex-cadre posts may also require posting of promotees in officiating capacity against cadre posts or appointment against ex-cadre posts but they nevertheless envisaged that such appointments should not automatically confer on them the membership of the service which they ensured through proviso to clause (1) or Rule 2.
Perusal of proviso to clause (1) of Rule 2 leaves no manner of doubt that a person merely by virtue of his appointment against an ex cadre post or an officiating appointing against cadre post cannot stake a right to the membership of service in terms of clause (12) of Rule 2.
Clause (12) of Rule 2 confers membership of the Service upon officers who are appointed substantively to a cadre post unless he happens to be a direct recruit or person appointed by transfer in whose cases as exception is made and as a result of that exception they become member of the service while holding an appointment on probation and after successful completion of the period of probation while awaiting appointment to a cadre post."
11.
The view of the Division Bench once again was doubted and on reconsideration, the same was upheld in Raja Ram Sheoran, Executive Engineer, Haryana (PWD) (B&R Branch) v. The State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 675.
12.
It would also be appropriate to notice Rule 916 of the C.S.R.
on which reliance has been placed by the learned State counsel and the same reads as under :-  "916.
Recovery and adjustment of Government dues.
- (1) It shall be the duty of the Head of Office to ascertain and assess Government dues payable by a Government employee due for retirement.
(2) The Government dues as ascertained and assessed by the Head of Office which remain outstanding till the date of retirement of the Government employee shall be adjusted against the amount of the death-cum-retirement gratuity becoming payable.
(3) The expression `Government dues' includes -- (a) dues pertaining to Government accommodation including arrears of licence fee, if any; (b) dues other than those pertaining to Government accommodation, namely, balance of house building advance or conveyance advance or any other advance, over payment of pay and allowances or leave salary and arrears of income tax deductible at source under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961)."
13.
A perusal of the above extracted rule shows that recovery and adjustment of Government dues can be made by ascertaining the dues payable by a Government employee from his death-cum-retirement gratuity.
It is further obvious from the reading of sub-rule (3) Clause (b) that Government dues would include over payment of pay and allowances or leave salary.
14.
It is not disputed that the petitioner after his retirement has become member of service as is evident from the order dated 13111995.
He has been allocated the year 1989 for that purpose.
It is a continuous process and in accordance with the seniority every incumbent is given a substantive post by making the ranking list year-wise.
In any case, the petitioner cannot claim that he was not appointed to service because in accordance with the definition of `Appointment to the service' given in Rule 2(2) of the Rules, such an incumbent does not need to become member of service within the meaning of Rule 2(12) to attract application of the Rules.
The `Rules' would apply to all the incumbents appointed to the service i.e. Punjab Service of Engineers Class II PWD (B&R Branch) as is clear from the long title of the Rules.
As a necessary corollary, the petitioner would be governed by Rule 15 of the Rules requiring him to pass the departmental examination within the period specified or to face the consequences of failing to do so.
Therefore, I have no hesitation to hold that in accordance with the provisions of Rule 916 of the C.S.R., the increments paid would be over payment of pay and allowances within the meaning of sub-rule (3)(b) of Rule 916 of the C.S.R.
It is pertinent to mention that according to Rule 2(2) of the Rules, even the officer appointed on an officiating vacancy or on an ex cadre post would be considered to have been appointed to the service.
Therefore, the application of the Rules is not dependent whether an incumbent becomes member of service or not.
Moreover, copy of the order dated 17.6.1994 was sent to the petitioner and no representation against the aforementioned order was filed.
On account of silence of the petitioner, the respondents implemented the order by passing the orders dated 311991, Annexure P-5 and 14101994, Annexure P-10.
15.
The argument of learned counsel for the petitioner based on the judgments in the cases of Sant Ram Bhal's case (supra) and Kewal Krishan Mahindroo's case (supra) would not require any detailed consideration because in those cases, the question which fell for consideration was entirely different, namely, whether an employee who has been appointed to service temporarily would acquire any right to the post for the purposes of seniority.
Therefore, I do not find any substance in the aforementioned argument of the learned counsel.
16.
The other argument that the petitioner is not expected to pass departmental examination after long years based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Shamlal Murari's case (supra) has also not impressed me because in that case the employee was given exemption from passing the examination.
Moreover, the petitioner was promoted on 2111986 as Sub Divisional Engineer on temporary basis and retired on 3041994.
In order to become entitled to the payment of continued increments, he was required to pass the departmental examination envisaged by Rule 15 of the Rules.
Moreover, the insistence on passing of this examination by the respondent is not after long years of service as was the case before the Supreme Court where the employee had put in two decades of service.
Therefore, I do not find that the judgment in the case of Shamlal Murari (supra) is applicable to the facts of the case in hand.
17.
The last argument of the learned counsel that the principles of natural justice has been violated based on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Bhagwan Shukla (supra) and Sahib Ram (supra) has to be considered by referring to the averments made in paragraphs 11 to 13 of the writ petition as well as paragraph 11 of the written statement which read as under:-  "That instead of giving the above mentioned increments due to the petitioner the respondent No. 2 has gone a step further in adding to the misery of the petitioner by arbitrarily and illegally withdrawing one increment granted on 14.5.91 reducing petitioner pay to Rs. 3300/- w.e.f.
1191 vide order dated 12.7.1994 (A copy is attached as Annexure-P/8 to this petition), after petitioner's retirement without giving any reason whatsoever for such reduction and without giving any notice to the petitioner of the same, or giving any opportunity of hearing.
This action of the respondents is totally arbitrary and against the well established principles of natural justice and calls for quashing the same by this Hon'ble Court.
That accordingly the Accountant General Punjab (Respondent No. 3), worked out pension and other retiral benefits of the petitioner on the basis of reduced pay of Rs. 3300/- pm as on 1191 vide his order dated 5994 (copy at Annexure P-9), thereof putting the petitioner to a great all round financial loss and hardship.
That the Chief Engineer PWD (B&R), Patiala (Respondent No. 2) has further illegally deducted an amount of Rs. 10915/- from the petitioner's DCRG vide his order dated 141094 (copy whereof is attached at Annexure-P/10 to this petition), on account of alleged recoveries without giving any details thereof and without the order of a competent authority i.e. the Secretary to the Govt. of Punjab and without following the procedure prescribed as per Punjab Civil Services (P&A) Rules 1970 and principles of natural justice."
........... "In regard to Para No. 11, it is submitted that the Respondent No. 3 vide Memo No. Pen-IX/0-1/94-95/3723-2 dated 17694 addressed to Respondent No. 2 with a copy to the petitioner, pointed out that the payment of petitioner has not been regulated in accordance with the Rules & therefore it needs fresh regulation.
The Petitioner did not submit any representation against the above memo meaning thereby that he accepted the above observations in its totality.
The Respondent No. 3 was not required to issue fresh show cause notice for regulation of his pay afresh, as he was duty bound to regulate the pay of the petitioner to attend to the observations of the Audit in its true spirit.
Accordingly, the pay of the petitioner was regulated afresh vide office order No. 256/GAC dated 12794.
Resultantly, recovery worth Rs. 10915/- was worked out, on account of erroneous regulation of pay, which was subsequently effected out of DCRG under the provision of Rule 916(3)(b) of Punjab CSR Vol-II....." 18.
A perusal of the above paras shows that the order Annexure P-8 dated 12.7.1994 was sent to the petitioner by respondent No. 3 - the Accountant General (A&E), Punjab.
However, the petitioner failed to make any representation.
A perusal of order Annexure P-8 would show that a copy of the same was endorsed to the petitioner vide endorsement No. 596/GAC/86/2842- 43/GAC dated 12/1371994.
According to the respondents, no representation against the aforementioned order was filed by the petitioner.
However, the petitioner has averred that on 8.11.1994 vide Annexure P-11, a representation was sent which was repeated by sending Annexure P-12 on 2141997.
In these circumstances, without quashing the order Annexure P-8, I deem it appropriate to direct respondents 1 and 2 to consider the representations of the petitioner Annexures P-11 and P-12 and take a decision thereon within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
It is expected that the respondents would grant the petitioner an opportunity of hearing and thereafter would pass a reasoned order.
If the petitioner is found entitled to any of the benefit, then the same shall be released to him within a period of four months thereafter.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Order accordingly.