Viney Mittal, J - The plaintiff is in appeal.
He filed a suit for declaration challenging the order dated February 28, 1979 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ropar and the order dated April 22, 1979 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range.
The plaintiff had challenged the aforesaid orders as null and void, against the principles of natural justice and as such not binding upon him.
The plaintiff further claimed a declaration that he was entitled to all the benefits treating the aforesaid two orders as non-est.
2.
The plaintiff had filed the suit with the averments that he was working as Constable in the Police Department and was posted at Ropar.
On September 3, 1978, he was posted in Police Lines, Ropar.
He was ordered by Joginder Singh, Lines Officer to do fatigue duty under the supervision of the Head Constable Sita Singh.
The plaintiff refused.
Another allegation was that the plaintiff was absent on the same day at about 400 pm and was late by 45 minutes.
It was further claimed by the plaintiff that a departmental inquiry was ordered against him because of the aforesaid acts of misconduct and Swarn Singh, Inspector was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
According to the plaintiff, he was given only a summary of misconduct and list of witnesses and no other documents.
He was charge-sheeted.
Thereafter, a show cause notice was also issued on the basis of findings in the inquiry report.
In the aforesaid show cause notice, punishment of forfeiture of the two years approved service was proposed.
Subsequently, vide order dated February 28, 1979, publishment of forfeiture of two years of service was imposed upon him.
He filed an appeal.
The aforesaid appeal was also dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The aforesaid orders have been impugned by the plaintiff in the present suit.
3.
The defendants contested the suit and the averments made by the plaintiff were denied.
It was claimed that the inquiry report submitted by the Inquiry Officer was valid, legal and proper.
It was further claimed by the defendants that rules of procedure and principles of natural justice had been duly observed.
It was further claimed that the order of punishment was perfectly legal and valid.
4.
The learned trial Court decreed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
5.
The defendants took up the matter in appeal.
The learned first appellate Court re-appraised the entire evidence.
The learned first appellate Court observed that the Civil Court was not competent to sit in appeal or to adjudicate upon the merits of the impugned orders or the facts with regard to the occurrence.
The only interference was possible if there was no evidence to support the punishment order.
On the basis of the aforesaid observations, the learned first appellate Court came to the conclusion that the plaintiff had failed to prove that the orders passed by the department were contrary to the principles of natural justice or that the rules were not followed.
6.
The learned first appellate Court further observed that the plaintiff had been given opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses during the course of inquiry proceedings.
However, he refused to cross-examine them.
When a show cause notice was issued to the plaintiff, even at that stage, he did not make any grievance in his reply to the show cause notice about non-supply of any document which has now been claimed by him in Civil Suit.
In these circumstances, the learned first appellate Court upheld that the findings recorded in the inquiry report and the punishment order were perfectly legal and valid and nothing had been shown by the plaintiff that there was any violation of the rules or the principles of natural justice.
On the basis of aforesaid findings, the learned first appellate Court reversed the judgment of the learned trial Court and dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
7.
I have heard Shri HS Mann, learned counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri PS Thiara, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
8.
In my considered view, the findings recorded to the learned first appellate Court do not suffer from any infirmity.
Nothing has been shown that any of the observations made by the learned first appellate Court was contrary to the record.
Re-appreciation of the evidence as suggested by the learned counsel for the appellant, is not possible in the present regular second appeal.
9.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in the present appeal.
10.
In these circumstances, I do not find any merit in the appeal and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.