MM Kumar, J - Plaintiff-appellant Surender Singh, who is alleged to have deserted Indo Tibetan Border Police Force (for brevity `the ITBP') where he was working as a Constable has invoked the appellate jurisdiction of this Court conferred by Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity `the Code') to challenge the judgment and decree dated 882001 of the learned District Judge, Narnaul.
The learned District Judge has affirmed the findings of facts recorded by the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Narnaul, upholding the order dated 871995, dismissing the plaintiff-appellant from service and the orders dated 2111995 4.4.1995 and 19.5.1995 with regard to convening a Court of enquiry.
Both the Courts below have returned findings of facts against the plaintiff-appellant and have held that he was in the habit of absenting himself from duty without sufficient reasons and was also in the habit of misbehaving with his seniors.
It has also been found that he failed to participate in the enquiry nor did he send any reply to the show cause notice issued to him.
It has further been found that he himself deserted the battalion and did not report for duty despite best efforts made by the department.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the plaintiff-appellant was enrolled as a Constable in the ITBP and joined as such on 2541988.
He remained with 18th Battalion till 21.2.1992 and thereafter he was shifted to 17th Battalion Pithoragarh where he remained posted upto 1851994.
The plaintiff-appellant then was posted with the 16th Battalion at Patiala.
On account of his misbehaviour with the Company Commander on four occasions, he was awarded punishment of seven days pack drill from 7.8.1992 to 13.8.1992.
He remained absent from duty for 18 days from 24.6.1994 to 1371994 without sanction of leave from the competent authority and reported for duty only on 1371994.
It has further been asserted that for remaining absent from duty for five days from 8101994 to 12.10.1994, he was awarded five days punishment of force custody.
His period of unauthorised absence was regularised as `dies-non'.
He again absented without leave for 63 days from 381994 to 4101994.
Even the period of 63 days was also regularised as `dies-non'.
The plaintiff- appellant again absent on 14.12.1994 despite directions to report for duty.
He was dismissed from service on 871995 under Rule 17 read with Rule 20 of the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Rules, 1994 (for brevity `the ITBP rules').
3.
The plaintiff-appellant has pleaded that Commandant 16th Battalion has started harassing him in order to adjust his own man in June 1994.
The plaintiff-appellant is alleged to have applied for casual leave to attend his wife, who was unwell and was to undergo her first delivery.
The leave was refused by the Commandant.
Alleging that no leave was granted for 18 months and on receipt of a telegram from his wife, the Commandant still refused to grant him any leave.
The plaintiff-appellant was directed to attend compulsory armourer course.
His pay was withheld for the month of June on the order passed by the Commandant.
He has further pleaded that when he made an application to collect some pocket allowance so that some amount may be sent to his wife and also requested that he may be permitted to see his uncle, who was serving at police lines, Patiala, he was declared as deserter with effect from 16121994 despite the fact that he was physically present in the unit on that date.
He had gone out on a outpass to see his uncle on 17.12.1994 but the Commandant ordered his enquiry and did not allow him to rejoin the unit.
No decision is alleged to have taken place by the authorities on his two appeals dated 551995 and 561995 yet the order dated 851995 has been passed dismissing him from service with effect from 16121994.
It is claimed that the plaintiff-appellant is entitled to be reinstated alongwith backwages and all consequential benefit with interest.
4.
The Civil Judge found that the plaintiff-appellant has failed to point out any material discrepancy in the enquiry conducted by the defendant-respondent.
It has further been held that the plaintiff-appellant had himself deserted the unit despite the directions issued to him to rejoin the unit.
A proper action is said to have been taken by requesting the Superintending of Police, Narnaul to apprehend the plaintiff-appellant and to produce him before the unit.
Despite efforts made, the plaintiff-appellant failed to join the unit or to face the Enquiry Committee.
It has been held just and reasonable to proceed ex-parte as the defendant-respondents were not to wait for the plaintiff- appellant endlessly.
The service record has also been taken into consideration, which shows that the plaintiff-appellant was in the habit of deserting the unit and had done so earlier also on 2/3 occasions.
The District Judge affirmed the afore-mentioned findings and held as under :-  "11.
In the present case, the defendants, Union of India and others, have placed on the record Ex. D1 Service-cum-Causalty Sheet of the plaintiff which shows that the entries were made therein from time to time regarding his misbehaviour and desertion and whenever the punishment was awarded to him.
Learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the defendants, pointed out three entries which are Ex.D2 to Ex.D4 which go to show that the plaintiff was in the habit of deserting the Battalion without permission of the higher authorities.
The application of the plaintiff for leave Ex. D6 was rejected on the ground that he could not be sent on leave frequently and he was advised to go on long leave, but even then, he deserted the Battalion without the permission of the authorities, so he was charge-sheeted vide document Ex.D7.
The plaintiff even submitted his resignation on 6.12.1994, the copy of which is Ex.D9.
The plaintiff was directed to deposit three months pay vide instructions Ex.D10 and vide order Ex11, he was ordered to deposit Rs. 5,599/- but the plaintiff deserted the Battalion on 16121994.
A letter was written to Superintendent of Police, Narnaul for apprehending the plaintiff and producing him before the Commandant and the copy of the same is Ex.D14.
A request was sent to the Superintendent of Police, Narnaul regarding the presence of the plaintiff in his native village vide letter Ex.D17 and vide letter Ex.D16, Superintendent of Police, Narnaul informed the Commandant that the plaintiff had left his village to join the service, but the plaintiff did not report for duty in the unit.
When the plaintiff failed to report on duty, an enquiry was ordered Ex.D15.
The Enquiry Report Ex.D23 was submitted by the Committee on which a show cause notice Ex.D20 was issued to the plaintiff and all these facts have been supported by DW1 Satbir Singh, Deputy Commandant, 6th Battalion, ITBP, Patiala.
The plaintiff never appeared before the Commanding Officer and he never filed any reply to the show cause notice and thereafter he was ordered to be dismissed.
The plaintiff was given sufficient notice of the enquiry and the action to be taken against him, as is evident from documents Ex.D25 and Ex.D26.
Thereafter the plaintiff was given his pay for the months of October and November 1994 vide Ex.D28 and Ex.D29.
He was also given bonus vide Ex.D30.
However, amounts of GPF, GIS were also given vide Ex.D32.
As per letter Ex.D33 the plaintiff was informed that his forms have not been received.
12.
So many documents have been placed on the record by the defendants which go to show that the plaintiff was in the habit of absenting himself from the Battalion without any sufficient reasons and was also in the habit of misbehaviour with the seniors.
He did not participate in the enquiry and he did not give any reply to the show cause notice issued to him.
From the documents placed on the record, it is amply proved that the plaintiff himself deserted the Battalion without any sufficient reasons.
The defendants, department, made all efforts to procure the presence of the plaintiff, but he did not report for duty, despite best efforts made by the department.
So, ultimately, after holding an enquiry, the services of the plaintiff were terminated because the defendant was left with no other alternative.
5.
Mr. RS Sangwan, learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has argued that under Rule 22 of the Rules, it has been provided that when it is proposed to terminate the services of a person, he is entitled to be given an opportunity by the authority competent to dismiss him from service.
The learned counsel has argued that no such opportunity was afforded to the plaintiff-appellant as postulated by Rule 20 of the `Rules'.
The learned counsel then argued that his past absence from duty has also been taken into consideration, for which he has already undergone the punishment including the period of 7.8.1992 to 13.8.1992, 24.6.1994 to 1371994, 381994 to 4101994.
According to the learned counsel for the aformentioned past conduct, no further action could be taken because the plaintiff-appellant has already undergone the punishment of seven days pack drill, five days punishment in force custody or regularisation of his period of alleged desertion.
6.
Ms. Ranjana Shahi, learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the plaintiff-appellant has been in the habit of remaining absent from duty.
On 14.12.1994 despite specific direction to report for duty, the plaintiff- appellant deserted the unit.
According to the learned counsel, despite the office letter No. 7313 dated 30121994 and the report of the police authority dated 1651995 that he was not available at his house the plaintiff-appellant did not join duty.
It is in these circumstances that on 2551995, on finalisation of Court of Enquiry proceedings, the plaintiff- appellant was declared as deserter.
She has further pointed out that he submitted his appeal dated 561995 wherein he has requested for grant of personal hearing before deciding his appeal.
On 1961995 vide letter No. 553, the Commandant directed him to appear in person so that he may be heard personally.
He was to appear by 3061995.
The letter was duly received by him on 2761995 but he did not come present on 3061995.
Accordingly, an order of dismissal was passed on 871995.
The learned counsel has further submitted that there is no infringement of the provision of ITBP Act or ITBP Rules.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that this appeal is without any merit and is thus liable to be dismissed because the order dated 871995 Ex.P-1 challenged by the plaintiff-appellant is consistent with the provisions of law applicable to the plaintiff-appellant.
The aforementioned order dated 871995 Ex.P-1 reads as under :-  "No. 880185606 Const/GD Surendra Singh  S/o Shri Bahadur Singh, Vill.
Gehli PO Hamidpur Distt.
Mahendragarh (Haryana)  Whereas I have carefully gone through the case of desertion/absence without leave against you, it is found that you while functioning as member of the force, deserted on 16121994 (FN) and are absenting without leave till date without sufficient cause.
You were also directed to report for duty vide this office letter No. 7313 dated 30121994 but you failed to comply with the orders.
2.
You were given an opportunity vide this office letter No. 463 dated 29.5.1995 to submit your explanation and defence within 15 days of the receipt of this letter.
The request made by you vide your appeal dated 561995 to give you a chance of hearing before deciding this appeal was considered by the undersigned and you were again given another opportunity vide this office letter No. 553 dated 1961995 to appear in person alongwith your written explanation and defence relevant to the case on or before 3061995.
This Memo No. 553 dated 1961995 has been received by you on 2761995 but you have not reported so far.
3.
Your appeals dated nil and dated 561995 have been duly considered by the undersigned and it is found that you have not produced any reasonable justification/defence against your desertion and absence without leave without permission of the competent authority, till date.
4.
I am satisfied that you are absenting without any reasonable cause and that you further retention in service is considered undesirable.
5.
Therefore, under the provisions of rule 17 read with rule 20 of ITBPF Rules, 1994, you are hereby dismissed from service with immediate effect.
The period of your unauthorised absence w.e.f 16121994 to till date is treated as `dies non' for all purposes."
8.
Under Section 74 of the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 (for brevity `the ITBP Act') enquiry into absence without leave is contemplated and the same is required to be held in accordance with the prescribed procedure under the rules.
Section 74 of the Act reads as under :-  "74.
Inquiry into absence without leave - (1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent from duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, be appointed by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or necessaries; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due authority or other sufficient cause, the Court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said deficiency, if any, and the commanding officer of the unit of which the person belongs or is attached, shall make a record thereof in the prescribed manner."
9.
It is further pertinent to mention that under Chapter XIV of the rules, the procedure for holding a Court of enquiry has been provided by Rules 174 and 175.
The action to be taken on such enquiry is regulated by Rules 176 and 177.
The aforementioned rules are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "174.
Procedure of Courts of Inquiry - (1) The proceedings of a Court of Inquiry shall not be open to the public.
Only such persons may attend the proceedings as are permitted by the Court to do so.
(2) The evidence of all witnesses shall be taken on oath or affirmation and signed by them after the same has been read over and explained to them.
Explanation - The Court shall administer the oath or affirmation to witnesses as if the Court were a Force Court.
(3) Evidence given by witnesses shall be recorded in narrative form unless the Court considers that any question and answers may be recorded as such.
(4) The Court may take into consideration any documents even though they are not formally proved after recording the reasons thereof.
(5) The court may ask witnesses any questions, in any form, that they consider necessary to elicit the truth and may take into consideration any evidence, whether the same is admissible under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or not.
(6) No counsel, or legal practitioner shall be permitted to appear before a Court of Inquiry.
(7) Provisions of section 101 shall apply for procuring the attendance of witnesses before the Court of Inquiry.
Witnesses shall be summoned as per Form set out in Appendix XV.
(8) (i) Save in the case of a prisoner of war who is still absent whenever the subject matter of inquiry is the conduct or character of a particular person, such person may be associated throughout with the inquiry and be given full opportunity of making any statement, or giving any evidence, he may wish to make or give and of cross-examination any witness whose evidence in his opinion, affects his character or reputation.
(ii) In other cases, before giving opinion against any person subject to the Act, the Court shall afford that person an opportunity to know all that has been stated against him, cross-examine any witnesses who have given evidence against him and make a statement and call witnesses in his defence.
(9) The answers given by a witness to any question asked before the Court shall not be admissible against such a witness on any charge at any subsequent occasion except a charge of giving false evidence before such Court.
(10) Where the proceedings of an inquiry are submitted to a higher authority for order under rule 176 such authority before disagreeing with the opinion of the Court, shall record reasons for doing so.
In such a case, provisions of clause (ii) of sub-rule (8) may not be complied with.
(11) The Court may be reassembled as often as the officer who assembled the court may direct, for the purpose of examining additional witnesses or further examining any witness or recording further information.
In such a case the Court may record fresh opinion if considered necessary after complying with the provisions of clause (ii) of sub-rule (8)  175.
Courts of Inquiry, when to be held - (1) A Court of Inquiry may be held to investigate into any disciplinary matter or any other matter of importance.
(2) In addition to a Court of Inquiry required to be held under sections 60 and 65 or Section 74, a Court of Inquiry shall be held in the following cases :- (a)(i) All unnatural deaths of persons subject to the Act or of other persons within the Force lines, an immediate report shall be sent through the messenger to the officer-in-charge of the Police Station within whose jurisdiction the place of such unnatural death exists.
(ii) In cases when such report cannot, for any reasons be delivered within a reasonable time, the Commanding Officer or the senior-most officer of the unit present shall prepare a report in Form set out in Appendix XIII.
(b) All injuries sustained by persons subject to the Act which are likely to cause full or partial disability.
The court shall in such case determine whether such injuries were attributable to service or not.
(c) All financial irregularities, losses, theft and misappropriation of public or Force property, where it is necessary to obtain the order of a superior officer on such irregularities, loss, theft or misappropriation.
(d) All losses of secret documents and any other material of secret or above security classification.
Such a court of Inquiry shall be ordered by an officer or authority superior to the Commanding Officer of the Unit having the lost document or material on its charge.
(e) All injuries sustained by private persons or damages to their property in respect of which there is likely to be a claim against the Government or the Force."
176.
Action on the proceedings of a Court of Inquiry - The proceedings of a Court of Inquiry shall be submitted by the Presiding Officer to the officer or authority who ordered the Court.
Such officer or authority on receiving the proceedings may pass final orders thereon himself, if he is empowered to do so, or refer them to a superior authority.
177.
Copies of Court of Inquiry Proceedings - A persona subject to the Act against whom the Court of Inquiry has given an opinion or who is being tried by a Force Court on a charge relating to matter investigated by the Court of Inquiry, shall be entitled to copies of the proceedings of the Court of Inquiries unless the Director General orders otherwise."
10.
A perusal of the aforementioned rules show that a Court of enquiry is required to be held in cases where the absence from duty without sanction is for a period of 30 days or more.
Under Rule 174, the evidence of all witnesses shall be taken on oath on affirmation.
The Court is also competent to take into consideration any document without their formal proof after recording reasons thereof.
A perusal of the record shows that Court of enquiry was order on 2111995 on the allegations that the plaintiff- appellant had remained absent from duty with effect from 16121994.
The Court of enquiry comprised of three persons namely the Chairman Sh. PK Singh, Ex-Army Man, Member I Subedar Sadh Ram and Member II Sub Inspector (O) Rajesh Gosain.
Despite best efforts made by the Enquiry Committee, the presence of the plaintiff-appellant could not be procured before it.
However, on 1151995, an appeal was received from him and eventually on the basis of documentary and oral evidence, the plaintiff-appellant was declared as deserter on 871995.
It is appropriate to mention that in reply to his appeal, the Commandant afforded him an opportunity to appear in person and explain his position on or before 3061995.
The letter dated 1961995 has been duly acknowledged by the plaintiff-appellant on 2761995 as is apparent from the registered A.D. received in the office of the Commandant on 3061995 but still the plaintiff-appellant did not appear before him.
A list of documents and witnesses who have come before the Board of Enquiry is Ex.D- 23.
Five persons have appeared as witnesses, who are Subedar Amro Singh, Khadhak Singh, Havildar G.D. Raghbir Singh, Subedar Major Rajinder Singh, SI Parkash Singh.
Various documents have also been mentioned, which are nine in number and the same were the basis for the Board of Enquiry to conclude that the plaintiff-appellant was guilty of absence from duty and was declared deserter.
It is also pertinent to mention that the plaintiff-appellant had tendered his resignation.
Therefore, the enquiry has been held in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
11.
It is well settled that absence without leave may amount to desertion if it is accompanied by necessary animus deserendi.
This view has been taken by the Supreme Court in Ibrahim v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1968 SC 731 and Capt.
Virendra Kumar v. Chief of the Army Staff, (1986) 2 SCC 217.
12.
The argument of the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant that there was no actual service of the charge sheet on the plaintiff-appellant would not require any detailed examination because the plaintiff-appellant himself has been in touch with the Court of enquiry and had sent appeals to it in May 1995.
He was granted ample opportunity to appear and explain his position vide letter dated 1961995, which was duly acknowledged by the plaintiff-appellant on 2761995.
Therefore, no violation of Rule 20 is made out.
In such a situation, the judgment in the case of Union of India v. Dinanath Shantaram Karekar, 1999(1) S.C.T.
667 : 1998(3) RSJ 714 and Dula Singh v. Union of India, 2000(3) RSJ 413 relied upon by the counsel for the plaintiff-appellant would have no application as the position is entirely different on facts and law.
The appeal is thus liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.