SS Saron, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 2915 of 2003 and Civil Writ Petition No. 6658 of 2003 as they are between the same parties and the subsequent writ petition is a continuation of the earlier one.
The earlier writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 2915 of 2003 has in fact become infructuous as in the said petition it was prayed by the petitioner that he be considered for promotion from the post of Reader to that of Professor in the Department of Mathematics of the respondent Maharshi Dayanand University Rohtak (hereinafter referred to as the "University") under the Career Advancement Scheme (CAS - for short) During the pendency of the writ petition, he has been considered and found not suitable.
2.
The subsequent writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 6658 of 2003 is for assailing the decision dated 142003 (Annexure P-4) of the University whereby the petitioner has been informed that his case for promotion as Professor in the Department of Mathematics under the CAS has not been recommended as two out of the three outside subject experts have evaluated his research work to be inadequate and of substandard quality.
Besides, directions are sought against the University to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Professor in the Department of Mathematics of the University under the CAS.
It is alleged by the petitioner that there has been improper consideration and bias on the part of Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2) and Head of the Mathematics Department (respondent No. 3) due to which the petitioner has not been promoted as Professor.
3.
Notice was issued in both the petitions and replies have been filed.
Respondent No. 6 Dr. NR Garg, Reader Department of Mathematics filed his written statement in CWP No. 2915 of 2003.
Thereafter, vide order dated 2972003 the written statement on behalf of respondents No. 3, 4 and 8 in CWP No. 2915 of 2003 was taken on record.
Respondent No. 6 as also respondents No. 3, 4 and 8 in their respective written statements have stated that the writ petition i.e. CWP No. 2915 of 2003 has become infructuous as the primary relief claimed by the petitioner was for consideration for promotion to the post of Professor under the CAS.
It is stated that the case of the petitioner has been considered by the respondent University and in terms of the consideration process, the Research work submitted by the petitioner was referred to three outside subject experts appointed by the Vice Chancellor in terms of Rule 7 under the head "Process".
It is also submitted that the report of the three outside subject experts on the assessment and evaluation of the research work have been received in the University and the two outside subject experts have given negative reports on the research work in respect of the petitioner.
They have mentioned in their assessment reports that the Research work of the petitioner is inadequate and of sub-standard quality.
4.
As already noticed above the petitioner has himself filed the present CWP No. 6658 of 2003 for quashing the decision contained in order dated 142003 (Annexure P-4) whereby he has been informed that his case for promotion in the department of Mathematics under CAS has not been recommended.
Therefore, evidently C.W.P.
No. 2915 of 2003 has become infructuous as the petitioner himself has filed the subsequent writ petition challenging the action of the respondent University in not recommending his case for promotion as Professor.
5.
Written statement has been filed by the Registrar of the University in CWP No. 6658 of 2003 on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
It is stated that the petitioner has not appended the complete true copy of letter (Annexure P-4) and has purposely deleted the last para of letter with a view to show that he had been permanently rejected for promotion as a Professor under CAS.
The true copy has been appended as (Annexure R-1/1) with the written statement.
The relevant para which has been omitted, is that after informing the petitioner that his case has not been recommended for promotion, the Vice Chancellor had passed orders that he may apply afresh as and when he feels that he has sufficient published work and that his case would be considered after one year as per provision under the Scheme.
6.
It is further stated in the written statement that the petitioner has admitted that the University Grants Commission (UGC - for short) guidelines have been duly approved/adopted by the respondent University.
The University has got evaluated the published research work of the petitioner along with others in terms of Clause 7 under Head "Process" of Chapter VII of the University Calendar Volume III.
This process, it is stated, conforms with the UGC revised criteria as contained in UGC letter dated 21.2.2002 which was approved by Government of Haryana vide its letter dated 1142002.
Thereafter, it was approved and adopted by the University for implementation vide its letter dated 1842002 (Annexure R-1/2).
It has been made clear that books/reprints of published research work submitted by the petitioner would be got assessed and evaluated by three outside experts in the subject of Mathematics, the specialization of the experts may be of any sub-branch of Mathematics.
An expert in the subject of Mathematics whose name is in the University's approved panel of subject experts, it is stated, is fully competent to assess the work of a Reader in Mathematics.
Thus, it is further stated, that the competence of subject expert in Mathematics is not liable to be challenged.
Besides, the outside subject experts were appointed by the Vice Chancellor himself in accordance with the Executive Council resolution No. 5 dated 3112001 and the order dated 28112002 of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 16643 of 2002 wherein a Division Bench of this Court had directed that consideration for merit promotion under CAS wherein the claim of the petitioner and others from the department are to be considered shall not be conducted in the presence of Head of Department i.e. Dr. Babu Ram (respondent No. 3) or by the members nominated or recommended by him and in case the University desires to effect such consideration, it may do so after constituting a fresh committee wherein the expert shall be nominated by the Vice Chancellor of the University.
Therefore, respondent No. 3 Dr. Babu Ram had no role whatsoever in getting appointment of three outside experts in Mathematics to assess the quality and quantity of the published work of the petitioner.
Therefore, it is prayed that the writ petition merits dismissal.
7.
The petitioner by way of C.M.
No. 11339 of 2003 in CWP No. 6658 of 2003 has filed replication in the form of short affidavit controverting the assertions of the respondents in their written statement in CWP No. 6658 of 2003.
Besides, has placed on record letter dated 1252003 (Annexure P-8) written by the Counsel for the petitioner to the UGC, the reply of the UGC dated 1452003 (Annexure P-9), the letter dated 14/1522000 (Annexure P-10) from the UGC to the Education Secretary Haryana, letter dated 22112002 (Annexure P-11) from the Registrar of the University to the petitioner and a letter dated 10.10.2002 (Annexure P-12) have been placed on record.
The Civil Misc. is allowed and the replication and the documents are taken on record.
8.
The facts leading to the case are that the petitioner holds a Doctorate Degree in the field of Mathematics.
He joined the University on ad hoc basis on 2111983 and on regular basis with effect from 281984.
The date of joining of the petitioner as Reader in the Department of Mathematics in the respondent University in the scale of Rs. 3700-5700 is 15111991.
The appointment of the petitioner was by duly constituted selection committing for the purpose.
The petitioner was appointed against a substantive cadre post of Reader in the respondent University and he has been working since then.
9.
The UGC with a view to alleviate the teaching faculty from stagnation has from time to time been formulating promotion policies where without the availability of higher post, employees would be notionally promoted while continuing to hold the same post which they were occupying.
The UGC initially framed the Merit Promotion Scheme (MPS - for short) and thereafter the Career Advance Scheme (CAS) was framed to provide assured career progression and to end stagnation amongst the teaching faculty.
10.
The CAS was adopted by the respondent University as per State Government Notification dated 8122000 and it was approved by the Executive Council of the University on 1622001.
The detailed guidelines were circulated for the implementation of CAS for University appointed teachers for the purposes of promotion.
This scheme has also been incorporated in Chapter VII of the University Calendar Volume III.
Applications were invited by the respondent University vide letter dated 492001 (Annexure P-2) from eligible Readers for their promotion as Professors under CAS.
The cut off date for consideration was 3092001 and the concerned teachers were asked to submit their research work on the prescribed proforma latest by the said date i.e. 3092001.
The petitioner applied for promotion as Professor on 2992001 along with his research work he had in support of his claim under the CAS for which he was eligible.
11.
Prior to the case of the petitioner being processed and considered for promotion as Professor, the UGC vide letter dated 21.2.2002 laid down revised criteria according to which the required research papers/publications was raised from three to five, out of which two could be books.
This was for the purposes of selecting a candidate for promotion from Reader to Professor under the CAS in the University departments.
A communication dated 252002 was addressed to the petitioner informing him that as per the modified criteria for the CAS, minimum five research papers/publications, out of which two could be books, to be got assessed/evaluated are required in three sets for consideration of his case for promotion as Professor.
The petitioner was asked to submit the additional research papers/publications in three sets through the Head of the Department at the earliest.
The petitioner in response to the same vide his covering letter dated 952002 (Annexure P-3) furnished the details of additional Research papers/publications.
12.
A meeting of the screening committee was held in the office of Professor Babu Ram (Convener) on 1382001 to recommended the eligible candidates for promotion from Readers to Professors under CAS in view of their publication/Research work as per UGC norms.
During the meeting the Committee sent an Assistant of the Establishment Branch to approach the petitioner so as to make available one additional re-print of Research paper submitted by him.
The petitioner prepared photo-copy of three sets of his Research papers and delivered the same in the office of Assistant Registrar (Establishment) of the respondent University.
The petitioner states that his case for promotion was cleared by the Screening Committee along with other cases for promotion from the post of Reader to Professor in the meeting held on 1382002.
13.
The petitioner earlier also had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 16643 of 2002 in this Court wherein a challenge was made to an order dated 392001 appointing Dr. Babu Ram as Head of the Mathematics Department (respondent No. 3).
The case of the petitioner was that the appointment of Dr. Babu Ram as Head of the Mathematics department was in utter violation of statute 21 of the Maharshri University Dayanand Act, 1975.
The petitioner states that in his said writ petition he had pleaded his apprehension as regards the role of Dr. Babu Ram, Head of the Mathematics department in the forthcoming interviews for appoinment by way of promotion to the post of Professor under CAS in view of the fact that the petitioner had impugned his appointment.
The respondent University filed its reply dated 23112002 (in the earlier writ petition) wherein it was submitted that the case of the petitioner was being considered for the post of Professor.
A Division Bench of this Court on 28112002 passed the following order in the earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 16643 of 2002 :-  "C.M.
35384 allowed.
Admitted.
List for final disposal in the month of February, 2003.
Consideration for merit promotion under "Career Advancement Scheme" wherein the claims of the petitioner and others from the Department are to be considered, shall not be conducted in the presence of the Head of Department i.e. respondent No. 3 or by the members nominated or recommended by him.
In case the University desires to effect such consideration, it may do so after constituting a fresh Committee wherein the experts shall be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor of the University."
14.
The petitioner, thereafter, came to know that interviews for consideration for promotion under CAS for the post of Professor in the Mathematics Department was fixed for 29112002 in which respondent No. 6 (in CWP No. 2915 of 2003), the only candidate, had been called but the petitioner was not intimated or called for the interview.
The petitioner accordingly addressed a communication dated 27.11.2002 stating therein that his junior Dr. NR Garg, had been called for the interview while he was being denied the same.
There was no response to the said communication from the University and in fact the interviews were held on 29112002.
The petitioner sent representations to the respondent University for consideration of his case and one of the representations is dated 1312003.
The petitioner, however, vide communication dated 1312003 was informed by the University in reference to his earlier letter dated 27.11.2002 that his name was not considered and placed before the selection committee in the interview held on 29112002 as he had not been found eligible for promotion as Professor under CAS.
The reason given was that the petitioner had submitted inadequate research work, besides, he had submitted his research work late i.e. 8112002 and, as such, it was on account of non-submission of research/published work that his case could not be considered.
The petitioner vide his letter dated 10.2.2003 clarified that he had submitted the requisite research papers/publications to the Head of Department on 952002 itself.
It was also submitted that his name had been cleared in the meeting of the Screening Committee held on 1382002 wherein the names of eligible candidates had been recommended for promotion from Reader to Professor under the CAS in view of their publication/research work as per UGC norms.
Therefore, the assertion that the petitioner had submitted his publication/research work on 8112002 were contrary to record.
In spite of the petitioner clarifying the factual position, it came to his knowledge that 163rd meeting of the Executive Council was slated for 2422003 and agenda item 42 related to recommendations of the selection Committee for promotion of Readers of various teaching department of the University to the posts of Professors under the CAS.
15.
In this manner, it is stated, that the necessity had arisen to file CWP No. 2915 of 2003 on account of the fact that in case the Executive Council was permitted to deliberate upon Agenda Item No. 42 and grant approval as regards promotions to the post of Professors under CAS including private respondents (in CWP No. 2915 of 2003), the petitioner would suffer an irreparable loss both in terms of seniority in the department and at the University level, besides, being deprived of higher pay scale.
Therefore, it was prayed in CWP No. 2916 of 2003 that it be declared that the action of the respondent University in not considering the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Professor under CAS along with his juniors i.e. private respondents (in CWP No. 2915 of 2003) despite his being eligible is unconstitutional and illegal.
A direction was also sought in CWP No. 2915 of 2003 against the respondent University to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Professor under the Career Advancement Scheme in the department of Mathematics along with juniors respondents No. 3 to 8 (in CWP No. 2915 of 2003).
A writ of prohibition was also sought for restraining the respondent University from deliberating upon Agenda Item No. 42 in the 163rd meeting of the Executive Council of the University to be held on 2422003.
16.
At the time of motion hearing of CWP No. 2915 of 2003, this Court on 21.2.2003 passed the following order :-  "Notice of motion for 2972003.
In the meantime proceedings in respect of agenda No. 42 in its meeting to be held on 2422003 by the Executive Council may go on, but the decision taken thereon be not given effect to, and be retained in a sealed cover.
Order dasti on payment of usual charges."
17.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
18.
Shri TS Dhindsa, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the University in terms of communication dated 142003 (Annexure P-4) informing the petitioner that his case has not been recommended for promotion is illegal, perverse, arbitrary and motivated.
It is submitted that in the subject of mathematics there are three basic fields of specialization i.e. (i) Analysis; (ii) Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory; and (iii) Applied Mathematics, Seismology and Elasticity.
The field of specialization of the petitioner is Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory and the case of the petitioner has not been evaluated by the outside experts relating to his field of specialization as was the mandate under the UGC guidelines.
There are only with six outside experts in the specialization of Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory.
The petitioner, it is contended, had got in touch with them and they have confirmed the fact that his case was not considered by them.
It is also contended that the UGC guidelines do not contain the `Bench Mark' to assess the research/publications in terms of quality and it is on this account that the guidelines provide for research work/publications to be evaluated by the outside external experts from the field of specialization in the subject concerned.
The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on a letter dated 24102002 (Annexure P-6) which it is contended clarifies that the University itself concedes that the evaluation of the research work has to be from an outside external expert from the field of concerned specialization only.
It is further contended that respondents No. 2 and 3 are biased against him in view of the fact that the petitioner had assailed the order dated 392001 whereby Dr. Babu Ram respondent No. 3 was appointed as Professor and Head of the Department by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 16643 of 2002.
It was the case of the petitioner that the appointment of Dr. Babu Ram was in violation of statute No. 21 of the Maharashi Dayanand Act, providing for the rule of rotation for appointment of Head of the Department.
In that petition also the petitioner had raised a specific apprehension that his case for consideration for promotion to the post of Professor under CAS would not be dealt with fairly due to the bias of respondent No. 3.
The bias and mala fide intention, it is contended, is clear from the fact that after the passing of the order dated 28112002 in C.W.P.
No. 16643 of 2002, interviews were held for the post of Professors under CAS wherein the case of the petitioner's juniors was considered but the petitioner was left out on the lame excuse that he had submitted his research and publications late in point of time.
In support of these assertions, the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the case of State of Punjab v. VK Khanna (2001) 2 SCC 330 : 2001(1) SCT 933 (SC).
19.
On the other hand Shri Ashok Aggarwal, learned Senior Counsel appearing with Shri J.B. Tacoria and Shri Vikram Aggarwal, Advocates for the respondents No. 1 to 3 has contended that the contentions urged on behalf of the petitioner are absolutely misconceived and do not call for interference by this Court.
He has contended that the University got the published research work of the petitioner evaluated in accordance with Clause-7 under the head "Process", of Chapter VII of the University Calendar Volume III.
Besides, in addition to the aforesaid process even the UGC revised criteria and terms of promotion of a candidate from Reader to Professor under CAS in the University Department is as contained in the UGC letter dated 21.2.2002.
The said guidelines were approved by the Haryana Government vide letter dated 1142002 and approved and adopted by the University for implementation vide letter dated 1842002 (Annexure R-1/2).
On the basis of the same it is contended that books/reprints of published research work submitted by the petitioner is to be assessed and evaluated by three outside experts in the subject of Mathematics, the specialization of the experts may be of any sub-branch of Mathematics and expert in the subject of Mathematics whose name is on the University's approved panel of subject experts is fully competent to assess the work of a Reader in Mathematics.
The petitioner was found to be ineligible as two of the three experts, after assessment of the quality and quantity of his published research work in terms of UGC guidelines, did not recommend him for promotion to the post of Professor.
Therefore, the selection committee did not recommend the petitioner for the next stage of the selection process i.e. for the interview.
As such the grievance of the petitioner, it is contended, is based on an outdated and irrelevant UGC guidelines.
Insofar as the bias on the part of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 is concerned, it is contended, that the same is false which is evident from the fact that it was made at a belated stage i.e. after about one year of the appointment of Professor Babu Ram as Head of the Department.
Even otherwise, it is contended that this Court had by an interim order disassociated Professor Babu Ram Gupta for considering the case of the petitioner for the post of Professor.
The learned Senior counsel had also produced before us the records of the case including the reports of evaluation/assessment of research/published work/material for promotion to the post of Reader, a list of the panel of subject experts and the noting of the case.
The learned counsel Shri Dhiraj Chawla and Shri SS Godara appearing for the private respondents in CWP No. 2915 of 2003 have adopted and supported the contentions urged by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents No. 1 to 3 in CWP No. 6658 of 2003.
20.
On the basis of the above contentions, the questions that require consideration in CWP No. 6658 of 2003 are: (i) whether there has been violation of the UGC guidelines governing the selection for the post of Professor under the CAS, (ii) whether there has been a proper evaluation of the published research work of the petitioner by the University, and (iii) whether the action of the respondent University in not promoting the petitioner from the post of Reader to that the Professor under the CAS is biased and suffers from the vice of malafides and ulterior motives.
21.
The points (i) and (ii) above are common and therefore, may be considered together.
As already noticed, the primary contention of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that the research work of the petitioner has not been properly evaluated in accordance with the UGC guidelines.
The UGC guidelines on which the petitioner places reliance have been appended as Annexure P-1 under the heading "Selection Committee".
A reading of the said Annexure, however, does not show that the same has been issued by the UGC.
There is no mention of the authority issuing the letter or even the fact whether these indeed have been issued by the UGC, besides there is no date.
In any case, the petitioner relies on the following part of the so called instructions ;-  For the Post of Professor - "The process of selection should involve inviting the bio-data and reprints of three major publications of which one could be a book or research report, before the interview and getting them assessed by the same three external experts who are to be invited for the interview.
The assessment report must be placed before the Selection Committee.
The composition of the Selection Committee for the post of a Professor will be the same as proposed for the post of Reader" The above said instructions, however, do not help the petitioner except that it provides that the assessment which is to be done by the external experts is to be by the same experts who are to be invited for the interview.
The respondent University has got the published research work of the petitioner along with that of others evaluated in terms of Clause-7 under head "Process" of Chapter VII of the University Calendar Volume III, which reads as under :- "Clause-7.
Professor (Promotional) In addition to the sanctioned positions of Professor, which must be filled in through direct recruitment through all advertisements, the Scheme for promotion to the post of Professor would be applicable to all the Readers (directly recruited as well as promoted) in the University having a minimum 8 years of teaching experience as Reader in the scale of Rs. 3700-5700 (revised Rs. 12000-18300).
PhD degree shall be compulsory for promotion to Professorship.
The candidate should present herself/himself before the Selection Committee with the following :- (a) Self appraisal report for the period including 5 years before the date of eligibility be submitted.
(b) Minimum of five research publications out of which two could be the books be submitted for evaluation/assessment before the interviews.
(c) Any other academic contributions.
(d) Seminars/Conferences attended.
(e) Contribution to teaching/academic environment/institutional corporate life.
(f) Extension and field outreach activities.
Process The process of Selection should involve inviting the bio-data and re-prints of minimum of five research publications out of which two could be the books.
The assessment of the research publications including books, be done by three eminent experts in the subject which shall be different than those called for interview to be conducted later on.
All the recommendations be positive from the three experts.
In case the recommendation of one out of the three is negative the research publications be sent to the fourth expert for evaluation and assessment.
In all, there has to be minimum of three positive recommendations out of the total of four experts, in case the fourth experts has participated in the exercise due to one negative report out of the initially three experts involved in evaluation.
Repeat process of promotion/interview for the rejected candidates can be conducted only after a minimum period of one year from the date of promotion process/interview in which the candidate was rejected."
22.
The process provided for by the University Calendar is in conformity with the revised criteria of the UGC and the terms of promotion of a candidate from Reader to Professor under the CAS in the University Departments as contained in UGC letter dated 21.2.2002, which reads as under :-  "Dr. (Mrs.) Pankaj Mittal,  Joint Secretary University Grants Commission Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi - 110 001.
February, 21 2002.
No. f.3-3/2000 (PS) Dear Maj. Gen.
(Retd.)
Suhag, The Commission at its meeting held on 1812002 considered the modification in the procedure for promotion of Reader to Professor under the Career Advancement Scheme in University Departments.
The Commission RESOLVED that the following criteria and terms must be adhered to in selecting a candidate for promotion from Reader to Professor under Career Advancement Scheme in University departments :- * that a minimum of 8 YEARS EXPERIENCE AS A READER be an eligibility; * that the professor already appointed under direct recruitment be not eligible; * that self-appraisal report for the period including five years before the date of eligibility be submitted; * that minimum of FIVE RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS out of which two could be the books be submitted for evaluation/assessment before the interviews; * that the assessment of the research publications, including books, be done by three eminent experts in the subject which shall be DIFFERENT than those called for interview to be conducted later on; * that all the recommendations be positive from the three experts.
In case the recommendations of one out of the three is negative, the research publications be sent to the fourth expert for evaluation and assessment.
In all, there has to be a MINIMUM OF THREE POSITIVE RECOMMENDATIONS out of the total of four experts, in case the fourth expert has participated in the exercise due to one negative report out of the initially three experts involved in evaluation; * that there be a separate column in the evaluation report of the expert saying whether the research publications and books are recommended or not recommended; * that the University be permitted to hold the interview for promotion under CAS only for those candidates who have cleared by obtaining minimum of three positive recommendations from the experts on their research publications/books; * that then after the interview be conducted inviting three experts of the concerned subject making sure that these experts be different than those who had assessed and evaluated the research publications; * that repeat process of promotion/interview for the rejected candidates can be conducted only after a minimum period of year from the date of promotion process/interview in which the candidate was rejected; * that the promotion from Reader to Professor under CAS being a personal position and not against a sanctioned post, the teaching workload of the Reader be carried forward with him/her and be undertaken by the promotee even in the capacity of the CAS Professor; * that the aforesaid communication be communicated to all the Universities for immediate compliance with effect from March 1, 2002.
This is for your information & necessary action.
Maj. Gen.
(Retd.)
Bhim S Suhag,  Vice-Chancellor,  Maharshi Dayanand University  Rohtak-124001".
Yours faithfully  Sd/-  (Dr. (Mrs.).
Pankaj Mittal) 23.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that his categoric assertion is that the evaluation of the research work of the petitioner is to be done by external subject experts from his field of specialization i.e. Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory in terms of the UGC conditions.
Besides, in terms of the revised guidelines even the words "subject expert" are preceded by the word "eminent" which in itself signifies a subject expert who has attained a certain level of eminence in the concerned field.
The learned counsel for the petitioner had vide letter dated 1252003 (Annexure P-8) sought clarification from the UGC as regards the evaluation of research work as to whether the same is to be done by the subject expert concerned or from the subject expert from the field of his specialization.
This clarification was sought as in the letter dated 21.2.2002 issued by the UGC, the words used were "Eminent Subject Expert".
The Under Secretary of the UGC vide her letter dated 1452003 (Annexure P-5) informed that: "eminent subject expert means an expert who has shown eminence in his subject area/field."
The petitioner has also placed reliance on a communication dated 1422000 (Annexure P-10) addressed by the Secretary UGC to the Education Secretary Government of Haryana, Chandigarh wherein it has been brought to the notice of the State Government that the Haryana Government is not implementing the UGC notification dated 1991991 on minimum qualifications of teachers in toto.
It was informed that the UGC regulations are mandatory and even the Supreme Court of India has upheld them to be mandatory in Raj Singh's case in 1994 [i.e. University of Delhi v. Raj Singh, 1994 Supp.
(3) SCC 516 : 1995(1) SCT 1 (SC)].
Therefore, it is contended that the UGC guidelines are mandatory.
Another letter that has been adverted to by the petitioner is the letter dated 22112002 (Annexure P-11) from the University to the petitioner wherein it has been requested to give the specific instance where subject experts from the concerned field of specialization in Mathematics Department were not called.
It is stated that the criteria of selection/panel of subject experts is the same for the post of Reader and the CAS guidelines issued by the UGC.
Another aspect which has been contended is that the University vide its letter dated 10.10.2002 (Annexure P-12) addressed to all Heads of the Teaching Departments, it was provided that scholarship would be awarded only in the specialization in which research facilities are available in that department.
As such the Heads of Departments were asked to send the specialization in which research facilities were available.
The petitioner also refers to an Ordnance relating to Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) contained in the University Calender Volume II Clause 15.1 which provides that even in the case of appointment of Examiners to evaluate the thesis of a candidate for the award of PhD, the Examiners have to be from the same area of specialization.
24.
In short, the primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that his research work was only liable to be evaluated or assessed by a subject expert from his speciality of Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory and the evaluation by other than those of this specialization vitiates the selection process of consideration for promotion to the post of Professor under the CAS.
25.
We have considered these contentions also of the learned counsel for the petitioner and have also perused the documents referred to by him.
26.
As already noticed, the revised UGC guidelines dated 21.2.2002 provide that the assessment of the research publications, including books, is to be done by three eminent experts in the subject who are to be different than those called for interview to be conducted later on.
Besides, after the consideration process there is a requirement of minimum three positive recommendations out of the total four experts, in case four experts have participated in the exercise due to one negative report out of the initially three experts involved in evaluation.
The University is to hold an interview for promotion under CAS for those candidates who have been cleared by outside experts by obtaining minimum of three positive recommendations from the experts on their research publications/books.
Thereafter, the interview is to be conducted by inviting three experts of the concerned subject making sure that these experts are different than those who had assessed and evaluated the research publication.
27.
Therefore, evidently the assessment of the research publication including books is to be done by three outside experts in the subject.
The assessment and evaluation of the research work in respect of the petitioner has been done by three outside experts in the subject of Mathematics.
We have perused the reports of the three experts submitted by the learned Senior Counsel for the University.
Two out of the three experts have given negative reports in respect of the research work of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner in the initial assessment did not have recommendations from three outside experts so as to be eligible for participation in the interview.
Besides, this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is not to re-appreciate or re-examine the assessment of research work of the petitioner.
Judicial review, as is well known, is concerned not with the decision but with the decision making process.
The Courts are merely concerned with the competence of the authority and the mode in which the authority takes the decision.
The Courts are not concerned with the merits of the decision and neither can the Courts substitute their opinion or decision in place of the impugned decision of the authority as judicial review is not to be mistaken as if the Court was sitting in appeal over the decision taken by the authority.
The control by Judicial review of an administrative decision is permissible in case of illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety.
Errors of law which vitiate the ultimate decision are open to judicial review and those apparent on the face of the record render the decision ultra vires.
However, it is not shown by the petitioner that the decision taken by the authorities of the University is in any manner contrary to the statutory provisions of law.
It is even not his case that the exercise of power of evaluation has been done for an irrelevant consideration or for an improper purpose so as to make the decision irrational.
The case of the petitioner is not one of procedural impropriety.
28.
The grievance of the petitioner is that his research work has not been assessed by a subject expert of his speciality of Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory.
This contention is without any basis.
The letter dated 1452003 (Annexure P-9) from the Under Secretary of the University addressed to the learned counsel for the petitioner informing the latter that eminent subject expert means an expert who has shown eminence in his subject area/field, is not of much consequence.
The subject involved here is the subject of Mathematics and the perusal of the letter dated 1452003 (Annexure P-9) does not give much support to the case of the petitioner.
Eminent subject expert in the context of the facts and circumstances would mean an expert in the subject of Mathematics.
The letter does not go on to specify the sub- classification of the specialization in the area/field of Mathematics.
We are of the view that the rights of parties cannot be determined by mere correspondence by letters written by the UGC to the party or his Counsel.
The petitioner in order to show that there was been an improper consideration of his research work must show the specific guidelines or instructions of the University or the UGC, which have allegedly been violated.
A mere letter from the Under Secretary of the UGC, which even otherwise is not of much help to the petitioner, cannot determine the rights of the petitioner so as to issue a mandamus to the respondents to re-consider the case of the petitioner on account of an alleged improper consideration.
The University guidelines dated 21.2.2002 enjoin that the assessment of research publication including books is to be done by three eminent expert in the subject which would mean the subject of Mathematics and not the further sub classified fields of specialization as is sought to be contended on behalf of the petitioner.
The letter dated 1452003 (Annexure P-9) from the under Secretary of the UGC cannot possibly supersede the UGC criteria dated 21.2.2002.
29.
After examining the record and the material produced by the learned Senior counsel for the University, we are of the view that the research work of the petitioner has been considered in accordance with the consideration process provided under Clause 7 under the head "Process" of chapter VII of the University Calender Volume III read with the UGC revised criteria dated 21.2.2002.
The process of selection provides the assessment of research publications including books, which is to be done by three eminent experts in the subject who are to be different than those called for interview to be conducted later on.
Besides, all the recommendations are to be positive from the three experts.
In case the recommendation of one out of three is negative the research publications are to be sent to the fourth expert for evaluation and assessment.
In all, there are to be a minimum three positive recommendations out of the total of four experts.
The reports of experts produced before us, as already noticed, show that two out of the three outside experts who assessed and evaluated the research work of the petitioner for consideration for promotion from Reader to Professor in the Mathematics Department under the CAS, have not recommended him for promotion and only one has recommended him.
The two of the experts who have not recommended the petitioner, did assess the research work of the petitioner and have given their brief reasons in support of their decision and this Court cannot sit in appeal over the reasons recorded by the experts and neither can it substitute the decision of the experts.
30.
Therefore, there is no error in the consideration process of the research work of the petitioner and the contention of the petitioner that his research work has to be assessed and evaluated only by experts in the sub-classified specialization of Algebra and Algebraic Coding Theory, is without any basis.
An expert in the subject of Mathematics whose name is in the Universities approved panel of subject experts is competent to assess the work of a Reader in Mathematics for consideration for promotion to the post of Professor.
The outside subject experts were appointed by the Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2) himself in accordance with the Executive Council resolution No. 5 dated 3112001 as also the order dated 28112002 of this Court passed in C.W.P.
16643 of 2002 which provided that consideration of merit promotion under CAS wherein the claim of the petitioner and others from the Department are to be considered shall not be considered in the presence of Dr. Babu Ram Gupta, Head of the Mathematics Department (respondent No. 3).
The nomination of subject experts was done by the Vice Chancellor and the panel of outside experts was approved.
The three experts who assessed the work of the petitioner are outside experts in the subject of Mathematics and are on the approved panel of subject experts drawn by the University.
Therefore, we find no infirmity in the consideration process of the research work of the petitioner and neither has the petitioner shown the violation of any guidelines or instructions of the University or the UGC from which it can be said that his work was not properly evaluated or assessed.
31.
Insofar as allegations of bias, mala fide and ulterior motive are concerned, we find that the allegations have been made at a belated stage.
It may be noticed that Professor Babu Ram Gupta (respondent No. 3) became Head of the Mathematics Department under statute No. 21 of the Maharshi Dayanand University Act on 392001.
It is also stated that the petitioner submitted his application for promotion from the post of Reader to Professor through the Head of the Mathematics Department (respondent No. 3) to the Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2) and it is for the first time after more than one year that the petitioner raised objection to the appointment of Head of the Mathematics Department through a representation made on 25.9.2002 and then by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 16643 of 2002.
From this it can be safely inferred that the petitioner had no grievance till 292002 when his case was cleared by the screening committee of which respondent No. 3 was also a member and as soon as his case was cleared by the scrutiny committee for being processed for promotion he started making allegations of bias, prejudice and malice against Head of Department (respondent No. 3).
This Court, as already noticed above, passed an interim order dated 28112002 directing that claim of the petitioner and others from the department shall not be conducted in presence of Head of the Department (respondent No. 3) or by the members nominated or recommended by him.
In other words Dr. Babu Ram Gupta, Head of the Department, was disassociated from the consideration process for all intents and purposes.
Therefore, in the circumstances, the Head of the Department (respondent No. 3) had no occasion to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion and he was disassociated from the consideration process.
In fact after respondent No. 3 had been disassociated from the process of consideration for promotion, then soon thereafter the petitioner submitted his published research work on 8112002 in three sets as per requirement.
Therefore, the allegations of bias made by the petitioner have been made more for the sake of making than being made out.
The ratio of the judgment in VK Khanna's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not of any help to the petitioner.
It is provided therein that the test of bias is as to whether there is a mere apprehension of bias or there is a real danger of bias and it is on this score that the surrounding circumstances are and ought to be collated and necessary conclusion drawn therefrom.
In the event, however, the conclusion is otherwise that there is existing a real danger of bias, administrative action cannot be sustained.
If on the other hand, allegations pertain to rather fanciful apprehension in administrative action, question of declaring them to be unsustainable on the basis therefor, would not arise.
32.
Keeping in view the facts that Head of the Mathematics Department (respondent No. 3), was not involved in the consideration of selection process of the petitioner, the allegation of bias against him are without basis.
Insofar as the allegation of bias against the Vice Chancellor (respondent No. 2) is concerned the same are equally without basis.
The petitioner has not shown as to how and in what manner the Vice Chancellor has been inimical to him.
In order to assail an administrative action on the ground of bias and malafide, it must be specified as to how the concerned officer was ill disposed towards the petitioner and how and in what manner did he manage to see that the petitioner is not promoted to the post of Professor.
The allegations of bias have been made in a casual manner without any material or circumstance on record to substantiate them.
In the absence of any clear allegations against respondent No. 2 and 3, the charge of bias and malafide cannot be sustained.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no merit in this writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 6658 of 2003 and the same is dismissed.
C.W.P.
No. 2915 of 2003, as already noticed above, is dismissed as having become infructuous.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.