Viney Mittal, J - This order will dispose of Civil Revision No. 3013 of 1996, Civil Revision No. 3015 of 1996 and Civil Revision No. 3016 of 1996.
2.
The State of Punjab is in revision before this Court.
The order dated June 11, 1996 has been impugned.
3.
Certain facts be noticed.
The plaintiff-respondents filed a suit for declaration claiming that they were entitled to the house rent allowance at the rate of 125% of the basic pay per month and compensatory allowance as per the service rules with effect from April 1, 1985 as was being paid to other Govt. employees in the district with consequential relief that the plaintiffs would also be entitled to all benefits towards pay and allowances after getting the required relief.
In the alternative, a prayer was made to issue a mandatory direction to the defendants to grant house rent allowance at the rate of 125% of the basic pay per month and compensatory allowance with effect from April 1, 1985 as admissible to the other Govt. employees working in the district and pay and calculate the arrears.
4.
The said suit filed by the plaintiffs came to be decreed by the learned trial Court vide judgment and decree dated April 22, 1988.
The relief, which was granted by the learned trial Court, is as under :-  "In view of my findings on the above issues, the suit of the plaintiffs for declaration to the effect that they are entitled to 12-1/2% of the house rent of the basic pay per month instead of 7-1/2% to be paid to them with further directions to the defendants to grant 12-1/2% house rent of the basic pay in future with arrears of this allowance as well as compensatory allowance w.e.f.
1485 as the same is being paid to the Govt. employees working in Gurdaspur City or any other place within 16 Kms.
within the belt of international border is decreed with no order as to costs.
Decree sheet be prepared accordingly.
File be consigned to the record room.
A copy of this judgment be placed in other connected case."
5.
The matter was taken up in appeal.
The learned Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur modified the judgment of the learned trial Court and ordered as follows :-  "In the result, the decree of the learned trial Court is modified to the extent that the plaintiffs shall be entitled to house rent allowance at the rate of 12-1/2% of their basic pay with effect from 141985 subject to the condition that the appointment of the plaintiffs is against the frozen strength of 1121967.
The plaintiffs shall also be entitled to compensatory allowance as admissible to the employees working in the Govt. schools.
The said house rent allowance and compensatory allowance shall be admissible on the same pattern as allowed to the similarly situated employees in the Govt. school with effect from 111996 as per the policy laid down by the State Govt. consequent upon the recommendations of the third Pay Commission."
6.
Since no further appeal was filed against the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge, therefore, the aforesaid judgment became final between the parties.
The decree holders subsequently took up the matter in execution.
An order dated August 25, 1993 was passed by the learned executing Court.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure A-1 to the present petition and reads as follows :-  "It has been conceded by learned counsel for the DH that the JD has complied with the decree under execution except the payment of house rent allowance @ 5% of the basic pay.
The house rent at this rate is to be paid by the department to the DH from 111986 to date.
GP has stated that this payment would be made in due course.
So, under these premises JD is directed to pay house rent allowance at the aforesaid rate and for the aforesaid period as per directions given in the decree under execution within 3 months failing which it will be open for the DH to proceed against the JD under Contempt of Court Act, with this execution application stands disposed of.
File be consigned to the record room".
7.
The State of Punjab filed an application for reviewing the order dated August 25, 1993.
However, the aforesaid review application was dismissed.
8.
Subsequently, in the course of the execution proceedings, the following order was passed by the executing Court o June 11, 1996 :-  "Shri Deep Chand, District Education Officer (Secondary), part payment of the decretal amount awarded by decretal Court has not been paid by the department.
So, the department is directed to make the payment with interest, if any, upto 2771996, positively, otherwise necessary proceedings will be initiated against the department."
9.
The petitioners have now impugned the order dated June 11, 1996.
It was submitted that in fact, the decree holders have sought such reliefs, which had not been claimed by them in the main suit and had never been decreed.
On that basis, Shri Rakesh Verma, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, submits that the said reliefs could not have been granted to the plaintiffs- decree holders.
10.
On the other hand, Shri RS Sharma, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, submits that the order dated June 11, 1996, could not have been challenged by the petitioners inasmuch as the executing Court was merely trying to execute the decree.
11.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
In fact, after taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the case, I find that the executing Court has nowhere dealt with the question as to whether the reliefs, which were sought to be claimed by the plaintiffs-decree holders, had ever been claimed by them in the suit or had ever been granted to them while passing the decree.
If that be so, the executing Court had no jurisdiction to grant the said reliefs while dealing with the execution of the decree.
In these circumstances, the present petition is disposed of with a direction to the learned executing Court to first adjudicate the question as to whether the claim made by the plaintiffs-decree holders was in consonance with the decree passed by the learned trial Court, as modified in appeal by the learned first appellate Court.
12.
The State of Punjab would be well within its rights to file the objection petition to the said claim of the decree holder seeking the execution of the decree.
13.
It is made clear that none of the parties would be permitted any liberty to lead any evidence in the matter.
Since the matter only pertains to the interpretation of the decree passed by the learned trial Court as modified in appeal by the learned first appellate Court, therefore, the parties would only be permitted to raise the objections, to file reply and to argue the matter.
The learned executing Court shall finally decide the matter within a period of six months from the date, a certified copy of this order is received.
The parties, through, their counsel, are directed to appear before the learned executing Court on August 11, 2003.
Order accordingly.