SS Saron, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in the School of Management of the respondent-Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as "the Institute") vide appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7).
She joined by submitting her joining report on 412002 (Annexure P-8).
During the period of probation a termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11) giving her one month's notice for termination of her service was issued.
The main ground taken for issuing the said termination notice, though not mentioned in the notice, is that the Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing Management (hereinafter referred to as "PGDMM") done by the petitioner from Mohta Institute of Management Studies, Faridabad is not recognized as equivalent to the Master of Business Administration (MBA-for short) degree.
Hence the present petition for quashing the termination notice as also for quashing Regulation B-34(i) of the Institute Regulations as well as clause 3(b) [sic.
- clause 3(a)] of the appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7).
Notice of motion was issued on 612003 and operation of the impugned order Annexure P-11 was stayed meanwhile.
2.
Shri Sanjeev Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner qualified the PGDMM from Mohta Institute of Management Studies, Faridabad and she secured 74% marks and was awarded a Gold Medal.
The said PGDMM issued to the petitioner, is recognized by the All India Council For Technical Education (AICTE - for short) which lays down the minimum standards and norms for the management education courses and it recognizes that PGDMM as equivalent to MBA.
It is also contended that the petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer as advertised along with all her certificates and testimonials and these were duly scrutinized by the Institute and that, therefore, the Institute is estopped from now saying that the qualification possessed by the petitioner is not equivalent to that of MBA.
Besides, though the impugned notice appears to be innocuous but the foundation of the same is that the petitioner does not have the requisite qualification and therefore, the principles of natural justice were liable to be followed before issuing the notice and non-compliance of the same warrants that the impugned notice be quashed.
This is moreso for the reason that there is nothing against the work and conduct of the petitioner.
Therefore, it is contended that Regulation B- 34 (i) of the Institute Regulations as well as clause 3(b) [sic.
- Clause 3(a)] of the appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7) are arbitrary, illegal and discriminatory.
Besides, the Head of the School of Management Mr. GK Srivastava is also similarly placed as the petitioner as he also has the same qualification as the petitioner and, therefore, the action of the Institute is discriminatory and arbitrary.
It is further contended that the notice has been issued by an incompetent authority inasmuch as according to Rule 31(i) framed by the Institute, the Board of Governors is the competent authority to issue such notice.
The notice has been issued by the Registrar without any reference to the meeting of the Board of Governors whereby a decision may have been taken to dispense with her services.
3.
On the other hand, Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri DS Patwalia, Advocate, for the Institute, contends that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualification for the post of lecturer as advertised on 532001 (Annexure P-5) and that she did not give the correct picture regarding her qualification and she represented in her application form Annexure R-1/3 that she has done MBA (Marketing) during the years 1996-98 from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar and that she secured First Division with 75% marks and that she was a Gold Medalist.
Therefore, it was taken that she had the necessary qualification and was appointed as lecturer on 312002 (Annexure P-7).
It is in fact at a later point of time when the petitioner sought enrollment for doing PhD in her field that the Committee while considering her case pointed out that the PGDMM certificate from the Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar was not equivalent to MBA.
This was later confirmed by the Association of Indian Universities which is a recognized body of the Government of India vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6), It is further contended that the Institute wrote a letter dated 1572002 to the Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar asking them to clarify the equivalence of the PGDMM with that of MBA.
In response to the said query the Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar vide their letter dated 12122002 (Annexure R- 1/8 informed that PG Diploma in Marketing Management from Mohta Institute of Management Studies is not equivalent to MBA of their University.
Besides, equivalence determined by the AICTE is stated to be inconsequential in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bharathidasan University & Anr. v. All India Council for Technical Education & Ors., 2001(4) SCT.
704 : (2001) 8 Supreme Court Cases 676.
The termination notice has been served on the petitioner during the period of probation in accordance with para 3(a) of her appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7).
The same is an innocuous decision to terminate the services during the period of probation of the petitioner and, therefore, does not cast any stigma on her.
As such, the principles of natural justice, it is stated, are inapplicable.
The decision to terminate the services of the petitioner was taken as the Institute being a prestigious one, cannot afford to have teachers who do not have the prescribed qualifications as this would ultimately affect the students who undertake the course and also the degrees which are obtained by them from the Institute, which is a deemed University.
As regards the order being passed by an incompetent authority i.e. the Registrar and not by the Board of Governors, he has referred to Rule 38(ii) of the Rules of the Institute to contend that the director has the power to take immediate action on any matter which is conferred on the Board and it if is necessary to do so he is to report to the Board of the action taken.
The matter was put up before the Director on 26112002 who after going through the records, recommended for termination of the appointment of the petitioner.
This was forwarded to the Chairman who granted the approval to terminate the services of the petitioner.
The Director and the Chairman have the powers to act for and on behalf of the Board of Governors under the rules.
Insofar as ratification by the Board is concerned, the matter would be put up before the Board of Governors in their next meeting as this is the normal course of business as the Board of Governors normally meet once or twice a year and it is in these circumstances that Regulations have been made delegating the powers of the Board of Governors to the Director as well as to the Chairman.
4.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the respective Counsel appearing for the parties it may be noticed that the petitioner did her PGDMM from the Mohta Institute of Management Studies, Faridabad in May 1998.
Certificate dated 1121998 (Annexure P-3) was issued in this regard by Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar.
Before doing PGDMM, the petitioner on 2911998 joined a Pharmaceutical Company namely CIPLA Ltd as Marketing Trainee and it is stated that in a span of three years she rose to the rank of Regional Manager (Marketing).
It is on 532001 (Annexure P-5) that the Institute advertised various posts of Lecturers including Lecturers in the School of Management being run by it.
The said advertisement indicated that the essential qualification, experience and scale of pay for the posts were to be the same as were approved AICTE and the Institute The petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer and gave complete details of academic qualifications and experience and also annexed attested copies of all testimonials as proof of qualification and eligibility.
The petitioner was vide letter dated 28.11.2001 (Annexure P-6) asked to appear for the interview on 27.12.2001.
In view of the stipulation laid down by the Institute the petitioner resigned from CIPLA Ltd with effect from 17.12.2001 so as to compete for the post of Lecturer in the School of Management of the Institute The petitioner appeared for the interview along with all the documents in original which were checked by the Personnel Department of the Institute It is stated that it is after being convinced about the eligibility she was interviewed by an Interview Board.
The petitioner and two others were selected on 312002 (Annexure P-7).
Accordingly, the petitioner joined the Institute as Lecturer in the School of Management on 412002 (Annexure P-8).
5.
The petitioner in her application form Annexure R-1/3 for the post of Lecturer indicated that she had done MBA (Marketing) during 1996-98 and under the column "College/University" it is indicated as "GJU Hissar".
It is also indicated that she had secured first Division with 75% marks and that she is a "Gold Medalist".
Since the petitioner had specifically averred in her application form that she had passed her MBA Examination in first class, therefore, the Institute considered her to be fulfilling the qualifications as prescribed by Institute.
Accordingly she was appointed as Lecturer vide letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7).
In terms of the appointment letter, the petitioner was on probation for a period of two years and it was provided therein that her services could be terminated on either side by giving one month's notice or payment of one month's pay in lieu thereof without assigning any reasons.
6.
The petitioner on 1172002 applied for doing PhD in her field and she was to get herself enrolled for the same.
The Committee while considering her case pointed out that the PGDMM certificate from the Guru Jameshwar University, Hissar was not equivalent to MBA.
To ascertain the position, the respondent Institute approached the Association of Indian Universities which is a body consisting of 19 Vice Chancellors of various Universities and is stated to be the only recognized body for determining equivalence of degrees as granted by the Universities and Institutions throughout the country.
This Association of Indian Universities is also stated to be recognized by the Government of India vide Notification dated 1331995 (Annexure R-1/4).
A clarification vide letter dated 1872002 (Annexure R-1/5) was sought by the Registrar of the Institute from the said Association of Indian Universities as to whether various degrees/diplomas as indicated in the said letter including that of Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing Management from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar are considered equivalent to MBA or not, in connection with registration of candidates for PhD The Association of Indian Universities vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) stated that the PGDMM of Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar was not considered to be equivalent to MBA Degree.
When this fact was brought to the notice of the Institute it came to light that the petitioner was not only ineligible to undertake her PhD course but in fact she was not fulfilling the minimum qualification for appointment to the post of Lecturer even as prescribed in terms of the advertisement dated 532001.
Accordingly, in terms of clause 34(i) of the Institute's Regulations as also in terms of condition No. 3(A) of her appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7), termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11) was issued.
7.
As already noticed the challenge in this writ petition is to the issuance of the impugned termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11).
The conditions of the appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7) of the petitioner amongst others provides that she would be on probation for period of two years from the date of joining which may be extended.
It is also provided that during the initial or the extended period of probation, the appointment is liable to be terminated on either side on one month's notice or on payment of one month's salary in lieu thereof.
Besides, Clause B-34(i) of the Institute Regulations reads as under :-  "The appointing authority shall have power to terminate the service of an employee on one month's notice without assigning any reasons, during the period of probation, or extended period of probation."
The challenge is also for quashing para 3(a) of the appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7) and the above said Clause B-34(i) of the Institute Regulations.
8.
In respect of equivalence of the posts it may be mentioned that this Court in exercise of its supervisory writ jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India is not to embark upon an inquiry to determine the equivalence of the certificate which the petitioner is having and to determine whether that is equivalent to MBA degree which was the requirement for seeking appointment as Lecturer in terms of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5).
This clearly is the domain of the expert bodies.
The reason for issuance of the termination notice is that according to the Institute, the petitioner does not have the necessary qualifications for undertaking the classes and course in the school of Management being run by the Institute During the hearing of the case it was suggested to the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Institute, that it should hear the petitioner and pass a fresh order to see the equivalence of the degree that the petitioner is having.
However, the learned Senior Counsel stated that this would be an exercise in futility as result would be the same and, therefore, this Court may examine the case on its own merit.
In any case, in order to satisfy ourselves we may notice the material on record for the limited purpose of appointment as Lecturer in the Institute in terms of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5), without giving any finding as a general proposition of law that the PGDMM certificate which the petitioner is having is equivalent or not to the MBA degree.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Institute is estopped by its act and conduct from dispensing with the services of the petitioner as it had satisfied itself with regard to the degrees that the petitioner was possessing.
He also contends that there has been no misrepresentation on the part of the petitioner while applying for the post of Lecturer in the Institute However, it may be noticed that the qualification that the petitioner is having is that of "Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing Management" from the Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar, which is evident from the certificate dated 1121998 (Annexure P-3) and in her application form Annexure R-1/3 she has mentioned that she has done her MBA (Marketing) from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar.
The Institute has placed on record the letter dated 1872002 (Annexure R-1/5) whereby the Registrar of the Institute had sought clarification from the Association of Indian Universities as to whether the degree/diploma indicated therein which includes the PGDMM from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar is considered equivalent to MBA or not in connection with registration of candidates of PhD and for appointment of Lecturers.
In reply to the said letter, the Association of Universities vide their letter dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) stated that the PGDMM from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar is not considered equivalent to MBA.
Besides, the Institute vide letter dated 1572002 sought clarification from the Guru Jambeshwar University itself regarding equivalence of PGDMM with MBA.
The University vide its letter dated 12122002 (Annexure R-1/7) informed that : "the matter has been considered in the equivalence committee wherein it has been decided that PG Diploma in Marketing Management from Mohta Institute of Management Studies is not equivalent to MBA of our University.
A candidate with the above diploma is also not eligible to pursue PhD programme in this University."
Therefore, on the basis of the said material it cannot be said that the Institute is estopped by its act and conduct from terminating the services of the petitioner.
It is well known that at the time of Selection Body proceeds on the assumption that all those appearing for the posts are otherwise qualified.
Even mistakes occur and an erroneous data is prepared by the office, which is put up before the Selection Body.
However, when the mistake is discovered it can be undone and the plea of estoppel would not be applicable in such a case especially in the case of a temporary employee.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, also contends that as per the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5) the essential qualification required was: "experience and scale of pay for all posts are as approved by AICTE and as approved by the institute".
The degree of PGDMM is stated to be recognized by the AICTE.
In support of this contention, the petitioner has placed reliance on the letter dated 2661998 (Annexure P-2) on the subject of extension of AICTE approval to the existing Mohta Centre for Management Studies Faridabad for conducting MBA programme.
The said letter in fact merely states that on the recommendation of Expert Committee and the Sub Committee of the All India Board of Management Studies, the AICTE has extended its earlier approval accorded to Mohta Centre for Management Studies for conducting the MBA programme for the Sessions 1998-99 with annual intake and duration as below :-  "Name of Course Annual Intake Period of Approval MBA FULL TIME 40 1998-99 CONVERTED FROM PGDHRM (FT) 20 & PGDMM (FT) 20 TO MBA (FULL TIME) 40 FORTY.
DURATION : Full time :, 2 Years Part Time:, 3 Years and D.Ed.
: 3 Years."
The above letter has been issued by the AICTE and from this according to Shri Sanjeev Sharma learned counsel for the petitioner, fulfills the requirement of the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5) inasmuch as 20 seats of PGDMM have been converted to full time MBA course.
We have considered this and find that the petitioner did her PGDMM in May 1998 as per the certificate dated 1121998 (Annexure P-3) issued by Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar and the above approval is for the period of 1998-99.
Besides, even otherwise in Bharathidasan University's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the question as to whether the Bharathidasan University should seek prior approval of the AICTE to start a department for imparting a course or programme in technical education or a technical institution as an adjunct to the University itself to conduct technical courses of its choice.
While considering the said question it was also observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in relation to the provisions of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 that Section 10 of the AICTE Act, deals with the functions of the Council as also its duties and obligations to take step for fulfillment of the same.
After noticing the provisions of the two Acts, it was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as follows :-  "A careful scanning through of the provisions of the AICTE Act and the provisions of the UGC Act in juxtaposition, will show that the role of AICTE vis-a-vis the Universities is only advisory, recommendatory and a guiding factor and thereby subserve the cause of maintaining appropriate standards and qualitative norms and not as authority empowered to issue and enforce any sanctions by itself, except submitting a Report to the UGC for appropriate action.
The conscious and deliberate omission to enact any such provision in the AICTE Act in respect of Universities is not only a positive indicator but should be also one of the determining factors in adjudging the status, role and activities of AICTE vis-a-vis Universities and the activities and functioning of its departments and units."
The above observations evidently show that the AICTE Act and the functions of the Council (AICTE) under the Act is only of an advisory and recommendatory nature.
As an authority, it is not empowered to issue and enforce any sanction by itself.
The Institute is a deemed University and subscribes to the norms laid down by the University Grants Commission (UGC - for short).
The role of the AICTE is limited to submit a report to the UGC for appropriate action as held in Bharathidasan University's case (supra).
From this is may be noted that the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5) envisages for experience and scale as approved by the AICTE and as approved by the Institute Therefore, from the material on record when examined from the stand point of the Institute, keeping in view the fact that the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5) did provide for experience and scale not only as approved by the AICTE but also as approved by the Institute besides, also the letter from the Association of Indian Universities dated 3172002 (Annexure R-1/6) to the effect that the PGDMM of Guru Jambeshwar University Hissar was not considered to be equivalent to MBA Degree and the letter dated 12122002 (Annexure R-1/7) from the Guru Jambeshwar University Hissar to the effect that PGDMM from Mohta Institute of Management Studies was not equivalent to MBA, the action of the Institute in issuing the termination notice cannot be faulted with.
This, however, we may hasten to add is not the determination of equivalence or non-equivalence of the PGDMM certificate that the petitioner has with the MBA degree.
It is only from the standpoint of the Institute keeping in view the larger public interest, which as contended by the Institute, would affect the course that is being undertaken by the students who are imparted lectures by the petitioner as also the ultimate degrees to be given to them on the completion of their course that we are of the view that the action of the Institute in issuing the termination notice cannot be faulted.
11.
This is moreso for the reason that the petitioner was admittedly a temporary employee under probation and had no right to the post.
A temporary employee as is well known has no right to the post unless it matures into a permanent one.
The challenge to the same is without any basis.
The learned counsel has extensively quoted the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of West Bengal State Electricity Board v. Desh Bandhu Ghosh, 1985(2) SLR 304 : (AIR 1985 SC 722) to contend that clauses like Clause B-34 of the Institute Regulations are arbitrary and confer a power which is capable of vicious discrimination.
This is not the correct position.
In Desh Bandhu Ghosh's case (supra) the respondent therein was a permanent employee of the West Bengal State Electricity Board and the Regulations of the said case provided for termination of services of a permanent employee by serving three months' notice or on payment of salary for the corresponding period in lieu thereof.
The present is not a case of a permanent employee.
The petitioner admittedly was a temporary employee on probation.
Therefore, being a temporary employee she has no right to the post both under the contract of service i.e. condition No. 3(a) of her appointment letter dated 312002 (Annexure P-7) and also in terms of clause 34(i) of the Institute's Regulations.
12.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner further is that the petitioner not having the requisite qualification is the foundation of the impugned termination notice and not the motive and that therefore, the principles of natural justice were liable to be followed before issuing the notice and non-compliance of the same vitiates the impugned notice, as also the contention that the Head of the School of Management Mr. GK Srivastava is also similarly placed as the petitioner as he also has the same qualification as the petitioner and, therefore, the action of the Institute is discriminatory and arbitrary are equally without any force.
It may be noted that the services of the petitioner are not being dispensed with on account of some misconduct, which can be said to be the foundation of the termination notice.
The notice has been issued for want of having the requisite qualification of MBA.
Therefore, the notice is an innocuous one without any stigma or evil consequences visiting on her.
It is not in dispute that under the contract of service as also the rules governing her services, the employer had the right to terminate her services by giving her one month's notice.
The notice is not founded on any misconduct.
It is only if the delinquency of a temporary employee that is taken as the operating motive in terminating the service, the order is not considered as punitive while if the termination order is founded upon it, the termination is considered to be punitive.
That is not the position in the case in hand as the termination notice is not based on any sort of punitive action and neither is this the case of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner not having the requisite qualifications when examined from the standpoint of the Institute is the motive for the termination.
As such the principles of natural justice are inapplicable in the case of a temporary employee who is sought to be discharged in accordance with her contract of employment during the period of probation.
Besides, it is not a case where the petitioner is an employee holding a civil post under the Union or the State in which case the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India would be attracted.
Therefore, the contention of the petitioner for protection under Article 311 of the Constitution is not tenable.
13.
The position that others similarly situated as the petitioner are continuing in service is of no consequence as the same can, in the facts and circumstances of the case, cannot be a ground for issuing a writ in his favour of the on the alleged plea of discrimination.
There is no material before us to examine the qualifications of Mr. GK Srivastava who is stated to be similarly placed as the petitioner.
Besides, his continuation or appointment is not the subject matter of dispute.
The continuation of Mr. Srivastava may be legal and valid or it might not be.
This requires the investigation of the matter before it can be applied in the case of the petitioner.
If the continuation of Mr. GK Srivastava is found to be contrary to law, the same is any case cannot be made the basis for perpetuating a wrong and compelling the Institute to repeat the wrong.
14.
Therefore, keeping these circumstances in view, and the fact that this Court is not to embark upon any inquiry regarding equivalence of the PGDMM certificate with the degree of MBA and the fact that the Institute has satisfied itself after making its inquiries that the PGDMM certificate in possession of the petitioner is not equivalent to MBA degree and there is no bias or arbitrariness on the part of the Institute, its action cannot be said to be illegal or unwarranted in the facts and circumstances of the case.
As already noticed the petitioner herself while submitting her application Annexure R-1/3 had indicated her qualification to be MBA (Marketing) although she had done PGDMM, which was not indicated.
The Institute acted on the representation given by the petitioner.
However, it is later when the petitioner sought registration for her enrollment to Ph.D, that the Committee scrutinizing her documents found that the did not have the minimum qualification of MBA and thereafter it transpired that she also did not have the minimum qualification for appointment as Lecturer in the Institute pursuant to the advertisement dated 532001 (Annexure P-5).
It is, then, that the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11) was issued.
This is evidently an innocuous letter of termination during the period of probation on the strength that the petitioner was not having the necessary qualification of MBA.
Therefore, we find nothing wrong with this action of the Institute specially when it is not based on any misconduct so as to make the order stigmatic.
15.
The other contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the competency of the Registrar in issuing the impugned termination order may be adverted to.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, as already stated above, has contended that the termination notice has been issued by the Registrar of the Institute who is not the competent person to issue such a notice.
In this regard it has been stated in the written statement that the Director of the Institute has power to take immediate action on any matter in exercise of powers conferred by Rule 38(2) of the Rules of the Institute Besides, in the meeting of the Board of Governors held on 1142002 the Chairman was delegated with the powers of Board of Governors to act on any matter and to act on behalf of the Board of Governors under Rule 14(xxvi) of the Rules.
Rule 38(ii) of the Rules reads as under :-  "The Director may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on the Board and shall report to the Board the action taken by him on such matter.
Provided that if the Board is of the opinion that such action ought not have been taken it may refer the matter to the President whose decision thereon shall be final.
Provided further that any person in the service of the Institute who is the aggrieved by the action taken by the Director under clause (ii) above, shall have the right to appeal against such actions to the Board within thirty days from the date on which such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Director", The delegation of powers has been done by the Board of Governors to the Chairman in its meeting held on 1142002 as follows :  "B. Delegation of powers to the Chairman, Board of Governors.
1.
Approval of the appointment of faculty and other in the equivalent scales, as per the recommendations of the duly constituted selection committee as per rules and regulations of the Institute Whenever an appointment to a post is proposed to be made by invitation, the matter shall be put up to the Board of Governors for consideration with the comments of the Chairman.
2.
Creation/argumentation/abolition of the posts below the level of Lecturer/Assistant Registrar.
3.
Revision of charges for various services rendered by the Institute Service includes provision of hostel accommodation to the students, supply of electricity and water to the on-campus residents and other miscellaneous services.
4.
In case of temporary appointment for more than one year, the Chairman will have the powers to approve such appointments on the recommendations of the Director".
16.
The matter regarding termination of the petitioner was put up before the Director on 26112002 who after going through the records recommended that the appointment of the petitioner may be terminated under the powers vested in Rule 38(ii) of the Rules and he recommended for the same.
This was also forwarded to the Chairman who was pleased to grant the approval to terminate the services of the petitioner.
In this manner, the Director and the Chairman had the powers to act for and on behalf of the Board of Governors under Rules.
It is also stated that the matter would be put up before the Board of Governors for ratification.
The learned Senior counsel has placed before us the minutes of Board of Governors 69th Meeting held on 2442003.
At page 11 of the minutes under the heading; "To Report About Approvals Accorded by the Chairman and Director," it is mentioned that the Board ratified the approvals accorded by the Chairman on behalf of the Board as mentioned in item No. B69.31, which amongst others relates to termination of the petitioner as Lecturer.
It is also recorded that the Board took a note of the fact that the petitioner and Ashish Mehra (sic.-Nehra) have approached this Court against their termination of service and this Court had granted an interim stay.
Therefore, there has been ratification of the action by the Board even.
17.
As already noticed, it is on the recommendations of the Director of the Institute that the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11) was issued.
This was issued in exercise of powers conferred by rule 38(ii) of the Rules of the Institute a reference to which has already been made above.
Besides, in the case in hand, the Board of Governors under Rule 14(xxvi) have delegated certain powers to the Chairman Board of Governors.
Therefore, it is not a case where the Director has assumed jurisdiction in respect of which ratification is subsequently required.
It is a case where the order has been passed by the Director within the purview of Rule 38(ii).
For the foregoing reasons we find no merit in this writ petition.
The petitioner was on probation and the termination notice dated 9122002 (Annexure P-11) was issued during the probation period.
The same was issued as in the opinion of the Institute the PGDMM certificate which the petitioner is having from Mohta Institute of Management Studies, Faridabad was found to be not equivalent to MBA.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.