Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - By this judgment we shall dispose of the above noted writ petitions, as common question of law arises for consideration based upon somewhat of the similar facts.
For the purpose of convenience we are referring to the facts of the case titled Jagdish v. The State of Haryana and another, 2003(4) S.C.T.
101, Civil Writ Petition No 17602 of 2002.
The petitioner was appointed as a baildar at Balabhgarh in the department of respondent State on 1711984.
In June, 1992, services of the petitioner were terminated.
The workman raised an industrial dispute and an award was announced in favour of the petitioner by granting him reinstatement with 40% back wages and continuity of service.
The award attained finality between the parties.
The petitioner earlier filed a Civil Writ Petition before this Court being No. 3197 of 2002 on February 20, 2002 claiming regularisation of service under the said policies.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court by issuing a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation by passing a speaking order within a period of three months.
However, non-speaking order was passed which resulted in filing of another civil writ petition being No. 10957 of 2002 for setting aside the order rejecting the request for regularisation.
The order was set aside by another Division Bench of this Court and directed to consider the case of the petitioner afresh in accordance with law.
The claim of the petitioner now again has been rejected vide order dated 11102002 giving rise to the filing of the present writ petition.
The ground on which the claim of the petitioner has been declined vide order Annexure P-5 to the writ petition, is that the petitioner was not in service.
It will be more appropriate at this stage to notice the material part of the impugned order vide which the claim of the petitioner has been rejected :  "As per record, you have worked for 240 days in the year 1993-94 (2/93 to 1/94) only and have not worked for 240 days in the year 2/94 to 1/95, 2/95 to 1/96.
Your break in service is more than 30 days in various months during the years 2/93 to 1/94, 2/94 to 1/95 and 2/95 to 1/96.
Also you were not present on 3111996.
As such you do not fulfil any of three conditions of the policy framed by the Government for regularisation and your claim is hereby rejected.
Hence, in the light of instructions issued by the Government as explained above, your case has been again considered for regularization and it has been found that you do not fulfil the condition of the policy laid by the Government.
Sd/- Executive Engineer,  Provincial Division No. 1, PWD B & R Br, Faridabad.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents have filed written statements.
The case of the respondent is that the petitioner is not qualified for regularisation of his services in terms of the policies of the State i.e. 1993 and of 1996.
It is further stated that the petitioner does not fulfil the condition of 240 days and for a continuous service of five years or three years as the case may be.
3.
The petitioner has placed the copy of the award dated November 14, 2000 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad where while deciding issue No. 1 the court granted continuity of service in an uncertain terms.
It was stated by the court "the claimant is entitled to back wages at the rate of 40% (forty per cent) for the period of break in service i.e. August 1992 to February 1993 and he will be deemed to be in continuous service".
The back wages for the remaining period were denied as the petitioner was stated to be employed intermittently.
The basic question that calls for consideration of the court is what is the effect of award passed by the Labour Court granting continuity of service with back wages to the petitioner ?
Would it amount presumption of continuous employment in favour of the workman making him eligible for consideration for regularisation in terms of the said policies.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State vehemently contended that the petitioners do not satisfy the stipulated condition of service as they have not completed the prescribed period of service, have not worked for 240 days and were not physically in employment on the cut off date i.e. March 31, 1993 or January 31, 1996.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon various judgments of different Division Benches of this Court to contend that once a workman is reinstated with back wages and continuity of service, it shall be deemed fiction of law in favour of the workman to treat him as physically on duty.
In this regard counsel relied upon Bhikam Singh and others v. The State of Haryana, Civil Writ Petition No 809 of 1998 decided on May 12, 1998, Krishan Kumar v. The Haryana State Federations of Consumer's Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd (CONFED) and another, 1997(1) SCT 686 (P&H) : (1998-1) PLR 831, Subhash Chander v. State of Haryana, 1999(1) S.C.T.
480, CWP No. 18233 of 1997, Mehender Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(1) S.C.T.
769, C.W.P.
No. 18199 of 1997, Dalip Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) S.C.T.
385, C.W.P.
No. 311 of 1998 and Rajbir v. State of Haryana, 1999(4) S.C.T.
63, C.W.P.
No. 16854 of 1998.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, we see no reasons to express our view different than the one expressed by various Division Benches of this Court.
The decisions cited are reasoned judgments and are applicable and on the basis of principle of ratio decidendi would be squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Once this Division Bench has no strong reason to differ with the view already taken and being no law cited by the respondents to the contrary, it would be in consonance with the precedent of judicial propriety to follow the view with respect.
6.
It is matter of regret that despite so many judgments the State still takes a view which compels the workman to approach the court repeatedly.
It has been categorically stated in the above judgments including Kavita Gandhi's case supra that the workman could work for 240 days in any of the three years immediately preceding the cut off date.
Once the workman has been granted continuity of service with back wages by the Labour Court the deemed fiction of law for the period during which the contract of service between the parties remained under a cloud shall stand wiped and the continuity of contract of service will remain uninterrupted.
In the case of Ghansham Dass v. State of Haryana, 2002(2) RSJ 798 : 2002(2) SCT 815 (P&H) Division Bench of this Court had relied upon different judgments of the Supreme Court as well as the different Division Bench to come to the conclusion as noticed above.
Usefully, at this stage we can refer to the finding recorded in the above case :  7.
In the impugned order, it has been mentioned that the services of the petitioner could not be regularised as he was physically absent from the work as on 111996.
This plea is equally untenable.
Once an award is passed in favour of the workman and he is granted reinstatement with continuity of service, then the respondents cannot take plea that the workman was physically absent from the work.
Such absence is a result of compulsion and not of choice on the part of the workman.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Deep Chand v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 14165 of 2001 decided on 1012002, considered the plea at some length and held as under :-  "It is a deemed fiction of law that the period in face of such award would have to be treated as a period actually spent on duty.
Initially, the services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated by the respondent-State and subsequently the State compelled him to remain out of service for no fault of the workman.
Even after the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was not permitted to join the duty.
In other words, the petitioner was not physically present at the work as a result of action of the respondent and no fault was attributable to the petitioner on any ground whatsoever.
The physical absence of the petitioner from duty was result of compulsion of the petitioner and not his choice.
In these circumstances we are unable to sustain the reasons given in the impugned letter that the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation because he did not physically work during the period in question.
The learned counsel for the State was unable to support his argument by any precedent or documents to show that the petitioner was called upon to join his duties.
Once the Court finds it as a matter of fact that the services of the employee were wrongly terminated, who in the eyes of law, would be deemed to be in service, cannot be even deprived of his back wages of arrears of salary subject to just exceptions and the law of limitation.
The consequences of setting aside an order of dismissal or termination gives rise to a consequential relief of reinstatment and payment of back wages as a necessary corollary to the setting aside of such order.
As a logical consequence of this declaration (award), it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefits or reliefs which was natural results of such relief.
(In this regard reference can be made to Full Bench augment of this Court in the case of Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) SLR 151 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharashtra, 1977(2) SCC 288.
The above admitted facts support the case of the petitioner and are indicative of the fact that the respondent has taken this objection only to deny a benefit legally and reasonably due to the petitioner."
8.
Reference can also be made to the judgments of another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Kavita Gandhi v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(4) Recent Service Judgment 760 and Attar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 3651 of 2000, decided on 722002."
7.
The break of 30 days would lose its significance.
Thus it is proved that the workman has actually worked for 240 days in an year or in the alternative continuity of service has been awarded to him.
On both these counts the respondents were not justified in rejecting the claim of the petitioners for regularisation.
We may notice that in all other connected writ petitions similar question arise for consideration.
The petitioners were entitled to be regularised under the policy dated May 27, 1993 and or 1831996, from March 31, 1993 and January 31, 1996 or the prescribed year or days respectively.
Claim of all the petitioners in these petitions were rejected on the ground that they had not worked for the requisite period as well as they were not physically present on the cut off date.
All the petitioners have awards in their favour granting them continuity of service with back wages.
In most of the cases, the respondents have actually rejected the claim while in two of the cases they have not yet passed orders of rejection but the grievance of the petitioners is similar.
8.
In view of the above, we set aside the order of rejection (P-5 in Civil Writ Petition No 17602 of 2002 dated October 11, 2002) and similar orders in all other cases, with a further direction to the respondents to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their services under the respective policies without taking the above grounds of rejection against the petitioners.
However, we make it clear that the petitioners have already approached the courts on three different occasions and this is the third round of litigation between the parties which could have easily been avoided while (with ?)
some diligence and exercise of powers by the concerned quarters.
Consequently appropriate orders in accordance with rules and policies and in the light of the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and this Court shall be passed within one month from today.
9.
In view of our above discussion, we allow these writ petitions while imposing the costs of Rs. 2000/- per writ petition to be paid to the petitioners.
The costs shall be recovered from the officers who are responsible for causing this situation.
However, the said amount shall be recovered in accordance with law and after granting them opportunity of hearing.
Copy of the order be given dasti.
Petitions allowed.