MM Kumar, J - This order would dispose of three writ petitions namely, CWP Nos. 3100 of 1987, 3103 of 1989, and CWP 936 of 1988.
Facts are referred from CWP No. 3100 of 1987.
This petition filed under Section (Artilce?)
226 of the Constitution of India challenges the award of the Labour Court dated 651986 published in the Punjab Government Gazette on 12121986.
2.
The petitioner, who had been working as a Conductor with the Punjab Roadways, Amritsar II depot was on his duty on 2731980 in the Bus No. 4678 operating between Amritsar and Dera Baba Nanak.
Sh. Harbhajan Singh, Inspector checked the bus and on checking found that Conductor-petitioner had not issued tickets to 8 passengers, whereas he has recovered fare from them.
A regular departmental enquiry was conducted on 561980 and the statement of Sh. Harbhajan Singh, Inspector was recorded.
The Inspector stated in evidence that those 8 passengers did not form a group but were travelling individually.
There were 40 passengers sitting in the bus at the time of checking.
He has stated that the cash with the Conductor was not checked nor the statements of the passengers were recorded.
In defence the Conductor-petitioner also examined one passenger, who had boarded the bus at Amritsar for going to Dera Baba Nanak.
This witness merely stated that the bus was over crowded and some passengers were sitting on the roof.
He further stated that the Conductor was in the process of issuing tickets when the Inspector boarded the bus for checking of the passengers.
This version of the defence witness was not in consonance with the statement made by the Conductor himself on 2731980.
The Enquiry Officer held that the Conductor-petitioner was guilty of embezzlement and misappropriation for having charged fare from the passengers but not issuing them tickets.
Accordingly, his services were terminated by respondent No. 2 on 1411980.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Director, State Transport, who passed the order dated 1521982 (Annexure R- 1).
The Appellate Authority held that the petitioner was guilty of playing fraud with the department but still held that the punishment awarded was disproportionate to the mis-conduct.
The Appellate Authority set aside the order of termination of the petitioner and directed that the Conductor- petitioner be taken back in service afresh but without any back wages or grant of benefit of seniority.
However, the Appellate Authority ordered stoppage of two increments of the Conductor-petitioner with cumulative effect.
Thereafter, the Conductor-petitioner sought a reference to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court on reference has upheld the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer as well as by the Appellate Authority.
The Labour Court has also granted the relief of reinstatement with continuity of service but without back wages.
3.
Mr. VK Mahajan, learned counsel has argued that while holding enquiry, the Conductor was not permitted to engage the services of a co-workman, which violates the provisions of Rule 8.8 read with 811 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The learned counsel further argued that no passenger has been examined to conclude that the Conductor- petitioner charged fare from the passengers without issuing them the vouchers.
Therefore, in the absence of direct evidence of the passengers it would not be fair to hold the Conducter-petitioner guilty of the charges.
4.
Mr. DS Kamra, learned DAG, Punjab appearing for respondent No. 2 has argued that unless some prejudice is shown to have been caused, the provisions of Rule 8.8. read with 811 would be deemed to be directory in nature.
Even if the Conductor workman has not been permitted the assistance of a co-workman, it would not vitiate the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
According to the learned counsel, the Conductor-petitioner has never asked for such an assistance of a co-workman.
The learned counsel has also pointed out that the Labour Court has not given any findings showing violation of any rule while conducting the enquiry and, therefore, on merits, the findings have been upheld.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I do not feel persuaded to take a view different than one taken by the Labour Court because the findings of facts on merits recorded are that the Conductor-petitioner is guilty of misappropriation and embezzlement of fare which he collected from the passengers without issuing them tickets.
In State of Haryana and another v. Rattan Singh, 1977(1) SLR S.C. 750, their Lordships of the Supreme Court dealt with almost similar situation.
The argument that no passenger was examined at the enquiry was rejected observing that even hearsay evidence against the Conductor is admissible.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :  "The principal ground on which the courts below have declared the termination bad is that none of the 11 passengers have been examined at the domestic enquiry.
Secondly, it has been mentioned that there is a departmental instruction that checking inspectors should record the statements of passengers, which was not done is this case.
The explanation of the State, as borne out by the record, is that the inspector of the flying squad who had said that they paid the fares but they declined to give such written statement.
The third ground which weighed with the courts was, perhaps, that the co-conductor in the bus had supported with this evidence, the guiltlessness of the respondent.
It is well settled that in a domestic enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian Evidence Act may not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
There is no allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
It is true that departmental authorities and administrative tribunal must be careful in evaluating such material and should not glibly swallow what is strictly speaking not relevant under the Indian Evidence Act.
For this proposition it is not necessary to cite decisions nor text books, although we have been taken through case law and other authorities by counsel on both sides.
The essence of a judicial approach is objectivity, exclusion of extraneous materials or considerations and observance of rules of natural justice.
Of course, fairplay is the basis and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or surrender of independence of judgment vitiate the conclusions reached, such findings, even though of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held good.
However, the courts below misdirected themselves, perhaps, in insisting that passengers who had come in and gone out should be chased and brought before the tribunal before a valid finding could be recorded.
The `residuum' rule to which counsel for the respondent referred, based upon certain passages from American jurisprudence does not go to that extent nor does the passage from Halsbury insist on such rigid requirement.
The simple point is, was there some evidence or was there no evidence not - in the sense of the technical rules governing regular court proceedings but in a fair commonsense way as men of understanding and worldly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond scrutiny.
Absence of any evidence in support of a finding is certainly available for the court to look into because it amounts to an error of law apparent on the record.
We find, in this case, that the evidence of Chamanlal, Inspector of the flying squad, is some evidence which has relevance to the charge levelled against the respondent.
Therefore, we are unable to hold that the order is invalid on that ground."
6.
The afore-mentioned view of the Supreme Court has also been followed in cases of UP SRTC v. Basudeo Chaudhary, (1997) 11 SCC 370; UP SRTC v. Subhash Chandra Sharma, (2002) 3 SCC 324 and Devendra Swamy v. Karnataka SRTC, 2002(4) SCT 609 (SC) : (2002) 9 SCC 644.
7.
In the instant case, the Inspector, who have checked the bus himself appeared and deposed that 8 passengers were found without tickets and fare from them was already charged by the Conductor-petitioner.
Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that the Conductor-petitioner in this case has been dealt with leniency by the departmental authorities as well as by the Labour Court as only two increments with cumulative effect have been stopped and he had been reinstated in service without back wages by invoking Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
However, in CWP No. 936 of 1988 the punishment of dismissal has been rightly awarded which is consistent with the principles laid down in Rattan Singh's case (supra).
Therefore, I am not inclined to interfere with the impugned order.
This petition is devoid of merit and is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons stated above these petitions fail and the same are dismissed with cost.
Petitions dismissed.