GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against order dated 3.6.1998 passed by Labour Court, Gurdaspur under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
2.
Respondent No. 1 - Ishwar Dayal was engaged as a daily wage employee on 1611985 under Executive Engineer, PWD, B&R Division, Pathankot.
In 1989, he and other similarly situated employees, namely, Kamal Kishore, Raj Kumar Bhatti and Som Singh made claim for regularisation of their services.
The departmental authorities did not accept their demand.
This gave rise to an industrial dispute between the parties which was referred by the State Government to Industrial Tribunal, Punjab vide notification No. ID/9/91/89/74757 dated 18101989.
By an award dated 3081993 (Annexure P.2), the Industrial Tribunal ordered regularisation of the services of the employees including respondent No. 1.
After about 2 years, he filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act for payment of difference of salary by asserting that right from the first day of his appointment, he had been discharging the duties as Typist but was paid daily wages as Beldar.
After considering the pleadings and evidence of the parties, Labour Court, Gurdaspur accepted the application of respondent No. 1 and directed the petitioners to pay the amount due to him.
Paragraphs 12 and 13 of order dated 3.6.1998 passed by the Labour Court, which contain detailed reasons for accepting the claim of respondent No. 1, read as under :  "12.
No doubt, on the other hand, the award dated 3081993 passed by the Industrial Tribunal ExR1, has been filed by the respondent wherein these workers claimed the regularisation of their services from the date of appointment with all consequential benefits and it was observed inter alia "that these workers were working for the last many years and the respondents have made a number of employees as regular, but the case of these workers were not considered for being made regular.
These workers according to them are working in the office, but they are shown as Beldars.
No evidence has been led before me except the statement of the workmen that these workers are working in the office, so no finding to that effect can be given.
But one thing is clear that it is admitted by the respondent that Raj Kumar is working for the last 10 years, Kamal Kishore for 9 years, Ishwar Dayal for last 8 years and Som Singh for the last 7 years.
In this situation, they are certainly entitled to be regularised.
Undoubtedly, the analysis of Ex.R 1 still shrouds the status of the workmen in mystery; though the relief of regularisation of their services was granted.
Nevertheless, one cannot lose sight of the admitted facts elicited from the record and overwhelming evidence that these workmen had been performing the duties of Junior Draftsmen, Typist and Ferro Khalassi since the date of their appointments and corroborated as per the admission of Yodh Singh, SD1, RW1; though for the intermittent period, their work charged status was reduced to that of daily wages basis.
They continued performing the duties of Jr. Draftsmen, Typist and Ferro Khalasi in the respective branches of the respondent.
They are well qualified and trained in their respective fields as it is manifest from the plans drafted by Raj Kumar and Kamal Kishore and also holding diploma in the respective fields.
Whereas Som Singh has been discharging the duty of Ferro Khalasi and Ishwar Dayal also holding the diploma in Steno and working as Typist throughout his tenure.
13.
Therefore, I find force in the contention of the Ld.
AR of the workmen that the applicants have not been clamouring for the posts in these claim applications but confined their claims to the difference of wages admissible to the post on which even the respondent has not disputed this fact.
It is true as clearly held in case Municipal Committee, Mansa v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bathinda, 1996(4) SCT 720 (P&H) : 1997 LLR 66 that "the scope of section 33-C(2) of the Act is undoubtedly limited and it cannot be enlarged so as to determine the status of the workman.
The very question as to whether the workman had been posted as clerk or was required to perform the duties of a clerk was under dispute.
The principle of Equal Pay for Equal Work was required to be examined on the facts of the case.
These matters could not be said to be incidental or ancillary to determination of money claim of the workman."
Therefore, no advantage can be derived from the aforesaid case by the respondent.
Inasmuch as in the present case, the performance of duties of Jr. Draftsmen/Surveyor by the applicants Raj Kumar and Kamal Kishore and duties of Ferro Khalasi by Som Singh and duties of Typist by Sh. Ishwar Dayal, have not been controverted by the witness of the respondent.
Wages of Beldars were give to them.
It is clear cut exploitation of the labour class by the respondent, not permissible under the principle of justice, and equity and fair play.
Therefore, I hold that the applicants are entitled to wages of Jr. Draftsmen, Ferro Khalasi and Typists for the period indicated in their respective claim applications.
It must be amply made clear that this order shall not be construed as conferring the status on workmen which is outside the purview of section 33-C(2) of the ID Act.
It is also made clear that while calculating the wages of the applicants, the respondent may ensure about the working of these workmen on actual days.
But they will not be entitled to the wages for the absent period, if any.
As such, I decide this in favour of the applicants and against the respondent.
3.
The only ground on which the petitioners have challenged the impugned order is that the services of respondent No. 1 were regularised as Surveyor/Beldar and in the absence of any adjudication by the competent Court that he was working as Typist, the Labour Court could not have applied doctrine of Equal Pay for Equal work and directed the payment of salary in the higher pay scale on the basis of actual discharge of duties of a higher post.
4.
Shri Salil Sagar relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation, Delhi v. Ganesh Razzaq, 1995(1) SCT 408 (SC) : 1997(5) SLR 764 and argued that the impugned order is liable to be quashed because the Labour Court did not have jurisdiction to enforce the doctrine of equality in the matter of pay while deciding application under Section 33-C(2).
5.
Shri RS Manhas relied on order dated January 22, 2002 passed by a coordinate Bench in CWP No. 1333 of 2002, State of Punjab and others v. Kamal Kishore & another, and argued that in view of the dismissal of writ petition filed by the State against similar order passed by the Labour Court under section 33-C(2) in relation to the subsequent period, this petition may also be dismissed.
Shri Manhas further stated that after dismissal of CWP No. 1333 of 2002, the State has paid arrears of salary to respondent No. 1 in terms of the order passed by the Labour Court for the subsequent period.
6.
In response to the statement made by Shri RS Manhas that the petitioners have paid arrears of salary to respondent No. 1 in pursuance of the order passed by the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act for the subsequent period, Shri Salil Sagar fairly stated that he is not in a position to controvert the same.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and have carefully gone through the impugned order.
In our opinion, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed because after dismissal of C.W.P.
No. 1333 of 2002 filed for quashing of similar order passed by the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act in relation to subsequent period, the State Government has paid arrears of difference of salary to respondent No. 1.
Therefore, there does not appear any logic, rationale or justification to deny him benefit of difference of salary for the earlier period covered by the impugned order.
8.
We are further of the view that the impugned order does not call for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India because no manifest injustice has been caused to the petitioners.
The Labour Court has recorded a categorical finding that respondent No. 1 has throughout been working as Typist notwithstanding his designation as Beldar in the order of regularisation of service.
The petitioners have not placed any material before this Court to controvert the said finding.
Therefore, we do not find any justification to interfere with the impugned order.
No other point has been argued.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.