Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition, the petitioner Shiv Shanker Goyal, who is presently working as Superintending Engineer, has challenged the order dated 29th October, 2001, Annexure P/7 to the writ petition, vide which, the private respondents No. 2 and 3 have been promoted to the post of Chief Engineers and also order dated 912002, Annexure P/12 to the writ petition, vide which the representation of the petitioner claiming promotion to the post of Chief Engineer has been rejected.
2.
In order to examine the legality and propriety of the impugned orders, reference to basic facts would be necessary.
3.
Petitioner was appointed as Executive Engineer on 741980 as direct recruit and was promoted to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer on 17th June, 1983.
The seniority list of the Executive Engineer was finalised in terms of the rules applicable at the relevant time and the name of the petitioner was reflected at serial No. 56 while that of the private respondents was shown at serial No. 88 and 93 respectively.
The seniority list was finalised on 1641995.
On 1641995, the petitioner was promoted as Superintending Engineer.
After the petitioner was promoted to the said post, the Haryana Government amended the Haryana Service of Engineers, Class I, Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch), (Public Health Branch) and (Irrigation Branch) Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The provisions of this Act were made effective with effect from 1111966.
Retrospectivity of the Act was upheld by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of SS Bola & ors. v. BD Sardana & Ors., JT 1997(6) SC 637 : 1997(3) SCT 645 (SC), but with clear stipulation that promotion already made shall not be annulled in any manner.]
4.
The private respondents No. 2 and 3 were promoted as Superintending Engineer with effect from 7.10.1996 and 16121988 respectively.
They were promoted as Chief Engineer on 29102001 without even considering the case of the petitioner.
The petitioner earlier filed Civil Writ Petition being C.W.P.
No. 18640 of 2001, which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court granting liberty to the petitioner to move a detailed representation to the respondents within 15 days and further respondents were directed to pass a speaking order within one month thereafter.
The petitioner filed a detailed representation which has been rejected by a speaking order dated 912002, Annexure P/12.
5.
On these premises, the petitioner challenges the order of promotion of respondents as well as order rejecting his representation in the present writ petition.
6.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of the State and it is averred that the promotions have been made in terms of the seniority list prepared on 2911998, as persons with lesser service can march over their senior under the amended rules, resultantly, the seniority of the Executive Engineers was altered and the petitioner was placed at serial No. 71 and the officers upto serial No. 30 only have been promoted as Chief Engineer and many officers senior to the petitioner are also working as Executive Engineers.
The protection granted by the Supreme Court being limited to the promotion made prior to the promulgation of the Act, the future promotion, after enforcement of the Act, will have to be made on the basis of the seniority list dated 2911998.
The petitioner is much lower in seniority of the Executive Engineers, which is in accordance with the Act 20 of 1995 and in accordance with the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
It is stated that the petitioner's name has correctly been added in the seniority of the Executive Engineer as on 111998, as he was promoted as Superintending Engineer i.e. on the higher pot on 641995.
7.
Other facts are not much in dispute.
8.
The respondents have reiterated their stand taken in the order rejecting the representation of the petitioner.
9.
In order to appreciate the merit or otherwise of the controversy raised before us in the present case, reference to the provisions of the Act may be necessary.
10.
We are making reference to the Act inasmuch as the main controversy revolves around the operation of that Act and its effect retrospectively on the condition of service of the petitioner.
11.
On 30th November, 1995, a notification was issued promulgating Act 20 of 1995.
Under section 2(3) expression "Cadre post" was defined to mean permanent post in the service.
Under sub-section (15) of the same section expression "service" means Haryana Service of Engineer, Class I, Branch in the departments mentioned therein.
Strength of cadre would constitute under section 3 sub-section (i) of the Act, as number posts of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers, Chief Engineers and Engineer-in-Chief.
In other words, the strength of the service as defined together as the cumulative names in hierarchy of the department.
Under sub- section (c) of Section 5, only Superintending Engineer is entitled to be promoted to the post of Chief Engineer that too subject to the condition that he has rendered service on that post for a minimum period of three years.
Under sub-clause (b) of the same section a person is entitled to be promoted as Superintending Engineer only if he had rendered service of 7 years as an Executive Engineer.
Section 12 of the Act regulates the manner in which the seniority inter-se is to be maintained.
In case of Assistant Executive Engineers, seniority is to be maintained in order of merits determined by the Commission, while for Executive Engineers, by length of service on the post of Executive Engineers.
12.
The cumulative effect of harmonious reading of various provisions of the Act, referred to above, is that seniority of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers and Superintending Engineers have to be maintained inter- se seniority distinctly.
The person might have been Executive Engineer for any length of time but if he has discharged the duties and functions and was not appointed as Superintending Engineer for minimum period of three years he cannot be promoted as Chief Engineer.
Eligibility for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer is minimum three years of service as Superintending Engineer.
Applying these rules to the facts of the present case, the petitioner was appointed as Executive Engineer on 17th June, 1983.
Vide order dated 16th April, 1995, he was promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer by the government.
The order issued by the Haryana Government, Public Works (B&R) Department, promoting the petitioner and also issued posting orders in the name of Governor in the State of Haryana, which reads as under:-  "In pursuance of the judgment dated 451991 of the Supreme Court of India in CA No. 4094 of 1984-A.M. Sehgal and others RR Sheoran, the seniority list of Class-I Officers amongst direct Class-I recruits and promotees has been finalised vide order dated 641995 and 1641995.
As a consequence thereof, the Governor of Haryana is pleased to order the following promotions in the cadre of H.SE Class-I (Civil) with immediate effect :- xx xx xx  xx xx xx v) Sh. SS Goel, Executive Engineer, is hereby promoted as Superintending Engineer in pay scale of Rs. 4100-5300.
2.
The Governor of Haryana is further pleased to make the following postings/transfers with immediate effect in public interest.
Sr.No.
Name & designation Posted transferred as Remarks xx  xx xx xx  xx xx 6.
SS Goel, EE Prov.
Div-2 Kurukshetra (On promotion).
SE (Bridges) Head Office Vice Sh. PC Gupta transferred 13.
The above orders issued by the competent authority had granted substantive promotion to the petitioner in the post of Superintending Engineer subject to the provisions of Section 2, sub-section (3) and section 9 and obviously on the satisfaction of the prescribed conditions.
The promotion of the petitioner on 1641995 granted him the higher status and posting as Superintending Engineer and thus he walked outside the ambit of the Executive Engineer.
Alteration and/or fixation of seniority as Executive Engineer would not affect the petitioner particularly under the provisions of the Act, which came into force on 30111995.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while upholding the retrospectivity of the Act had clearly stipulated that the persons who have already been promoted, their promotion or seniority would be saved by the judgment itself and the operation of the new law despite being retrospective in its operation would not adversely affect their rights.
Instead of deliberating on this issue, it will be more appropriate to refer to the findings recorded by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of SS Bola (supra) :  "...In the ultimate result, therefore, we hold Haryana Act 20 of 1995 is intra virus except part of Section 25 which has been held to be ultra vires.
The Act having been given retrospective effect with effect from 1.11.96 the inter se seniority of direct recruits and promotees in each of the services, namely, the PWD Branch, the Public Health Branch and the Irrigation Branch will have to be re-drawn up in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The seniority lists already drawn up subsequent to the judgment of this Court in the case of Sehgal and Chopra and as well as during the pendency of these appeals in this Court are of no consequence in view of the Act coming into force.
It is, however, made clear that any promotion already given on the basis of seniority determined by the Government under the pre-existing rules will not be annulled notwithstanding any change in the seniority to be determined under the Act.
The impugned judgments of Punjab and Haryana Supreme Court are set aside.
The State Government is directed to re-consider the question of seniority of the employees of the three Branches under the Act within a period of six months from today and to give consequential promotion on that basis soon thereafter."
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance upon another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of P. Mohan Reddy v. E.A.A.
Charles & Ors., JT 2001(3) SC 1 : 2001(2) SCT 542 (SC), where the Court held as under :-  "Even though an employee cannot claim to have a vested right to have a particular position in any grade, but all the same he has the right of his seniority being determined in accordance with the Rules which remained in force at the time when he was borne in the Cadre.
The question of determination of the seniority in the cadre on the basis of any amended criteria or Rules would arise only when the amendment in question is given a retrospective effect.
If the retrospectivity of the Rule is assailed by any person then the Court would be entitled to examine the same and decide the matter in accordance with the law.
If the retrospectivity of the Rule is ultimately struck down, necessarily the question of redrawing of the seniority list under the amended provisions would not arise, but if however, the retrospectivity is upheld by a court then the seniority could be redrawn in accordance with the amended provisions of the employees who are still in the cadre and not those who have already got promotion to some other cadre by that date.
Further a particular Rule or seniority having been considered by Court and some directions in relation thereto having been given, that direction has to be followed in the matter of the drawing up of the seniority list until and unless a valid Rule by the Rule making authority comes into existence and requires otherwise."
15.
From the above facts and law enunciated, it is clear that petitioner's seniority as Executive Engineer while he was actually promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer could not have been altered in the garb of the application of new law.
Furthermore the case of the petitioner was fully protected and covered under the saving clause declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SS Bola'a case (supra).
Thus, the action of the respondents in disturbing the seniority of the petitioner cannot sustain the legal authority.
16.
It is also argued that the private respondents No. 2 and 3 were promoted on 7101996 and 16121998 respectively as Superintending Engineers, whereas the petitioner was promoted as Superintending Engineer on 1641995.
There is no justification before us as to how the petitioner has been ignored from the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer.
There is no dispute that the petitioner has already rendered more than three years of service as Superintending Engineer and is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Chief Engineers.
The stand of the respondents, as spelt out in the impugned order dated 10.1.2002 is liable to be set aside.
It has not been correctly noticed in the order that the promotion granted by the Superintending Engineer being limited to the promotion made prior to promulgation of the Act only the few promotion i.e. after endorsement of the Act will have to be made on the basis of the seniority determined on 21.9.1998 and the petitioner was not entitled to the promotion.
This reasoning is belied by admitted facts before us that the petitioner was promoted as Superintending Engineer by order of the authority on 641995 when Act 20 was promulgated and the notification was published on 30111995.
17.
The authorities have fallen in error in law and injustice done to the petitioner needs to be corrected.
18.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, set aside the order dated 29th October, 2001, Annexure P/8 to the writ petition and order dated 9.1.20o01, Annexure P12 to the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer in accordance with the Act and law.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.