Swatanter Kumar, J - By this common judgment we will dispose of above mentioned 10 writ petitions as all of them involve common question of law for determination based on somewhat similar facts.
For the purposes of brevity, reference is being made to the facts in the case of Guran Dass v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 6 of 2003.
2.
Petitioner joined as Work Supervisor with the Municipal `Corporation', Jalandhar, hereinafter referred to as the Corporation, on 2931987 on work charge basis.
He continued to work as such upto 13111990 without any break.
The Corporation vide its resolution No. 5080 dated 2831990 resolved to regularise the services of its temporary employees who had completed more than 240 days of service and satisfied the other conditions.
This resolution of the Corporation was approved by the Government vide its letter dated 19101990.
As a result thereto, the services of the petitioner were regularised as Work Supervisor in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/- on 30101990.
In the year 1991, the petitioner was adjusted against a vacant post of Road Inspector.
Vide letter dated 651991 the petitioner was so informed by the Corporation Engineer.
The petitioner was described as Work Supervisor in the certificate issued by the Superintending Engineer, Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar on 4.12.1998.
Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted to the post of JE on 2511999.
The scale of the said post was granted to the petitioner with effect from 141999 as he completed the 12 years prescribed experience under the rules on that date.
3.
However, the respondents served a notice to show cause dated 1922001 (Annexure P/8 to the writ petition) upon the petitioner calling him to show cause why he should not be reverted from the post of Junior Engineer as his promotion had been made contrary to the rules because on the date of his promotion, he did not possess 12 years experience and he had the experience of only 8 years and 5 months.
The petitioner submitted his reply dated 2822001 to the show cause notice, Annexure P/9 to the writ petition, clearly stating that he joined as Work Supervisor on 2931987 and as such had completed the prescribed period of 12 years as on 141999.
The petitioner also submitted a detailed representation putting forward his stand to justify that an order of reversion was not called for in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Despite that the respondent passed an order dated 24122002 whereby the petitioner was reverted.
It was stated in the said order that the petitioner did not even belong to the feeder cadre of Work Supervisor/Work Mistri/Surveyor as he was a Road Inspector, which was not the feeding cadre for promotion under that quota.
According to the petitioner he belongs to the cadre of Work Supervisor and had worked as such for all this time.
The petitioner was never paid the salary of Road Inspector and his name was shown in the seniority list maintained in the office of Municipal Corporation as well as in the State level seniority depicting the petitioner to be working as Work Supervisor and he had rightly been promoted to the post of Junior Engineer.
On these premises, the petitioner raises a challenge to the order of reversion Annexure P/11 dated 24122002, inter-alia, on the following grounds :-  a) The show-cause notice issued by the respondents does not state the grounds on which the impugned order has been passed.
As such the order has been passed on the grounds not disclosed in the show cause notice and the same is violative of principles of natural justice.
b) The impugned order is factually incorrect and is not supported by record.
c) The petitioner(s) possesses prescribed experience of 12 years.
It is not necessary for the petitioner(s) to render 12 years of regular service in the feeder cadre.
d) The cases of the petitioners are squarely covered by a judgment of this Court in the case of Ravinder Pal Kaur v. The State of Punjab and another, 1979(1) SLR 554.
4.
In most of the cases, different written statement has been filed on behalf of the State Government and the Municipal Corporation.
However, the stand taken is more or less common.
Primary objection has been taken by the respondents that in terms of Rule 11.3 Appendix `C' and `D' of The Punjab Municipal Corporation Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules) 1978, hereinafter referred to as the Rules, the statutory appeal lies to the competent authority.
The petitioner having not availed the statutory remedy, the writ petition is not maintainable for availability of alternative efficacious remedy.
5.
On merits, the facts of the present case are not much in dispute.
It is stated that the petitioner was promoted as Road Inspector vide resolution dated 351991 and the entry in the service book of the petitioner to the contrary is inconsequential.
The same post is not a feeder post for promotion to the Junior Engineer.
It is also averred that even if two posts belonging to different cadres have the same duties as well as carry the same pay scale, that would, by no means, grant any benefit to the petitioner.
The persons who are working as Work Supervisors are Matriculate and possess 12 years of work experience and as such are eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer.
On these facts, the respondents pray that the writ petitions of the petitioners are liable to be dismissed as the petitioners do not possess the essential qualifications and the petitioners are not entitled to take any benefit of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, 1950.
6.
At the very out-set we may notice that the petitioners in this petition and in all the connected petitions claim to be working as Mistri/Mate/Surveyor/work supervisor Motor Mate.
All of them were admittedly promoted to the post of Junior Engineer alike petitioner.
Thereafter they have been reverted vide impugned order dated 24122002 after serving notice to show cause upon them.
7.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed as Work Supervisor on 2931987 on work-charge basis.
His services were regularised thereafter in continuation to the work charge service.
The Superintending Engineer, Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar issued a certificate on 4.12.1998 stating as under :-  "This is to certify that Shri Guran Dass S/o Shri Ram Saran, has worked as Work Supervisor in Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar, on Muster Roll from 29387 to 131190.
Now he is working on regular basis.
His work and conduct is satisfactory.
He is sincere and hard worker.
There is no complaint or departmental enquiry against him.
I wish him all success in future."
8.
Thereafter the petitioner was continuously working on that post and was promoted to the post of Junior Engineer and reverted as afore-noticed.
In the show cause notice dated 1922001 it had been stated that the petitioner did not fulfil the condition of experience on the date of promotion and had only experience of 8 years 5 months.
The promotion was not proper.
Hence petitioner was called upon to show cause why he should not reverted.
However, when the order of reversion dated 24122002 was passed by the respondents entirely different ground was taken into consideration by the authority for reverting the petitioner.
The paragraph of the impugned order which decided the fate of all these petitioners reads as under :-  "Whereas I have gone through the facts of the case and the whole record.
These officials held various posts before their promotion to the post of Junior Engineer such as Head Mistri, Road Inspector, Clerk and Mate as given in para 1 and which have been verified, from the entries in their service Books, which do not constitute feeder channel for promotion as Junior Engineer.
Therefore, these officials were promoted in violation of relevant services rules (Punjab Municipal Corporation Act (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) (First Amendment) Rules, 1996 and 1989 as such, all these officials are reverted to their original posts."
9.
The reasoning given in the impugned order is apparently in variation to the grounds stated in the show cause notice.
Not having the prescribed experience for promotion to the post is entirely different than not belonging to a feeder cadre to the promotion post.
The response or defence of the petitioners to both these grounds could be distinct and different.
The competent authority is obliged to apply its mind in accordance with law before passing an order which is likely to vest the employee with such serious civil consequences.
The application of mind per se would require examination only of the grounds stated in the show cause notice and the reply of the employee to such grounds, in their correct prospective before passing any order much less any order of revision.
10.
We are of the considered view that the petitioners have suffered serious prejudice on this count and the impugned order is, thus, violative of principles of natural justice.
Where impugned order is violative of principles of natural justice, there it also offends the settled principle of application of mind in executive action.
11.
The petitioner was appointed to the post of Work Supervisor.
However, vide resolution of the Corporation dated 351991 the petitioner was adjusted against the vacant post of Road Inspector, though according to the petitioner he continued to discharge the functions of the Work Supervisor, the post on which he was regularised and was receiving the same salary, which he was receiving earlier.
This averment of the petitioner is duly supported by the entries effected by the respondents in the service record of the petitioner.
There is no material placed before us by the respondents which could show that the petitioner was not working as Work Supervisor for all the period in question.
In terms of Sr. No. 10 of Appendix `B' of Rule 3(ii) of the Rules, 35% of the prescribed promotion posts of Junior Engineers shall be filled by the employees working under the Corporation, Director, Local Government, who are Matriculates or equivalent or who have experience of working on either of the aforesaid posts for a period of 12 years and have passed departmental examination.
Out of these, 10% are to be out of Work Supervisors, 25% out of Mistris/Surveyors.
There is no dispute that the petitioners are matriculate and have passed the requisite Diploma/Departmental examination.
The obstacle further in way of the petitioners that they have not gained 12 years experience after their regularisation in the post of Work Supervisors.
12.
The impediments do not appear to be founded on correct analysis of legal principles.
To assume in absence of specific language in the Rule that 12 years experience must be as "regular service rendered in the feeder cadre" will not be permissible.
The Rule is silent and, therefore, the experience gained by the petitioners while working as work-supervisor whether on work- charge basis or adhoc basis may have to be considered as experience within the scope of the rule, particularly when such rendered service immediately preceded the regularisation of services of the petitioners on their respective posts.
This in any case would be substantial compliance of the prescribed qualification.
The framers of the rule have intentionally used the expression "experience of working on either of the aforesaid posts, itself indicates that they never intended to use the expression "regular service rendered in the lower cadre".
To imply such an interpretation to the Rule in absence of specific language would not be in consonance with the settled cannons of service jurisprudence.
13.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners have relied upon the judgments of this Court in the case of Ravinder Paul Kaur (supra) and Dharam Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, Recent Services Judgments (1950-1988) Vol. 1 page 158 in support of the contention that experience gained on regular basis or adhoc basis both would have to be counted for the purposes of satisfying the prescribed condition of 12 years experience.
14.
Keeping in view the language of the rule and the principles enunciated in the above cases, we are of the considered view that the respondents were not justified in excluding the experience which the petitioners had gained prior to their being regularised in their respective posts particularly when such experience is in continuation to the period of regularisation.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, JT 1989(4) SC 541 had even held that an employee working for a considerable time may even satisfy the prescribed condition of qualifications as experience, would be a proper guide to access suitability of the candidate.
Undisputedly the petitioner(s) have the working experience of Work Supervisors for all this period though part of the service is on adhoc/work charge basis while remaining of it is on regular basis.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ram Sarup v. State of Haryana and others, (1979) 1 Supreme Court Cases 168 even discussed the concept and enunciated the principle that where the requirement of minimum experience for holding a post was not satisfied, the appointment may be irregular, but would automatically regularised after the candidate clearing that required extent of experience while holding the post and reversion may not be justified.
The following observations of the Apex Court can be usefully referred to at this stage :  "The appellant worked as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer from January 01, 1968 and that being a post higher than that of Labour Inspector, or Deputy Chief Inspector of Shops or Wage Inspector, the experience gained by him in the working of Labour Laws in the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer must be regarded as sufficient to constitute fulfilment of the requirement of five years' experience provided in clause (1) of Rule 4.
The appointment of the appellant to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, therefore, became regular from the date when he completed five years after taking into account the period of about ten months during which he worked as Chief Inspector of Shops.
Once his appointment became regular on the expiry of this period of five years on his fulfilling the requirements for appointment as Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer and becoming eligible for that purpose, he could not thereafter be reverted to the post of Statistical Officer.
The order of reversion passed against the appellant, was, therefore, clearly illegal and it must be set aside."
15.
The impugned order also does not depict correct factual matrix of the record of the petitioners.
Besides it being not in consonance with the grounds stated in the show cause notice, it is silent as to what was the shortfall in experience.
The show cause notice does not give correctly the period in relation to each of the petitioner(s) and it also proceeds on a wrongful assumption that the service rendered by them prior to their regularisation cannot be counted for satisfying the condition of 12 years experience stipulated in the rules.
For example, the present petitioner is stated to have worked for 8 years and 5 months which obviously excludes the three years plus service, which the petitioner had rendered as Work Supervisor on work charge/adhoc basis.
This fact is fully corroborated by the certificate issued by the Superintending Engineer dated 4.12.1998 as stated above.
16.
Now we proceed to discuss the merits of the preliminary objections taken by the respondents with regard to maintainability of the writ petitions on the ground that an alternative efficacious remedy is provided to the petitioners under Rule 11(3) of the Rules.
17.
This objection is without merit.
Rule 11 deals with imposition of punishment and the authorities which are entitled to hear appeals against such orders.
No penalty, upon conclusion of departmental enquiry or otherwise, has been inflicted upon the petitioners.
The case of the respondents is that the petitioners were granted wrongful promotion and they have been reverted by withdrawal of the same and after serving a show cause notice upon them.
Thus, it cannot be termed as a penalty within the meaning of Punishment and Appeal Rules.
The provision of appeal before the competent authority in any case would not divest this Court of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
We are further of the considered view that for the sake of arguments even if the submission of the respondents is accepted, even then no fruitful purpose would be served by relegating the petitioners to the departmental proceedings at this stage of the proceedings, particularly when some of the writ petitions are pending before this Court for quite sometime and the parties have been heard at great length.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow these writ petitions and set aside the impugned reversion order dated 24122002.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.