GS Singhvi, J - Whether rendering of 240 days service in a calendar year is sine qua non for invoking the rule of last-cum-first go embodied in Section 25(G) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act') is the question which arises for determination in this petition filed by Sardar Masih (hereinafter described as `the workman') for quashing award dated 7.11.1985 passed by Labour Court, Amritsar.
2.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties are that the workman was appointed as Conductor in the services of Punjab Roadways on 1971978 and his services were discontinued w.e.f.
931979.
He challenged the action of the employer by filing a civil suit which was dismissed by Senior Sub Judge, Amritsar vide judgment and decree dated 141980 on the ground that the civil court did not have the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the legality of the termination of his services.
He then raised an industrial dispute which was referred by the State Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act to Labour Court, Amritsar.
In his statement of claim, the workman pleaded that while terminating his services, the employer had violated the rule in last-cum-first go, inasmuch as, a number of persons appointed after him had been retained in service and no reason had been assigned for termination of his services.
The employer resisted the claim of the workman and pleaded that the rule of last-cum-first go is not attracted in the case of the workman because he had not completed 240 days service.
The Labour Court accepted the plea of the employer and answered the reference against the workman by recording the following reasons :  "The appointment was ad hoc in nature.
The order of termination is one in simpliciter.
In other words, the order does not give rise to a stigma and it is accordingly not challengeable unless indeed there is plea of mala fide duly supported by proper evidence.
The workman in this case has not put forward any such plea nor is there anything to show that the termination was actuated by any motive on the part of any authority concerned to unduly purge the workman from service.
It is not essential that in each case the appointing authority must give reasons for terminating the services of an employee.
The Court would interfere, as already stated above, only in case there was lack of bona fides and there was unfair labour practice.
The workman has not yet completed service of 240 days.
In these premises, the termination order cannot be successfully challenged.
Accordingly, I hold the issue against the workman and dismiss the reference."
3.
Shri BR Mahajan assailed the impugned award by arguing that the condition of rendering 240 days service is relevant only for the purpose of determining the issue relating to violation of Section 25(F) of the Act and not Sections 25(G) on 25(H) and, therefore, the view taken by the Labour Court that it was not necessary for the employer to comply with the rule of last-cum-first go must be treated as erroneous.
In support of his argument, Shri Mahajan relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in Central Bank of India v. S Satyam and others, 1996(4) SCT 143 (SC) : JT 1996(7) SC 181 and Samishta Dube v. City Board, Etawah and another, 1999(2) SCT 284 (SC) : (1999) 3 SCC 14 and the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda, 2001(1) SCT 99.
4.
Shri DV Sharma, Additional Advocate General submitted that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in S Satyam's case (supra) and Samishta Dube's case (supra), he cannot support the impugned award.
5.
In our opinion, both the reasons assigned by the Labour Court for declining relief to the workman are legally erroneous and, therefore, the impugned award is liable to be set aside.
It is true that the workman was appointed as Conductor on ad hoc basis and his services were terminated before completion of 240 days service but this did not absolve the employer of its obligation to comply with the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and the rule of last-cum-first go while terminating his service.
In the Manager, Govt Branch Press and another v. DB Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429, their Lordships of the Supreme Court considered the question whether the services of a temporary government servant can be terminated without reason while retaining juniors in service and answered the same in the following words :  "If the services of a temporary Government servant are terminated in accordance with the conditions of his service on the ground of unsatisfactory conduct or his unsuitability for the job and/or for his work being unsatisfactory, or for a like reason which makes him off a class apart from other temporary servants who have been retained in service, there is no question of the applicability of Art. 16.
Conversely, if the services of a temporary Government servant are terminated arbitrarily and not on the ground of his unsuitability, unsatisfactory conduct or the like which would put him in a class apart from his juniors in the same service, a question of unfair discrimination may arise, notwithstanding the fact that in terminating his service, the appointing authority was purporting to act in accordance with the terms of the employment."
6.
The Court also rejected the argument that the employer has the absolute right to determine the employment of a temporary employee in accordance with the conditions of appointment.
Paragraph 25 of the judgment which contains discussion on this aspect of the matter reads as under :  "Another facet of Mr. Veerappa's contention is that the respondent had voluntarily entered into a contract of service on the terms of employment offered to him.
One of the terms of that contract, embodied in the letter of his appointment is that his service was purely temporary and was liable to termination at the will and pleasure of the appointing authority, without reason and without notice.
Having willingly accepted the employment on terms offered to him, the respondent cannot complain against the impugned action taken in accordance with those mutually agreed terms.
The argument is wholly misconceived.
It is borrowed from the archaic common law concept that employment was a matter between the master and servant only.
In the first place, this rule in its original absolute form is not applicable to government servants.
Secondly, even with regard to private employment, much of it has passed into the fossils of time.
"This rule held the field at the time when the master and servant were taken more literally than they are now and when, as in early Roman Law, the rights of the servant, like the rights of any other member of the house-hold were not his own but those of his patter families".
The overtones of this ancient doctrine are discernible in the Anglo-American jurisprudence of the 18th century and the first half of the 20th century, which rationalised the employer's absolute right to discharge the employee.
"Such a philosophy", as pointed out by KK Mathew, J (vide his treatise : "Democracy, Equality and Freedom", page 326) of the employer's dominion over his employee may have been in tune with the rustic simplicity of bygone days.
But that philosophy is incompatible with these days of larger, impersonal, corporate employers."
To bring it in tune with vastly changed and changing socio-economic conditions and mores of the day, much of this old, antiquated and unjust doctrine has been eroded by judicial decisions and legislation, particularly in its application to persons in public employment, to whom, the constitutional protection of Arts.
14, 15, 16 and 311 is available.
The argument is therefore overruled."
7.
In Central Bank of India v. S Satyam (supra), the Supreme Court held that the even though the workman may not have worked for 240 days in a calendar year, the employer is duty-bound to comply with the rule of last-cum-first go enshrined in Article 25-G of the Act.
In Samishta Dube v. City Board, Etawah and another (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that even in the case of daily wage employees, the rule of last-cum-first go is required to be complied with.
8.
By applying the ratio of the above mentioned decisions to the facts of this case, I hold that the impugned award is vitiated by an error of law and is liable to be set aside.
Ordered accordingly.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to reinstate the petitioner in service with the benefit of continuity of service and all other service benefits admissible to an ad hoc employee except the back wages.
For claiming back wages, the workman shall be free to avail remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
This course is being adopted in consonance with the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Corporation v. VN Vajpayee, AIR 1980 SC 840.
Petition allowed.