GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against award dated 17.2.1987 (Annexure P6) passed by Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak (respondent No. 2) in Reference No. 118 of 1984 for reinstatement of respondent No. 3-Ram Mehar Singh (hereinafter described as `the workman') with continuity of service and back wages.
2.
The workman was appointed on the post of Secretary in the services of the petitioner-Bank vide order dated 2291981 issued by its Managing Director.
As per the order of appointment, he was to remain on probation for two years, but keeping in view the provisions of Rule 5(iv) of the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975, his probation was treated as of one year.
This appears to be the reason why the Managing director extended the period of the petitioner's probation by six moths vide order dated 681982.
After three months, the Managing Director passed order dated 26121982 terminating the service of the workman on account of unsatisfactory performance during the period of probation.
The workman challenged that order by filing an appeal which was dismissed by Joint Registrar (Godown), Cooperative Societies Haryana, Chandigarh vide his order dated 11101983.
He then raised a dispute, which was referred by the Government of Haryana under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the 1947 Act') to Labour Court, Rohtak.
3.
In his statement of claim, the workman pleaded that he had continuously worked under the employer for a period of more than 12 months and his service was terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act.
He further pleaded that the action taken by the Management of the Bank was punitive in nature and the same was liable to be invalidated because before terminating his service neither any inquiry was held nor he was not given opportunity of hearing.
4.
In its reply, the petitioner questioned the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to try the reference by contending that it was barred by Section 128 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984 (for short, the 1984 Act).
Another objection taken by the petitioner was that the dispute raised by the workman was not covered by Section 2-A of the 1947 Act.
On merits, it was pleaded that the service of the workman had been terminated during the period of probation because of unsatisfactory performance and, therefore, it was not ncessary to give him notice or pay in lieu thereof and compensation.
It was also pleaded that the workman was gainfully employed after the termination of his service.
5.
After considering the rival pleadings and evidence, respondent No. 1 overruled the objection raised on behalf of the petitioner to the maintainability of the reference by observing that the workman was entitled to raise the dispute under Section 2-A of the 1947 Act.
Respondent No. 2 further held that termination of the service of the workman was punitive in character and as the same was brought about without inquiry and without giving him opportunity of hearing, it was liable to be invalidated.
He further held that the order terminating the services of the workman was liable to be quashed on the ground of violation of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act.
6.
Ms. Jagdeep Bains, learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the objection taken on behalf of the petitioner before the Labour Court and argued that the reference and the State Government should be declared as non est in view of the bar contained in Section 128 of the 1984 Act.
She further argued that even if this Court upholds the view taken by respondent No. 2 on the issue of maintainability of the reference, the impugned award should be declared as vitiated by an error of law and quashed because the finding recorded by respondent No. 2 that the termination of the service of the workman was by way of punishment is per se erroneous.
She laid emphasis on the fact that the workman was a probationer and argued that his service could be terminated at any time during the period of probation on account of unsatisfactory performance and the action of the management cannot be treated as punitive simply because in the pleadings filed before the Labour Court, a reference was made to the unsatisfactory performance and conduct of the workman.
Learned counsel further argued that it was not necessary to give notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation to the workman because the termination of this service did not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act.
In the end, she submitted that during the pendency of the writ petition, the workman was reinstated in service and he is being departmentally proceeded against for various acts of misconduct committed in the course of employment.
7.
Shri Ujjal Singh Sahni, learned counsel for the workman supported the impugned award and argued that this Court may not interfere with the findings recorded by respondent No. 2 about the nature of employment of the workman and the manner of termination of his service because the same are based on due consideration of the pleadings and appreciation of evidence.
8.
I have considered the respective arguments and carefully scanned the record.
In my opinion, the impugned award does not suffer from any jurisdictional error or legal infirmity requiring interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
9.
The argument of Ms. Jagdeep Bains that the reference made by the State Government was barred by Section 128 of the 1984 Act and, therefore, respondent No. 2 did not have jurisdiction to entertain the same is liable to be rejected because, -  (a) section 128 of the 1984 Act which debarred an employee of a Cooperative Society from raising an industrial dispute was struck down by a Full Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2018 of 1985 - Sonepat Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Sonepat v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak and another, decided 1481986; (b) even if Section 128 of the 1984 Act had not been struck down by the Full Bench of this Court, the same could not have been treated as a bar to the maintainability of the reference in view of the overriding effect given to the provisions of Chapter V-A of the 1948 Act by virtue of Section 25-J thereof which reads as under :- "25J.
Effect of Laws inconsistent with this Chapter.
- (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law [including standing orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946)] : [Provided that where under the provisions of any other Act or rules, orders or notifications issued thereunder or under any standing orders or any award, contract of service or otherwise, a workman is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act; the workman shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect of other matters under this Act.]
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to affect the provisions of any other law for the time being in force in any State in so far as that law provides for the settlement of industrial disputes, but the rights and liabilities of employers and workmen in so far as they relate to lay-off and retrenchment shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter".]
A reading of the section reproduced above shows that the provisions of Chapter V-A of the 1947 Act will have effect notwithstanding any inconsistent provision contained in any other law for the time being in force.
The 1984 Act and the rules framed thereunder fall within the expression of `any other law' used in sub-section (1) of Section 25-J of the 1947 Act.
Therefore, notwithstanding the bar contained in Section 128 of the 1984 Act, an employee of a Cooperative Society could raise an industrial dispute in the matter of termination of his service by claiming that it was by way of retrenchment and the appropriate Government could make reference under Section 10 to an appropriate adjudicating authority constituted under the 1947 Act.
Thus, reference made by the State Government in the matter of termination of the service of the workman cannot be held as barred by Section 128 and respondent No. 2 did not commit any jurisdictional error by entertaining the same; and (c) the argument of Ms. Bains that the dispute raised by the workman cannot be treated as an industrial dispute deserves to be rejected in view Section 2-A of the 1947 Act under which an individual dispute is fictionally treated as an industrial dispute.
10.
Having overruled the objection raised on behalf of the petitioner to the maintainability of the reference, I shall now consider the question whether respondent No. 2 erred in holding that termination of the service of the workman was invalid and inoperative on account of violation of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act.
11.
The question whether the termination of the service of the probationer amounts to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the 1947 Act is no longer res integra.
In Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219, the Supreme Court applied the ratio of an earlier judgment in State Bank of India v. N Sundra Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111 and held that termination of service of a probationer also amounts to retrenchment.
In this context, it is appropriate to mention that the broader meaning given to the term retrenchment in N Sundra Money's case (supra) was approved by a Constitution Bench in Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and others, JT 1990(2) SC 489.
12.
The consequences of the termination of service of a workman without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act was considered in State of Bombay v. Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, AIR 1960 SC 610.
In that case, the Supreme Court held that Clause (b) of Section 25-F is mandatory and non- compliance thereof has the effect of rendering an order of termination of service of workman by way of retrenchment as invalid and inoperative.
In Gammon India Ltd v. Niranjan Dass, (1984) 1 SCC.
244, the Supreme Court declared the termination of the service of the workman without compliance of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act as void.
In Surendra Kumar Verma v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and another, AIR 1981 SC 422, a three Judges' Bench of the Supreme Court ruled that the action of the employer to terminate the service of a workman without complying with the requirement compensation has to be treated as non est entitling the workman with continuity of service with full back wages.
13.
By applying the ratio of the aforementioned decisions, I hold that respondent No. 2 did not commit any error when he held that termination of the service of the workman was violative of Section 25-F of the 1947 Act.
Indeed, it is not even pleaded by the petitioner that while terminating the service of the workman, one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation had been offered to him.
In view of the above conclusion, I do not consider it necessary to deal with the question whether termination of the services of the workman was by way of punishment and the same was liable to be invalidated on the ground of violation of the rules of natural justice.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, it is made clear that the decision of this case shall not preclude the petitioner-Bank from taking appropriate action qua any delinquency which the workman may have committed after re-employment in pursuance of the impugned award.
Petition dismissed.