Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner No. 1 is in the service of respondents as Casual Labourer since 1986 and the other two petitioners too are in the service of Food Corporation of India, as Casual Labourers since 1990-91 (Annexure-A).
Petitioners have been working as such Casual Labourers and discharging duties in different capacities all along.
The case of petitioners was also recommended, by their immediate officers for regularisation.
But, as there was no response from the other side, petitioners filed writ petition 262 of 1996, which was disposed of by Order dated 1091997 by Ld.
Single Bench of this court in terms of order as under :-  ".............
In the circumstances, official respondents are directed to consider petitioners' case for regularisation of their services taking in regard the award of the Central Administrative Tribunal in case Surinder Kumar and others v. Food Corporation of India and pass appropriate orders in the matter in accordance with rules within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
This petition stands disposed of at its admission to hearing with the consent of the learned counsel for the parties."
2.
As follow up, respondent No. 3 Senior Regional Manager of Food Corporation of India, headquartered at Jammu, declined to regularise the petitioners vide Order dated 421998 (Annexure-H).
This order is under challenge in this petition.
The order is alleged to have been passed in colourable exercise of power without carrying out the mandate of the court direction.
The excellent work done by the petitioners in most trying circumstances when the employees of the Corporation migrated from Valley en masse has not been considered.
The satisfactory and landable work done by the petitioners and even appreciated by their immediate officers and even reflected in communications recommending petitioners case for regularisation has been wholly ignored.
After all the cases of petitioners who have worked for long 12 to 15 years and served devotedly the Food Corporation of India in keeping it going in the valley cannot be brushed aside so lightly.
Petitioners having worked regularly for years together and having rendered the job with trappings of a permanent nature cannot be shown door in disregard to law, rules, equity and justness of petitioners case.
Respondents-Food Corporation of India by not applying its mind properly and considering the case in right perspective had failed to discharge their legal obligation to carry out the order, directions under law.
Independently whether petitioners case falls within the sweep of Circular EP 1(4) 25-Vol II dated 651987, as referred in the award given by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Chandigarh in Surinder Kumar and others v. Food Corporation of India and others, the competent authority was to consider the petitioners case on its own merits, as mandated by Writ Court judgment dated 1091997.
Petitioners case has been dealt with artificially and not considered on its merits accompanied by attending circumstances and the prevalent situation, when the petitioners were engaged and the adverse conditions in which they have been working all along.
3.
The main defence of respondents in reply is, that the order dated 1091997 of the writ court is confined to grant of consideration to petitioners case in terms of the award of Industrial-Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Chandigarh in Surinder Kumar's case.
This award in terms provides that the case of the petitioners to that award were covered by Circular (Ex.W11) dated 651987, in as-much-as, those petitioners had put in three months service on cut off date namely 251986, the pre-requisite for regularisation of service.
In this case petitioners have been engaged and are in the service of Food Corporation of India, as such, Casual Labourers from 1986 and 1990 and in any case not earlier to cut off date of 251986.
The petitioners case has been thus considered and is rejected by the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, (Respondent No. 3).
4.
The Ld.
counsel for the parties are agreed that the range and scope of court direction in judgment dated 1091997 (SWP No. 262 of 1996) is vital to govern the question, if the respondents have considered petitioners case in the letter and spirit of the direction or not apart from the stands taken by the counsel in accord with the stance of petitioners and respondents put forth in their respective pleadings.
The operative portion of the judgment/order dated 1091997 (Annexure-E) is as under :-  "...In the circumstances, officials respondents are directed to consider petitioners' case for regularisation of their services taking in regard the award of the Central Administrative Tribunal in case Surinder Kumar and others v. Food Corporation of India and pass appropriate orders in the matter in accordance with rules within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
This petition stands disposed of at its admission to hearing with the consent of the learned counsel for the parties."
5.
A plain reading of the court direction would show that the petitioners case for regularisation of their services was to be considered by the respondents and for the purpose were required to have regard to the award of the Industrial-cum-Labour Court Tribunal, Chandigarh (wrongly referred as Central Administrative Tribunal) in Surinder Kumar's case and pass appropriate orders under rules within a period of three months.
Obviously, respondents/competent authority was required to deal with the matter on merits and examine the petitioners case for regularisation within the canopy of applicable rules after duly accounting for the facts and circumstances of the case.
The order no where provides that respondents were required to take a hypertechnical view of the matter and address the issue only from the standpoint of the award of the Industrial-cum-Labour Court Tribunal, Chandigarh, in Surinder Kumar's case on literal meaning of the Circular dated 651987.
Such a hypertechnical view would not advance the cause of justice or even concentrate on the equities of the case and address the hard facts and circumstances emerging from record.
Whether the petitioners have acquired eligibility, merit or are required to be regularised in terms of rules or instructions issued during last over a decade are the issues which have not been at all addressed to and considered.
This is more pronounced when the communications dated 551992, 261992 and 211996 (Annexure-B to D) recommending petitioners case for regularisation and formal appointment on the basis of performance, good conduct and working in extra-ordinary situation primarily affected by militancy and vice of migration of the Corporation employees from the valley are noticed not to have been taken note of.
The conduct of petitioners cases on the part of respondent No. 3 is not too healthy, given the fact situation of this case.
It is strange, notwithstanding, a little said about delaying of accord of consideration, that the case(s) is not appropriately, meaningfully and fully dealt with and decided with reasonable dispatch in true legal spirit.
The consideration has been accorded in a lopsided manner, without addressing the real issue by taking a hypertechnical view of the matter.
The merits of the case and the petitioners claim for regularisation independently of the Circular in question has not been addressed to.
In fact, the direction of the court is not at all complied with.
6.
In result, in the above view taken, the impugned order No. RO/LEGAL/262 dated 421998 is quashed and the respondents/competency authority is issued a mandamus to accord wholesome and due consideration to petitioners case(s) for regularisation under law after keeping in view the observations made herein- above.
Disposed of.
Order accordingly.