SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner was granted pension under Rule 19(2) of the B.S.F.
Rules, 1969 on 10111979.
The services of the petitioner were regulated by B.S.F.
Act, 1968 and the Rules, i.e. B.S.F.
Rules, 1969.
The petitioner joined B.S.F.
on 221968 at the time of National Emergency.
He was continuously receiving pension since 10111979 when suddenly on 1672002, respondent No. 4 has issued directions to stop pension being paid to B.S.F.
Personnel who have resigned before completing qualifying service of 20 years.
When payment of the pension being made to the petitioner was stopped, he sent a legal notice dated 2392002 through his advocate to respondent No. 4.
When no decision was taken on the legal notice, the petitioner filed CWP No. 17903 of 2002.
This writ petition was disposed of on 12112002, with a direction to the respondents to pass an appropriate speaking order on the legal notice within a period of four months from the date when the certified copy of the order is brought to the notice of the respondents.
In view of the above, the respondents have now passed the impugned order dated 2412003.
3.
A perusal of the aforesaid order shows that the petitioner had submitted an application for acceptance of his resignation from service with pensionary benefits due to domestic problems after rendering 11 years 9 months and 9 days service.
His resignation was accepted by the appointing authority with effect from 11111979 with pensionary benefits as admissible.
4.
It appears that Civil Appeal No. 6166 of 1999, Union of India and others v. Rakesh Kumar and others, was pending in the Supreme Court with regard to interpretation of Rule 19.
The Supreme Court has now resolved the issue in the aforesaid judgment which is reported as Union of India and others v. Rakesh Kumar, (2001) 4 Supreme Court Cases 309 : 2001(2) SCT 1085 (SC).
The precise question which was raised before the Supreme Court was "Whether members of BSF resigning under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969, after serving for ten or more years but less than 20 years, were entitled to pension/pensionary benefits ?"
After considering the entire matter, the Supreme Court has held as follows :-  "In the result, there is no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules or on the basis of the GO, the respondents who have retired after completing qualifying service of 20 years by voluntary retirement, are entitled to get pensionary benefits.
The respondents, who were permitted to resign from service under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules before the attainment of the age of retirement or before putting such number of years of service as may be necessary under the Rules, to be eligible for retirement are not entitled to get any pension under any of the provisions under the CCA (Pension) Rules.
Rule 49 only prescribes the procedure for calculation and quantification of the pension amount.
The GO dated 27121995 does not confer any additional right of pension on BSF employees."
5.
In view of the aforesaid enunciation of law by the Supreme Court, it would not be possible for this Court to grant any relief to the petitioner.
6.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the law laid down by the Supreme Court would be prospective.
Since the petitioner had been granted pension in the year 1979, the same cannot be withdrawn at this page.
7.
We are unable to agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
A wrong benefits granted on the basis of erroneous interpretation of the statutory service rules, cannot be permitted to be compounded by a direction of this Court.
The Courts cannot direct the grant of a benefit, even if it causes hardship to a person, if it is initially granted contrary to the statutory rules.
In facts, it appears that a similar argument was raised before the Supreme Court which has been noticed in paragraph 21 of the judgment.
Shah, J has dealt with the aforesaid submission in the following words :-  "Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that on that basis of the GO, a number of persons are granted pensionary benefits even though they have not completed 20 years of service, and, therefore, at this stage, the Court should not interfere and see that the pensionary benefits granted to the respondents are not disturbed and are released as early as possible.
In our view, for grant of pension the members of BSF are governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules.
The CCS (Pension) Rules nowhere provide that a person who has resigned before completing 20 years of service as provided in Rule 48-A is entitled to pensionary benefits.
Rule 19 of the BSF Rules also does not make any provision for grant of pensionary benefits.
It only provides that if a member of the Force who resigns and to whom permission in writing is granted to resign then the authority granting such permission may reduce the pensionary benefits if he is eligible to get the pension.
Therefore, by erroneous interpretation of the Rules if pensionary benefits are granted to someone it would not mean that the said mistake should be perpetuated by direction of the Court.
It would be unjustifiable to submit that by appropriate writ, the Court should direct something which is contrary to the statutory rules.
In such cases, there is no question of application of Article 14 of the Constitution.
No person can claim any right on the basis of decision which is de hors the statutory rules nor can there be any estoppel.
Further, in such cases there cannot be any consideration on the ground of hardship.
If the Rules are not providing for grant of pensionary benefits it is for the authority to decide and frame appropriate rules but the Court cannot direct payment of pension on the ground of so-called hardship likely to be caused to a person who has resigned without completing qualifying service for getting pensionary benefits.
As a normal rule, pensionary benefits are granted to a government servant who is required to retire on his attaining the age of compulsory retirement except in those cases where there are special provisions".
In view of the above, we find no merit in the present writ petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.