Swatanter Kumar, J - Request of the petitioner Gurdev Singh for regularisation of his service in terms of the policy of the respondent-State dated 2312001 was declined by the respondents giving rise to the present writ petition.
2.
It will be appropriate to notice necessary facts in order to examine the validity or otherwise of the impugned action of the respondents.
The petitioner passed his middle examination from the Punjab School Education Board in the year 1980, was enrolled in the military on 1831983.
The petitioner joined the respondent-Department as Chowkidar on daily wages on 911992 and his service were terminated illegally on 131993.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute vide demand notice dated 6.9.1993 claiming his termination to be illegal and back wages etc.
In the claim petition, the petitioner prayed for setting aside the order of termination and claimed entire back wages.
Upon contest, this was contested by the Department and ultimately an award was passed in favour of the workman on 3181998.
This award attained finality.
The services of the petitioner were again terminated, and the petitioner filed a writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 15506 of 1998 before this Court challenging the order of his termination in which, the said order of termination was withdrawn and the petitioner was permitted to serve continuously in the respondent-Department.
The said writ petition was accordingly disposed of on 1821999.
The Punjab Government issued policy of regularising the daily wagers on 2312001.
According to the petitioner, he satisfied all the criteria specified in the policy and thus, he claimed regularisation which, afore-noticed, was denied to him despite the fact that notice of demand was served on 242002 upon the respondents.
3.
Upon notice, written statement was filed wherein it was stated that the case of the petitioner was considered against the existing regular vacant posts by counting the period of continuous service actually rendered by him in terms of the conditions of the Government policy for regularisation.
The petitioner did not figure in the merit because of lesser number of vacancies and keeping the years of service in mind.
4.
The main question that falls for consideration before us is whether the petitioner would be entitled to the advantage of the years of service for which he remained out of job as a result of the order of termination or not ?
5.
The undisputed facts are that the petitioner was initially appointed on 911992 for the period from 911992 tot 29.2.1992 and thereafter he was again appointed as Chowkidar on consolidated pay for a period from 131992 to 28.2.1993.
According to the respondents, he was relieved from service vide order dated 131993.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute wherein the following relief was granted to the petitioner :-  "In view of my above findings, I hold that the workman is entitled to reinstatment in the service of the respondent management, with continuity of service with full back wages from the date of demand notice i.e. 6th September, 1993.
The reference is answered accordingly."
6.
The learned Labour Court came to a finding of fact that the petitioner had actually worked continuously for a period of 240 days and was entitled to the protection available to a workman under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The relief of reinstatement in service with continuity of service and full back wages would clearly indicate that the petitioner would be deemed to be in service for all purposes and intents and cannot be deprived of any of the benefits which would have accrued to him if he had continued to be in service.
In other words, the order of termination dated 131993 would be of no consequence and the respondents cannot act prejudicially to the interest of the petitioner on the basis of the said order.
In this regard, we may refer to a recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Ghansham Dass v. State of Haryana, 2002(2) SCT 815 (P&H) : 2002(2) RSJ 798, where in somewhat similar circumstances the identical question of law was answered by the Bench as follows :-  7.
In the impugned order, it has been mentioned that the services of the petitioner could not be regularised as he was physically absent from the work as on 111996.
This plea is equally untenable.
Once an award is passed in favour of the workman and he is granted reinstatement with continuity of services, then the respondents cannot take plea that the workman was physically absent from the work.
Such absence is a result of compulsion and not of choice on the part of the workman.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Deep Chand v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 14165 of 2001, decided on 1012002, considered the plea at some length and held as under :- "It is a deemed fiction of law that the period in fact of such award would have to be treated as a period actually aspect on duty.
Initially, the services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated by the respondent-State and subsequently the State compelled him to remain out of service for no fault of the workman.
Even after the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was not permitted to join duty.
In other words, the petitioner was not physically present at the work as a result of action of the respondent and no fault was attributable to the petitioner on any ground whatsoever.
The physical absence of the petitioner from duty was result of compulsion of the petitioner and not his choice.
In these circumstances, we are unable to sustain the reasons given in the impugned letter that the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation because he did not physically work during the period in question.
The learned counsel for the State was unable to support his argument by any precedent or documents to show that the petitioner was called upon to join his duties.
Once the Court finds it as a matter of fact that services of the employee were wrongly terminated, who in the eyes of law, would be deemed to be in service, cannot be even deprived of his back wages of arrears of salary subject to just exceptions and the law of limitation.
The consequences of setting aside an order of dismissal or termination give rise to a consequential relief of reinstatement and payment of back wages as a necessary corollary to the setting aside of such order.
As a logical consequence of this declaration (award), it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefits or reliefs which was natural results of such relief.
(In this regard reference can be made to Full Bench judgement of this Court in the case of Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) S.L.R.
151 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharashtra, 1977(2) SCC 288).
The above admitted facts support the case of the petitioner and are indicative of the fact that the respondent-State has taken this objection only to deny a benefit legally and reasonably due to the petitioner."
8.
Reference can also be made to the judgments of another Division Bench of this Court in the cases of Kavita Gandhi v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(4) Recent Service Judgments 760 and Attar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 3651 of 2000, decided on 722002."
7.
The stand of the respondents in their written statement to deny the claim of regularisation to the petitioner is that the petitioner does not figure in merit and keeping in view the number of vacancies, the post could not be offered to him.
These objections would lose their strength the moment the respondents appreciate the law in its correct perspective.
The petitioner would be deemed to be in service right from 131993 and would be senior to many others who have been granted the relief of regularisation.
The contention that the petitioner was a temporary government employee, could also be of no consequence inasmuch an award of the Labour Court which has already attained finality, would stare the respondents in the face.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in the light of the directions afore-stated and grant him consequential benefits, if any.
However, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.