Hemant Gupta, J - The present revision petition is against the order passed by the executing court whereby objections filed by the State of Punjab were accepted and it was held that the decree holder-petitioner remained gainfully employed from 1451983 to 1451985 and is not entitled to the arrears of salary for the said period.
2.
The services of the petitioner were dismissed.
In civil suit, the court of Sub Judge First Class passed a decree on 22.2.1986 whereby the order of dismissal of the petitioner was set aside and absence of the petitioner from 2891981 till date was ordered to be treated as leave of the kind due.
The plaintiff filed the execution application for recovery of the arrears wherein State of Punjab filed an objection petition with the prayer that the employee remained gainfully employed during the period of his termination and is not entitled to the arrears of salary.
After considering the objections, it was found that the plaintiff remained employed from 1451983 to 1451985 at Muscat and therefore, not entitled to recover the arrears of salary for the said period.
3.
The learned trial Court has relied upon the passport of the petitioner Ex. R1 wherein the petitioner is reflected as employed as heavy duty driver in Douglas Chill Building contractor at Muscat.
The decree holder did not produce the passport, rather he took a stand the original passport had been lost.
A local commission was appointed to visit Embassy of Muscat to record the statement of the concerned official regarding the visit of the petitioner to that country for employment.
It transpired that the petitioner had obtained another passport by misrepresentation and the said passport was later on revoked.
The trial Court found that adverse inference has to be drawn against the petitioner of withholding the material evidence from the court.
4.
I see no illegality in the order of the executing court holding therein that the petitioner was gainfully employed from 1451983 to 1451985 at Muscat.
As a matter of fact, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Mangilal Sharma, 1998(1) SCT 322 (SC) : (1998) 2 Supreme Court Cases 510, has held that after setting aside of the order of dismissal, the plaintiff is not entitled to recovery of arrears unless such directions are claimed by the court.
It was further held that:-  "A declaratory decree merely declares the right of the decree holder vis-a-vis the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
Since in the present case, decree does not direct reinstatment or payment of arrears of salary, the executing court could not issue any process for the purpose as that would be going outside or beyond the decree.
The respondent as decree-holder was free to seek his remedy for arrears of salary in the suit for declaration.
The executing court has no jurisdiction to direct payment of salary or grant any other consequential relief which does not flow directly and necessarily from the declaratory decree.
It is not that if in a suit for declaration where the plaintiff is able to seek further relief, he must seek that relief though he may not be in need of that further relief.
In the present suit, the plaintiff while seeking relief of declaration would certainly have asked for other reliefs like the reinstatement, arrears of salary and consequential benefits.
He was, however, satisfied with a relief of declaration knowing that the Government would honour the decree and would reinstate him.
This Court will therefore assume the suit for mere declaration filed by the respondent-plaintiff was maintainable, as the question of maintainability of the suit is not in issue before the court.
(Para 6) It is contended on behalf of the respondent that once the court gave a declaration about the legal status, the necessary consequence would be that the respondent should be granted arrears of salary and other consequential benefits by the appellants, unlike in a case which was governed by law of contract between parties.
It is difficult to accept this proposition because provisions of Section 34 of the Specified Relief Act are specific, and in that case even declaration could not have been granted because it could be said that the respondent was able to seek further relief than a mere declaration of his legal status and which he omitted to do so.
(Para 7)" Consequently, the present revision petition is without any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
Revision dismissed.