Satish Kumar Mittal, J - This judgment shall dispose of CWP Nos. 3428 and 3578 of 1988, filed by the petitioners under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the part of the order dated 1511988 (Annexure P-4), vide which they were ordered to be promoted to the post of Vaidya Incharge with effect from 381982 instead of the date, i.e., 641970 when their juniors were promoted; and further for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider their claim for promotion to the post of Vaidya Incharge with effect from 641970, with all consequential benefits.
Since in both the writ petitions identical questions of fact and law are involved, therefore, they are being disposed of together.
2.
The facts are taken CWP No. 3428 of 1988.
The petitioner, Ram Lal, deceased (now represented through his L.Rs) was appointed as Upvaid on regular basis in the Punjab Ayurvedic Department on 1591955.
The service conditions of the petitioner were being governed by Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III Technical) Service Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
The next promotion from the post of Upvaid is to the post of Vaidya.
Under Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules, all appointments to the Service are required to be made in case of Vaidya, 50% by promotion from amongst the members of the Service and 50% by direct recruitment.
The promotion from one grade to another is required to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules is reproduced as under :-  "8.
(1) All appointments to the Service shall be made- (a) in the case of Senior Lecturers, Junior Lecturers, Assistant professors, Vaidyas, Hakims and Up Vaidyas, fifty percent by promotion from amongst the members of the Service, provided the persons to be promoted possess the qualifications specified in column 4 of Appendix A and fifty percent by direct appointment through the Commissioner or the Board, as the case may be ; (b) in the case of remaining posts either by promotion from amongst the members of the Service or by direct recruitment.
(2) All promotions, whether from one grade to another or from one class of service to another, shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotions on the basis of seniority alone.
(3) When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur, the Director shall determine in what manner such vacancy shall be filed in."
3.
As per the aforesaid Rules, the persons to be promoted on the post of Vaidya must possess qualification as specified in column 4 of Appendix A Serial No. 11 of Appendix A deals with the qualification of Vaidya which is reproduced below :-  "Sr.No.
11 Vaidya 80-5-105/5-135/7/170 A diploma or degree in Ayurveda of any recognised University or Board of Indian System of Medicine established by law in India or any teaching institution recognised by Government."
4.
The petitioner was possessing the diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi.
In the year 1970, the respondents promoted number of persons to the post of Vaidya in the pay-scale of Rs. 750-1300 out of whom many persons were junior to the petitioner.
The petitioner and the other similarly situated persons were not promoted to the post of Vaidya and their claim for promotion was ignored by the respondents on the ground that they were only possessing diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak, whereas only persons possessing degree of Ayurvedic Rattan from Hindu Sahitya Samellan Prayag, Allahabad and Ayurvedacharya from All India Vidyapeeth, Delhi were eligible and qualified for promotion on the post of Vaidya.
The other similarly situated persons and the petitioner challenged the action of the respondents by filing C.W.P.
No. 819 of 1982 and C.W.P.
No. 5310 of 1982 before this Court.
In the said writ petitions, the respondents took the plea that the petitioner and other similarly situated persons were not qualified to be promoted as they only possess the diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak, therefore, they were not eligible for promotion to the post of Vaidya when their juniors were considered and promoted as such; and those juniors were possessing the degree of Ayurvedic Rattan from Hindi Sahitya Samellan Prayag, Allahabad Ayurvedacharya from All India Vidyapeeth, Delhi.
Ultimately, C.W.P.
No. 819 of 1972 was allowed by this Court on 30.10.1981 (Annexure P-2); and C.W.P.
No. 5310 of 1982 filed by the petitioner was allowed in terms of C.W.P.
No. 819 of 1972 (Annexure P-1).
The petitioner and other similarly situated persons were held to be duly qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya and the following directions were issued by this Court on in their favour :-  "For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with costs and the petitioners are held to be qualified for consideration for promotion to the posts of Vaidya and respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to consider the names of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Vaidya with effect from the date when their juniors were promoted to the said posts if their service record is otherwise found to be suitable which entitles them for promotion."
As per the aforesaid order of this Court, the respondents were required to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Vaidya from the date when their juniors were promoted on the said post, but for some time the respondents did not implement the aforesaid directions given by this Court.
Ultimately on 14.7.1987 (Annexure P-3) the respondents promoted the petitioner and other similarly situated persons to the post of Vaidya in the pay-scale of Rs. 750-1300 with only immediate effect.
However, the respondents were directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the said post from the date their juniors were promoted.
Since the respondents only partly implemented the order of this Court, the petitioner filed contempt petition against the respondents for wilfully not complying the order of this Court.
Ultimately, during the pendency of the said contempt petition, the respondents passed an order dated 1511988 (Annexure P-4) whereby the petitioner was given promotion on the post of Vaidya w.e.f.
381982.
The petitioner was still aggrieved against the said order as he was claiming promotion w.e.f.
641970 when his juniors were promoted.
As per the directions given by this Court in the aforesaid writ petition, the respondents were required to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Vaidya from the date his juniors were so promoted.
Thereupon, the petitioner filed the instant writ petition on 2641988 challenging the order dated 1511988 (Annexure P-4) and seeking direction to the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion w.e.f.
641970, the date when his juniors were promoted on the said post.
5.
Pursuant to the notice issued, respondents appeared and filed the written statement in which they raised two preliminary objections.
Firstly, that the present writ petition is barred by the principle of constructive res judicata as the petitioner could have raised the point raised in this petition in the earlier petition filed by him.
Secondly, the juniors of the petitioner were promoted in the year 1970 and the petitioner is claiming promotion from the said date after a delay of 24 years.
Therefore, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on account of delay and laches.
On merits, though it has been admitted that the juniors to the petitioner were promoted in the year 1970 but it has been pleaded that the petitioner was not qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya in the year 1970 as he has only possessing the diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi, which did not fulfil the requisite qualification.
In this regard, the respondents took the following stand in the written statement :-  "It is, however, pertinent to mention here that as per provisions of Rule 8(2) of Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III Technical) Service Rules, 1963, no person is entitled to claim promotion on the post of Vaidya (now redesignated as Ayurvedic Medical Officer) the incumbent is required to possess the recognised qualifications prescribed in the Rules for the post of Vaidya.
Prior to 5672 qualifications for the purpose of appointments were recognised vide letter dated 531959, a copy of which is appended as Annexure R-1 to this reply.
The petitioner possesses qualification of Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi which is not mentioned in the letter dated 531959.
The Punjab Govt. recognised qualifications and Institutions vide notification dated 561972, a copy of which is appended as Annexure R-2 to this reply.
A perusal of Annexure R-2 would show that Ayurveda Bhishak qualification of All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi is not mentioned as one of the recognised qualifications.
Another notification dated 7380 was issued by superseding the notification dated 5672 and a copy of the same is appended as Annexure R-3 to this reply.
The qualification of Ayurveda Bhishak of All India Ayurveda is a recognised qualification under the Rules vide notification dated 7380 as it is mentioned in IInd Schedule to Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970.
Since qualification possessed by the petitioner did not entitle him for promotion to the post of Vaidya (now redesignated as Ayurvedic Medical Officer) upto 631980, there was thus no question of the petitioner being promoted prior to 7380."
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
Shri V.K.
Jindal, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner, this Court had directed the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Vaidya from the date when his juniors were promoted, if the service record is otherwise found to be suitable which entitles him for promotion.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that it is not the case of the respondents that the service record of the petitioner is not good; and no junior of the petitioner was promoted.
Rather, they have admitted that juniors to the petitioner were promoted to the post of Vaidya in the year 1970.
It is also not the stand of the respondents that the petitioner was not entitled for promotion to the said post from the year 1970 on the basis of his service record.
The counsel for the petitioner submitted that the respondents have denied promotion to the petitioner from the date his juniors were promoted only on the ground that in the year 1970 the petitioner was not qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya as he was only possessing diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak which does not fulfil the essential qualification.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that this controversy is not res integra.
In the earlier decision, it was found by this Court that the qualification of diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi is good qualification for promotion to the post of Vaidya, therefore, the respondents cannot deny the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the said post from the date when his juniors were promoted; and the promotion of the petitioner w.e.f.
381982 is wholly illegal and arbitrary.
8.
In reply to the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, Ms. Swati Gupta, learned Assistant Advocate General tried to justify the action of the respondents on the plea taken in the written statement.
9.
After hearing the respective arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the writ petition filed by the petitioner deserves to be allowed.
Undisputedly, in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner, it was directed by this Court that the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Vaidya be considered with effect from the date his juniors were promoted to the said post.
Admittedly, the juniors to the petitioner were promoted as Vaidya in the year 1970.
It is not the case of the respondents that the service record of the petitioner was not found to be satisfactory which disentitles him for promotion.
The only ground on which the petitioner has been denied the claim of promotion from the date his juniors were promoted is that the petitioner was not qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya when his juniors were promoted.
In this regard, it has been submitted that the petitioner was only possessing diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi, which was not the prescribed qualification for promotion the post of Vaidya, in view of the letter dated 531959 issued by the Punjab Government.
10.
In my view, the controversy whether the petitioner being possessing diploma in Ayurveda Bhishak from All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi was qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya or not, has already been decided by this Court in the earlier writ petition.
Precisely, the same plea which has been taken in the present writ petition, was raised by the respondents in the earlier writ petition to support their plea that the petitioner and other similarly situated persons were not qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya in the year 1970 when their juniors were promoted.
This fact is clear from the following observations made by this Court in the judgment of earlier writ petition (Annexure P-2) passed in favour of the petitioner:-  ".....the only question which requires determination in this case is whether the petitioners are qualified to be considered for the posts of Vaidyas in accordance with the rules or not.
The service conditions of the petitioners are governed by the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III Technical) Service Rules, 1963.
In accordance with the provisions of Rule 8 of the said Rules, all appointments to the service shall be made in case of Vaidyas, 50% by promotion from amongst the members of the service, provided the persons to be promoted possess the qualifications specified in column 4 of Appendix A and fifty percent by direct appointment through the Commission or as the case may be.
Serial No. 11 of Appendix `A' is as follows :- "Sr. No. 11 Vaidya 80-5-105/5-135/7/170 A diploma or degree in Ayurveda of any recognised University or Board of Indian System of Medicine established by law in India or any teaching institution recognised by Government."
The bare reading of the rule would suggest that a person having a diploma on degree in Ayurveda of any University or Board of Indian System of medicine recognised by the Government is qualified for consideration for appointment to the post of Vaidya.
It is, therefore, obvious that the plea taken by the respondents in the return that only Degree holders are qualified, is against the Rules.
The Rule specifically provided that a Diploma or Degree in Ayurveda of any recognised University or Board is sufficient for consideration of promotion to the post of Vaidya.
The only other question to be determined is as to which of the universities of Boards of Indian System of medicine established by law in India has been recognised by the State Government.
In this connection reliance has been placed by the petitioners on a letter dated 531959, copy Annexure `A' with the writ petition.
According to this letter, a list of institutions and universities which are recognised by the State Government, was forwarded to the various offices, which is Annexure A-1 with the writ petition.
In this list All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi also finds mention, it is not disputed that all the three petitioners possess a Diploma either in Ayurveda bhishak or Ayurveda-visharad from the All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (University), Delhi.
It would thus be seen that all India Ayuerveda Vidyapeeth (University), Delhi is one of the universities which has been recognised by the State Government.
However, it has been urged by Shri Sawhney, the learned counsel for the respondents, that only degree of Ayurvedacharya from all India Vidyapeeth, Delhi has been recognised and not a diploma.
This contention is not res integra.
A Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 1069 of 1970 (Smt. Kaushalya Saini Etc. v. The Director of Health Services, Punjab and others) decided on 11111970, went into this question in detail and came to the conclusion that all the universities and Institutions which find mention in the list as circulated vide letter dated 531959 had been recognised by the Government.
It was held that any person having a Diploma or a Degree from the said institutions was entitled to be considered for promotion the post of Vaidya.
Sitting singly, I am bound by the Division Bench judgment referred to above.
Therefore, there is no merit in the contention of Shri Sawhney that a Diploma from All India Vidyapeeth, Delhi, is not recognised by the State Government.
From what has been stated above, it is obvious that the petitioners are qualified to be considered for promotion to the posts of Vaidyas and their consideration has been refused by the official respondents on the ground that they were not qualified to be considered for the said posts.
xx xx xx xx For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with costs and the petitioners are held to be qualified for consideration for promotion to the posts of Vaidyas and respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to consider the names of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Vaidyas with effect from the date when their juniors were promoted to the said posts if their service record is otherwise found to be suitable which entitles them for promotion."
11.
In view of the aforesaid finding recorded by this Court, I am of the opinion that the respondents now again cannot agitate the plea that the petitioner was not qualified for promotion to the post of Vaidya from the date when his juniors were promoted in the year 1970.
In my view, the respondents have illegally denied the promotion to the petitioner from the date when his juniors were promoted and have illegally passed the order dated 1511988 by promoting the petitioner w.e.f.
381982, whereas he should have been promoted w.e.f.
641970 when his juniors were promoted.
12.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, both the writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned order dated 1511988 (Annexure P-4) is quashed and the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion w.e.f.
641970 when his juniors were promoted, with all consequential reliefs.
No order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.