Swatanter Kumar, J - Jarnail Singh, petitioner was working as a clerk in the Government Industrial Development Centres (Engg), Patiala.
On January 30, 1997, he was served with a memorandum Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, which was accompanied by Articles of Charges.
The petitioner was called upon to file a reply to the said charge-sheet within 21 days from the date of receipt of the memorandum.
The petitioner filed reply on February 26, 1997 denying Articles of Charges and requesting that the charge-sheet be withdrawn against him.
The petitioner also prayed that order of suspension be recalled and he be put into service.
Departmental enquiry was ordered to be proceeded against the petitioner in accordance with law.
During the course of proceedings on February 26, 1997, the petitioner was even asked for inspection of certain documents.
2.
The appointed Enquiry Officer submitted his report on October 8, 1997 Annexure P-3 to the writ petition, holding the petitioner not guilty of any Articles of Charges.
Still, the respondent-authorities issued a notice to the petitioner to show cause dated December 2, 1997 Annexure P-4 to the writ petition as to why punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect be not imposed upon the petitioner.
3.
Reply to said show cause notice was submitted by the petitioner on December 15, 1997.
The Disciplinary Authority without considering the reply to the show cause notice but taking notice of the representation preferred by the petitioner in relation to adverse remarks recorded for the year 1996-1997, inflicted punishment of stoppage of one increment which cumulative effect to the petitioner and the period of suspension was treated `as leave of the kind due' vide order dated January 21, 1998.
Against the said punishment, the petitioner preferred an appeal dated May 8, 1998 and also prayed for personal hearing.
The Appellate Authority, according to the petitioner, without any application of mind and without affording an opportunity to the petitioner of hearing, which he had personally prayed for in the grounds of appeal, dismissed the appeal by a non-speaking order dated February 29, 2002, Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
Aggrieved therefrom, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
4.
Upon notice, the respondent-State filed a detailed reply stating that the petitioner while working in the Marking Centre of the respondents at Patiala, tried to raise a lone of Rs. 15,000/- from M/s Fine Enterprises, Patiala without obtaining any permission from the competent authority and under the forged signatures of Shri MK Singhal, the then Junior Technical Officer, who was not the Drawing and Disbursing Officer at the relevant time.
In this regard, a charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner under Rule 8 of the relevant rules and after holding a departmental enquiry in accordance with law, order of punishment was passed against the petitioner.
The said orders do not suffer from any infirmity as pointed out by the petitioner, nor they are arbitrary.
It has been stated that reference to the representation dated November 11, 1997 which was preferred against the adverse remarks recorded by the authorities concerned has been inadvertently written in the impugned orders.
It is denied that the petitioner was exonerated of all Articles of Charges by the Enquiry Officer.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was required to seek prior permission of the competent authority before raising any loan.
Finally, it is submitted that the writ petition be dismissed.
5.
From the above factual matrix of the case, it appears that there is not much controversy raised by the parties in regard to the facts leading to the passing of the impugned orders.
The order holding the petitioner guilty of the Articles of Charges and proposing imposition of stoppage of one increment upon the petitioner with cumulative effect was issued and then order of punishment dated February 9, 1998 passed against the petitioner.
6.
At the very outset, it will be proper to refer to the relevant part of the impugned order, which reads as under :-  "After considering the enquiry report vide letter dated 6197 dated 8101997, charge levelled against Shri Jarnail Singh, Sr.
Clerk is established that he has violated the Government Conduct Rules, 1996 in getting loan Rs. 15,000/- without prior sanction.
Sh. Jarnail Singh failed to raise any solid plea in his reply dated 11111997 so that punishment could be relaxed and his reply was found unsatisfactory.
Therefore, under Rule 10 of Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970 one increment with cumulative effect of Sh. Jarnail Singh, Sr.
Clerk is stopped and his suspension period from 291997 to 2491997 is treated as leave of the kind due.
Sd/-  Vijay Kumar Singh Add.
Director (Estt.)"
Dated 2111998  7.
The main contention raised on behalf of the petitioner before us while impugning the above order is that the Enquiry Officer had not found the petitioner guilty of any Articles of Charges for which the departmental enquiry was conducted, and as such, the same could not be made foundation of passing the impugned orders.
Further, it is contended the Disciplinary Authority has neither differed with the report nor provided any reason to the petitioner in that regard before passing the impugned order.
8.
This contention of the petitioner has merit.
The report of the Enquiry Officer has been placed on record which is dated October 8, 1997 Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The respondents have not disputed the correctness or otherwise of the said document.
A perusal of the enquiry report clearly shows that the petitioner was never found guilty in positive terms by the Enquiry Officer.
On the other hand, the Enquiry Officer had expressed his doubt in that regard.
It will be useful to refer to the relevant material extract of the said document :-  The application of the official which was sent by the Industrial Department Centre (Engg), Patiala to MS Fine Enterprises, Lila Bhawan Patiala vide their letter No. 1823 dated 1391996, it appears that in this case separate sanction is not required as the application was sent through Industrial Development Centre (Engg) Patiala.
In the above letter, JTO/STO Industrial Development Centre Patiala, has given undertaking that in case the official fails to pay instalment or pays then the instalment shall be deducted from his pay and shall be sent to the company.
It is something else that alleged forged signatures were on the forwarding letter No. 1823 dated 1391996.
The official has not got loan from the firm on the basis of above letter as the STO IDC Patiala, vide his letter No. 14 dated 10101996 (copy enclosed) has stated that above letter No. 1823 dated 1391996 signatures of JTO were forged and signatures were not to the DDO.
In case, the original record was available, then opinion of handwriting expert could be obtained to prove the forged signatures, it is difficult to say at this stage as to who signed as JTO MK Singhal on No. 1823 dated 1391996 because the noting and original application for loan of Jarnail Singh are not available.
Therefore, opinion of signature expert cannot be obtained.
Therefore, it is difficult to reach at the conclusion as to whether the signatures were forged.
In case of original record was available then the opinion of signature expert could be obtained and finding could be given.
This inquiry report along with the following documents are sent herewith for information and necessary action.
9.
The above findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, by no stretch of imagination, can be construed to hold that the delinquent has been found guilty of the Article of Charges framed against him.
Show cause notice issued to the petitioner in furtherance thereto and even the impugned order passed by the authority does not even remotely suggest that for reasons recorded therein, the Disciplinary Authority intended to differ with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
On the contrary, it has been stated in the order that after considering the report of the Enquiry Officer, the authorities imposed the impugned punishment upon the petitioner.
In other words, the authorities has concurred with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
On these premises, only one conclusion is possible and that is that the impugned order suffers from vice of arbitrariness and contrary to the settled principle of law.
10.
We may refer to the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, where the Court has specifically directed that the Disciplinary Authority is under a specific obligation to convey reasons that differs with the Enquiry Officer and grant opportunity to the delinquent to explain his position and specifically reply to the aforesaid reasons so recorded as held in Managing Director, ECIL Hyderabad, etc. v B Karunakar, etc., 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : AIR 1994 Supreme Court 1074 and The State of Madhya Pradesh and others v. Mr. Krishnarao Shinde and others, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 489.
11.
Ex facie, there is violation of this established mandate of law.
The petitioner had preferred an appeal against the order imposing punishment upon him to the Appellate Authority.
Details are in his grounds of appeal in which he had prayed for grant of personal hearing.
It is not disputed before us that the petitioner was not granted personal hearing by the Appellate Authority and following cryptic order was passed by the Appellate Authority.
"Your appeal dated 851998 which was addressed to the Secretary on the cited subject.
2.
You are informed that the Government has rejected your appeal after consideration.
Sd/-  Asstt.
Director (Udyog-2) for Director, Industries and Commerce Punjab."
12.
A bare reading of the above order shows that there is no application of mind by the Appellate Authority.
The delinquent official had taken a specific plea that no Article of Charges had been proved against him.
The original records were not produced for inspection and the records were intentionally misplaced by the interested persons.
None of these contentions mentioned above was discussed by the Appellate Authority and it passed a one line order and that too without granting hearing to the petitioner.
This also is clearly violative of principles enunciated by the Full Bench of this Court in Ram Niwas Bansal v. State Bank of Patiala and another, 1998(3) SCT 550 (P&H) : 1998(2) PLR 768 as also the Hon'ble Apex Court in Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Bihari Misra, 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC) : AIR 1998 Supreme Court 2713, Yoginath D Bagde v. State of Maharashtra, 1999(4) SCT 403 (SC) : (1999) 7 Supreme Court Cases 739, State Bank of India v. Arvind K Shukla, AIR 2001 Supreme Court 2398 and State Bank of India v. KP Narayanan Kutty, 2003(3) SCT 743 (SC) : (2003) 2 Supreme Court Cases 449.
13.
The casual manners in which the impugned order was passed are evident from the fact that in the impugned order of punishment, the reply which is stated to have been considered is dated 11111997.
As already noticed, it is a representation of the petitioner against the recording of adverse remarks for the year 1996-1997.
14.
In the written statement filed before this Court, it has been suggested that actually, remarks dated 15121997 were considered and it was an inadvertent mistake.
Although error is possible but in light of the reasons given by us above and particularly a non-speaking order being passed by the Appellate Authority, this factor also assumes significance.
The Enquiry Officer has specifically noted in his report that no separate sanction was required by the petitioner even for seeking loan.
This finding of the Enquiry Officer has not even been referred to by the Disciplinary Authority.
15.
The inevitable conclusion of our above discussion is that the impugned order Annexure P-8 dated February 29, 2000, is liable to be set aside.
Consequently, we quash the order of punishment dated January 21, 1998 Annexure P-6 to the writ petition and that of the Appellate Authority dated February 29, 2000 Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
However, in light of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in ECIL's Case (Supra), we grant liberty to the respondent-department to proceed from the stage of consideration of the enquiry report by the Disciplinary Authority, if the department is so advised.
The writ petition is allowed on the above terms while leaving the parties to bear their costs.
Petition allowed.