Prakash Tatia, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the relief, which was granted to him in part only by award dated 7th June, 1999.
It is alleged that the petitioner was initially appointed on 1st June, 1990 and continued to work till 5th April, 1991.
By oral order, the petitioner's services were terminated, which according to the petitioner amounts to illegal retrenchment as it was in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act of 1947').
The labour Court found that the petitioner worked for 240 days in the preceding calendar year and there is a violation of Section 25-F of the Act of 1947, but after considering the various judgments on the point that what relief can be granted to the petitioner, awarded compensation of Rs. 20,000/- instead of order of reinstatement.
3.
According to learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner was entitled for the order of reinstatement and the Labour Court committed grave illegality in awarding compensation in lieu of order of reinstatement.
According to learned counsel for the petitioner, in view of the various judgments, it is clear that if initial order of retrenchment is found illegal and unjust then the employee gets right of reinstatement.
It is also submitted that reasons given in the award for not giving relief of reinstatement cannot be treated as sufficient reason for denying the reinstatement.
It is also submitted that in the matter of labour cases, it is difficult to get the matter referred to the labour Court within a short period and it may take years to reach before the labour Court and, therefore, virtually no case of relief of reinstatement will be available to the poor employee-workman.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents submits that Hon'ble Supreme Court, after considering the various aspects of the law, held that it is not mandatory to order reinstatement in each and every case, it depends upon the facts of each case.
It is also submitted that if the Labour Court after application of the mind and after considering the facts of the case exercised the discretion in any way or the other way unless it is shown absolutely perverse, this Court may not interfere in the discretion exercised by the Labour Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the recent judgment of the Division Bench of this Court delivered in the case of Ganshyam v. State of Raj.
& Ors., 2003(1) SCT 476 (Raj.)
: (DBC Spl.
A. No. 930 of 2001) decided on 14th Nov, 2002.
5.
After hearing the arguments of both the sides and after careful consideration of the judgment of this Court, which was relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner delivered in the case of Bhanwar Singh v. Labour Court & Ors. (SBCWP No. 3206/1998) decided on 15th March, 2000 and upheld by the Division Bench of this Court in D.B.C.
Spl.
A. No. 476 of 2000 dated 2nd Aug, 2000 wherein award the compensation in lieu of reinstatement was found permissible by the learned Single Judge of this Court in above referred judgment by following two earlier judgments of this Court and the same view was upheld by the Division Bench in the judgment relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner himself, therefore, in view of the Division Bench's judgment delivered in the case of Ganshyam v. State of Raj & Ors. (supra), it is clear that the labour court in the facts and circumstances of the case, can award compensation in place of giving relief of reinstatement to the workman when the Labour Court found that the order of retrenchment is illegal and in violation of Section 25-F of the Act of 1947.
6.
The labour Court in the present case gave positive reason for giving compensation in lieu of order of reinstatement.
The labour Court also took into consideration various facts mentioned at page No. 6 of the award itself.
Therefore, I do not find that the labour Court has committed any illegality in applying its judicial discretion in passing the award of the compensation in lieu of the order of reinstatement.
7.
I do not find any force in the writ petition filed by the petitioner- Bhanwar Singh and the same is hereby dismissed.
8.
The State Government preferred the writ petition even challenging the award of compensation to the workman, but a bare perusal of the award shows that the labour court after considering factual aspect of the matter recorded finding of fact that the non-petitioner in the writ petition of the State worked for more than 240 days in a calendar year.
The writ petition challenging the award of compensation is absolutely mis-conceived and therefore, the SB Civil Writ Petition No. 4068/1999 also deserves to be dismissed, hence, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.