JS Narang, J - The petitioner was appointed as Manager Grade III in July, 1972 by the Punjab State Warehousing Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation).
Subsequently, the post was redesignated as Godown Assistant.
In the year 1975, he was posted as Manager, Gehri Mandi with additional charge of Warehouse at Jandiala Guru.
It is alleged that during his tenure, two thefts took place, i.e., one in the night of 14/15-7-1975 at Gehri Mandi and allegedly 35 bags of Wheat were stolen.
The second theft took place in the night intervening between 11/12-9-1975 at Jandiala Guru and 55 bags of Wheat were allegedly stolen.
It is alleged that at Gehri Mandi a wall of godown No. 19 was broken and at Jandiala Guru, the locks of store were broken open by the thieves for the purpose of committing the alleged theft.
2.
The petitioner lodged first information reports with the police in the morning of 15.7.1975 and 12.9.1975.
Despite the reports having been lodged, the police authorities after sometime communicated to the department that in both the situations, no case of theft could be said to have been made out.
The petitioner wrote a letter to the Inspection Officer of the Corporation at Amritsar complaining that due to some ulterior reasons, the investigation has not been carried out properly and that the case is being sought to be closed by the police by fixing the liability allegedly upon the employees of the Corporation.
Resultantly, Chaman Lal Inspection Officer was deputed by the Corporation to hold enquiry on the spot and submit the report accordingly.
Upon detailed investigation, the report was submitted, opining that the report of the police authorities does not seem to be correct.
Despite this, the Corporation did not take any action as none has been divulged to the petitioner.
It is also alleged that the Managing Director of the Corporation wrote a communication dated 2671977 to the senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar asking him to register a case against the petitioner or any other employee of the Corporation who according to him are involved in the defalcations.
However, no action was taken in the matter.
3.
Instead, the Corporation served a charge sheet upon the petitioner on 22121978.
The petitioner requested for obtainment of the documents so that he could submit an effective reply to the charges.
He specifically asked for the investigation report made by the Inspection Officer appointed by the Corporation.
He also asked for the copies of the letters written by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar i.e., letters dated 891975 and 12121975.
None of the above said documents were supplied to the petitioner.
A reply was submitted by the petitioner without perusal of the above said documents as none had been supplied.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed vide order dated 21.7.1979.
The petitioner appeared before the Enquiry Officer.
No witness was examined by the Enquiry Officer as none had been sought to be summoned by the prosecution.
It shall be apposite to mention here that in the list of witnesses, the name of the petitioner had been given.
However, the petitioner was not produced as a witness, despite the fact that he was present before the Enquiry Officer.
Since no statements were recorded by any of the witnesses, the documents were also not proved accordingly nor any such document had been produced before the Enquiry Officer to the knowledge of the petitioner.
Thus, the opportunity or the question of cryptical analysis by the petitioner of such documents did not arise.
The petitioner had also not been given any opportunity to produce any evidence or produce any documents accordingly.
4.
The Enquiry Officer pronounced the petitioner guilty of the charge(s).
On the basis of the enquiry report, a Show Cause Notice regarding dismissal from service was served upon the petitioner along with a copy of the enquiry report.
The petitioner submitted reply on 421981 to the Show Cause Notice.
It has been claimed that neither any evidence had been led nor any witness has been examined by the Enquiry Officer and that the Enquiry Officer sat with the pre-determined mind and that he passed the mechanical order holding the petitioner guilty.
It is also alleged that the petitioner had never even been given the effective opportunity of being heard as the crucial documents which are stated to have been relied upon by the Investigation Officer were never ever shown or allowed to be examined and neither were allowed to be subjected to undergo the test in pursuant to the rigors of law.
However, the impugned order of dismissal was passed on 3041981 which was endorsed to the petitioner on 1251981.
5.
The petitioner being dissatisfied with the order, challenged the same by way of present writ petition.
This petition was disposed of vide judgment dated 2941991.
The said order was challenged by way of SLP which was granted and the Civil Appeal No. 4476 of 1991 was allowed vide order dated 11111991.
The judgment of this Court was set aside and the petition has been remitted to this Court for fresh decision in accordance with law.
6.
The stand of the Corporation is rather vague.
It is averred that no report alleged to have been submitted by Mr. Chaman Lal is available on record and alternatively, it has been said that the report is only in the nature of preliminary enquiry and has no value whatsoever.
It is strange that such kind of plea is being taken by the Corporation.
The reason projected for holding departmental enquiry is that the police report clearly indicated mischief on the part of the employees of the Corporation as the police did not find any evidence indicative of theft having been committed.
It is also the stand of the Corporation that the petitioner did not ask for the communication of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar and that the letter referred to by him is dated 1721978 whereas the petitioner was charge sheeted on 22121978.
However, it may be noticed that apart from this letter, a communication dated 311979 addressed to the Managing Director by the petitioner has also been placed on record.
Copy Annexure P-6.
It is vide this letter, the petitioner made a categorical request that he wishes to go through letter No. 38634-C dated 891975 received from the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar and letter No. 55364-C dated 12121975 again received from the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar by the Managing Director.
It is also requested that the departmental enquiry report submitted by Chaman Lal in respect of his findings with regard to each case of theft i.e., 35 bags at Gehri Mandi and 55 bags at Jandiala Guru, be supplied to him.
It may also be noticed that while submitting reply to the charge sheet, the petitioner has categorically stated that the letter No. 55364-C dated 12121975 has not been shown to him during the inspection of the record as the same was not traceable in record.
It is also stated that the reply received from the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar does not inspire confidence as is evident from the fact finding enquiry conducted by the Inquiry Officer appointed by the Corporation i.e., Shri Chaman Lal.
It is also the stand of the petitioner that despite the reply having been received from the Senior Superintendent of Police, the Corporation has never approached the police officials with regard to the mischief of the Staff of the Corporation, resultantly, no interrogation was done in this regard.
In fact the Inspection Officer proposed that the inquiry should be entrusted to CIA Staff if the civil police is unable to trace out the culprits.
No order is shown to have been passed by the Managing Director upon the said proposal submitted by the Inquiry Officer vide report dated 9121975.
The petitioner has averred in para No. 10 of the petition that apart from the letter dated 891975, the documents asked for vide letter dated 311979 addressed by him (copy Annexure P-6), rest of the documents had also not been shown to him.
The Corporation has taken the stand that infact the entire record was shown to him and that the petitioner was aware of the report made by the Police.
It may be noticed that no such letters have been appended with the reply nor the record was produced by the counsel for the Corporation to establish the fact of existence of that letter i.e., letter dated 12121975 and also the report of Chaman Lal.
However, it is admitted that the enquiry was completed in one sitting as has been mentioned in the enquiry report of the Inquiry Officer.
The extract from the copy appended as Annexure P-10 reads as under :-  xx xx xx xx xx "The above enquiry conducted by me has been completed in one sitting.
Copies of the proceedings are enclosed."
xx xx xx xx xx"  7.
It may also be noticed that the Inquiry Officer made reference to only the letter dated 891975 and that no reference has been made to the letter dated 12121975, perhaps none was on record but the similar inference has been drawn in respect of 55 bags as well.
It may also be noticed that observations made by the Managing Director have also been noticed by the Inquiry Officer and he has categorically observed that he agrees with the Presenting Officer that the Managing Director concurred with the findings of the police when the matter came under consideration on 371979 after a personal hearing had been given to the petitioner by the Managing Director on 16.3.1979.
Resultantly, the Inquiry Officer held him guilty of defalcation of 35 bags + 55 bags of wheat.
8.
It is further the stand of the Corporation that after the opinion had been received from the police authorities that no theft is involved, the responsibility fell upon the employees of the Corporation and that their joining hands in removal of the stock could not be brushed aside or ruled out.
Resultantly, the Managing Director accepted the report of the Inquiry Officer and has held the petitioner guilty of defalcation as aforesaid.
It may be noticed that while passing the impugned order, the Managing Director has also not discussed the letter dated 12121975 as none looks to have been produced before the Managing Director since the same was not traceable in the record.
So far as the report of the Inquiry Officer Chaman Lal is concerned, it has been observed that the opinion of the said officer is of no consequence, resultantly, no benefit can flow to the delinquent official.
It has also been mentioned that the then Managing Director does not seem to have concurred with alleged report of Shri Chaman Lal.
Surprisingly, the report has been discussed by the Managing Director while passing the impugned order but while submitting reply before this Court, it is stated that no report which may have been signed by Shri Chaman Lal is available on record, strange kind of reply has been submitted.
It shall be apposite to notice reply of the Corporation which has been submitted to para No. 5 of the petition, which reads as under :-  "5.
In reply to para 5 of the petition, it is submitted that a copy of the report alleged to have been submitted by Mr. Chaman Lal was, in fact, submitted by the petitioner.
However, no report which may have been signed by Mr. Chaman Lal is available on record.
In any event, the said report is only in the nature of a preliminary enquiry and have no value whatsoever."
Apart from this, it also needs to be noticed that the Managing Director has taken into consideration the previous record of the petitioner but the allegations alleged to have been made and relied upon by the Managing Director have not been put to the delinquent official to enable him to make appropriate disclosure in respect of the status of the said alleged allegations.
The Managing Director formed an opinion relying upon the cumulative effect of the past record in passing the order of termination.
It shall be apposite to note para 5 of the impugned order which reads as under :-  "5.
For the reasons recorded above, I am satisfied that the Enquiry Officer has rightly held Shri Jatinder Kumar guilty of the change and responsible for the defalcation of 90 bags of wheat.
Shri Jatinder Amar has a consistently bad record and he has been punished a number of times.
Apart from other punishments, namely, stoppage of increments etc. he was held guilty for defalcation of 229 bags of D.A.P.
vide Managing Director's orders dated 371979 and directed to make good loss of Rs. 23,71050 paise.
Of this amount to date only Rs. 1500/- have been recovered and as per the office note at this rate it will take 20 years to effect the recovery of cost of 229 bags of D.A.P.
from the delinquent official.
Now the cost of 90 bags of wheat works out to Rs. 11,700/- at the rate of Rs. 130/- per bag.
If the amount is also added to the already recoverable amount, the Corporation may not be able to recover the said losses even during the next 25/26 years.
Apart from this, there are many other cases of defalcation/shortage pending against him at the Head Office.
In the circumstances, I am definitely of the opinion that Shri Jatinder Kumar is not fit to be retained in the service of the Corporation which is a commercial organisation and it has to place large trust in its employees who have, in their custody, property worth several millions of rupees.
It is much too hazardous to put any trust in a person who has continually been defalcating the properties placed in his custody and has shown to improvement after the infliction of various penalties."
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the impugned order of dismissal of the petitioner from service is not at all sustainable as the order suffers from the basis infirmities i.e. :  (i) The Inquiry Officer has returned findings upon the charges without granting appropriate opportunity to the petitioner.
It is evident that the letter dated 12121975 addressed by the Senior Superintendent of Police to the Managing Director has not been made available for perusal by the petitioner as none was found on the record, this fact stands corroborated from the fact that the same has neither been referred to nor relied upon by the Inquiry Officer while submitting the report nor the same has been referred to by the prescribed authority while passing the order of termination.
(ii) Admittedly, no oral evidence has been recorded by the Inquiry Officer and as per his own averment, the proceedings were concluded in one sitting and the report has been submitted accordingly.
It is evident in the report that he was influenced by the observation of the then Managing Director whereby he is stated to have concurred with the report of the police authorities.
Thus, there is no independent application of mind by the Inquiry Officer and straight away he has relied upon observations by the Managing Director without even recording the oral evidence and without even summoning the other officials who are connected with looking after the godown such as the watch and ward staff.
Even in the list of witnesses, the name of the petitioner has been given by the prosecution and not that of watch and ward staff and or any other official of the Corporation.
It categorically discloses the pre- determined mind on the part of the Inquiry Officer while submitting the report.
iii) The impugned order also suffers from the basic infirmity, i.e., the documents not on record have been relied upon and the order of termination has been passed, such as, the signed enquiry report of the Chaman Lal, which admittedly is not on record as per the admission of the Corporation which has been made while submitting reply to para 5 of the petition.
iv) The Managing Director has further relied upon the alleged past record of the petitioner without even putting the said record to the petitioner, meaning thereby without affording an opportunity to the petitioner to give explanation or submit his reply with regard to the status of said alleged allegations.
It is the settled law that the past record cannot be relied upon while passing the detrimental order against the delinquent official.
10.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel has relied upon the following judgments :  (i) State of Mysore v. K Manche Gowda - AIR 1964 SC 506 - The apex Court has opined that the previous record can be taken into consideration by the punishing authority, even if the same has not been made subject matter of the charge at first stage but the punishing authority must disclose the said previous record by way of a second notice, so that the appropriate opportunity is afforded to the delinquent official.
Reference may be made to paras 7 and 9 of the judgment which read as under : (7) Under Art. 311(2) of the Constitution, as interpreted by this Court, a Government servant must have a reasonable opportunity not only to prove that he is not guilty of the charges levelled against him, but also to establish that the punishment proposed to be imposed is either not called for or excessive.
The said opportunity is to be a reasonable opportunity and, therefore, it is necessary that the Government servant must be told of the grounds on which it is proposed to take such action; see the decision of this Court in the State of Assam v. Bimal Kumar Pandit, Civil Appeal No. 832 of 1962 D/- 1221963 : (AIR 1963 SC 12612).
If the grounds are not given in the notice, it would be well nigh impossible for him to predicate what is operating on the mind of the authority concerned in proposing a particular punishment; he would not be in a position to explain why he does not deserve any punishment at all or that the punishment proposed is excessive.
If the proposed punishment was mainly based upon the previous record of a Government servant and that was not disclosed in the notice, it would mean that the main reason for the proposed punishment was withheld from the knowledge of the Government servant.
It would be no answer to suggest that every Government servant must have had knowledge of the fact that his past record would necessarily be taken into consideration by the Government in inflicting punishment on him; nor would it be an adequate answer to says that he knew as a matter of fact that the earlier punishments were imposed on him or that he knew of his past record.
This contention misses the real point, namely, that, what the Government servant is entitled to is not the knowledge of certain facts but the fact that those facts will be taken into consideration by the Government in inflicting punishment on him.
It is not possible for him to know what period of his past record or what acts or omissions of his in a particular period would be considered.
If that fact was brought to his notice, he might explain that he had no knowledge of the remarks of his superior officers, that he had adequate explanation to offer for the alleged remarks or that his conduct subsequent to the remarks had been exemplary or at any rate approved by the superior officers.
Even if the authority concerned took into consideration only the facts for which he was punished, it would be open to him to put forward before the said authority many mitigating circumstances or some other explanation why those punishments were given to him or that subsequent to the punishments he had served to the satisfaction of the authorities concerned till the time of the present enquiry.
He may have many other explanations.
The point is not whether his explanation would be acceptable, but whether he has been given an opportunity to give his explanation.
We cannot accept the doctrine of "presumptive knowledge" or that of "purposeless enquiry", as their acceptance will be subversive of the principle of "reasonable opportunity".
We, therefore, hold that it is incumbent upon the authority to give the Government servant at the second stage reasonable opportunity to show cause against the proposed punishment and if the proposed punishment is also based on his previous punishments or his previous bad record, this should be included in the second notice so that he may be able to give an explanation.
8.
Before we close, it would be necessary to make one point clear.
It is suggested that the past record of a Government servant, if it is intended to be relied upon for imposing a punishment, should be made specific charge in the first stage of the enquiry itself and if it is not so done, it cannot be relied upon after the enquiry is closed and the report is submitted to the authority entitled to impose the punishment.
An enquiry against a Government servant is one continuous process, though for convenience it is done in two stages.
The report submitted by the Enquiry Officer is only recommendatory in nature and the final authority which scrutinizes it and imposes punishment is the authority empowered to impose the same.
Whether a particular person has a reasonable opportunity or not depends, to some extent, upon the nature of the subject matter of the enquiry.
But it is not necessary in this case to decide whether such previous record can be made the subject matter of charge at the first stage of the enquiry.
But, nothing in law prevents the punishing authority from taking that fact into consideration during the second stage of the enquiry, for essentially it relates more to the domains of punishment rather than to that of guilt.
But what is essential is that the Government servant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to know that fact and meet the same."
(ii) Mahipal Ex. Constable v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) SLR 311 -  This Court has examined the effect of non-disclosure of the past record of the delinquent official by the punishing authority, no doubt the disciplinary authority can or has to take into account the past record of the delinquent official for imposing a particular penalty but the opportunity to explain the same has to be accorded.
In the case cited above, the relief has been granted by making categoric observation that the cumulative effect of habitual absence from duty, duty from which absent, incorrigibility, devotion to duty and reasons for absence are some of the considerations which would be taken into consideration while returning finding, the fact as to whether absence from duty was in the nature of a gross misconduct envisaged by the rules has to be noticed.
However, a categoric observation has been made that the delinquent official must be disclosed the previous record and that the appropriate opportunity should be granted before the past record is taken into consideration in passing the order of punishment.
(iii) Kuldip Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala and another, 1996(1) RSJ 187 -  In the aforesaid judgment, the only argument had been advanced that while passing the order of punishment, the competent authority took into account the previous record of the plaintiff but did not afford any opportunity of hearing to the delinquent official.
Thus, by placing reliance upon the aforesaid judgment of the apex Court and the judgment of this Court, the appeal had been allowed.
The principle reaffirmed and applied is that the delinquent official must be given an opportunity of being heard, if the previous record is to be relied upon while passing the order of punishment.
(iv) Union of India v. TR Varma - AIR 1957 Supreme Court 882 -  It is further argued that the petitioner has not been given the appropriate opportunity as no evidence was produced before the Inquiry Officer, resultantly, no opportunity granted, to test the vericity of the documents as the proceedings were completed by the Inquiry Officer in one sitting and the documents referred to were not even put to the petitioner and it is evident that letter dated 12121975 and the report of the fact finding inquiry instituted by the Corporation was neither shown to the delinquent official nor produced before the Inquiry Officer, thus, the question of examining the credibility of the document never arose.
Consequently, the principles of natural justice as enunciated by the apex Court in the aforesaid judgment, have not been adhered to.
11.
In this regard, reference has been made to para No. 10 of the judgment which reads as under :  10.
Now, it is not doubt true that the evidence of the respondent and his witnesses was not taken in the mode prescribed in the Evidence Act; but that Act has no application to enquiries conducted by tribunals, even though they may be judicial in character.
The law requires that such tribunals should observe rules of natural justice in the conduct of the enquiry and if they do so, their decision is not liable to be impeached on the ground that the procedure followed was not in accordance with that, which obtains in a Court of Law.
Stating it broadly and, without intending it to be exhaustive, it may be observed that rules of natural justice require that a party should have the opportunity of adducing all relevant evidence on which he relies, that the evidence of the opponent should be taken in his presence, and that he should be given the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses examined by that party, and that no materials should be relied on against him without his being given an opportunity of explaining them.
If these rules are satisfied, the enquiry is not open to attack on the ground that the procedure laid down in the Evidence Act for taking evidence was not strictly followed.
Vide the recent decision of this Court in New Prakash Transport Co v. New Suwarna Transport Co, 1957 SCR 98 : AIR 1957 SC 232 (C) where this question is discussed.
12.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the petitioner had been granted appropriate opportunity to inspect the record and it is after inspection of the record he had submitted his reply.
In the reply, no plea has been taken that he had not been show the letter dated 12121975 and the enquiry report submitted by Chaman Lal.
In view of the corroborative and admitted documentary evidence, there was no need to produce any oral evidence.
It is no where the case of the petitioner that these documents are incorrect and had not been admitted by him.
Infact, he has given the explanation and he has rather doubted the report of the highest police official of the district and has stated that the police has not made a thorough investigation.
The delinquent official is not entitled to sit as court of appeal upon the findings returned by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar.
The facts were taken into consideration by the police authorities and they have categorically opined that it is not a case of theft and that the employees of the Corporation are themselves involved in the act of defalcation.
13.
It has been further argued that the Managing Director has passed a perfectly legal order, the perusal of the order shows that after discussing the facts relating to the charge and the enquiry report, the finding has been returned that the delinquent official is guilty of defalcation.
However, it is thereafter in the second paragraph, he has made a passing reference to the conduct of the delinquent official and that over all view has been formed by him while coming to a conclusion in passing the order of termination.
It is obvious, the Managing Director formed the opinion that a dishonest person should not be allowed to remain in service of the Corporation.
The appointing authority is justified in forming such opinion if consistently bad reports of acts of omission and commission are imputable to the delinquent official.
The order, therefore, does not suffer from any infirmity and rather is an act of weeding out corrupt persons from employment of the Corporation.
14.
After hearing arguments of learned counsel for the parties, I have given thoughtful consideration to the facts and the pleas of the parties and have also considered the respective arguments of counsel for the parties.
15.
I am of the opinion that the petitioner has not been given appropriate opportunity to defend himself.
Admittedly, the letter dated 12121975 addressed by the Senior Superintendent of Police to the Corporation was not shown to the delinquent official nor the said letter has been produced before this Court, as no copy has been appended with the written statement nor has been shown by producing the record in the Court.
The Corporation also has not been able to show or produce, a copy of the official report submitted by Shri Chaman Lal, who had been appointed for carrying out fact finding enquiry in respect of the alleged theft having been committed in the two godowns.
It may be noticed that this report has been discussed by the Managing Director yet the Corporation has taken the plea that no signed report of the Inquiry Officer is available on record.
It is not understandable who is right, the Corporation or the Managing Director.
In such a situation, the benefit definitely goes to the delinquent official, i.e., that he has not been given the appropriate opportunity to defend himself.
16.
The Inquiry Officer has also not examined appropriate evidence as none has been produced by the prosecution to substantiate and prove the charge(s) against the delinquent official.
The charge of defalcation has been levelled against the delinquent official but to prove and support that charge, no oral evidence is forthcoming as none has been produced.
The Corporation could have produced watch and ward staff to bring the charge home against the delinquent official, if at all it is sustainable.
Perhaps the Corporation was aware of the fact that no such evidence would be forthcoming.
It is also not justifiable that the charge of removal of 35 + 55 bags as alleged against the delinquent official stands established.
For argument sake, admittedly, he could not have removed those bags single handed, if so, who are his alleged perpetrators.
No enquiry is stated to have been held in this regard and obviously nor any has been subjected to interrogation.
The inference to be drawn is far too obvious, the Inquiry Officer was definitely influenced by the observation made by the then Managing Director, wherein he has concurred with the report of the police authorities.
This finds mention in the enquiry report as has been noticed here above.
Thus, it is obvious there has been no independent application of mind by the Inquiry Officer.
17.
The perusal of the impugned order shows that the Managing Director has also not discussed the letter dated 12121975 but has concluded that the delinquent official is guilty of defalcation.
However, while holding him guilty of the charge and responsible for defalcation of 90 bags of wheat, nothing has been opined.
However, in the next paragraph, the reference has been made to the alleged allegations made out against the delinquent official from past record and also the alleged punishment suffered by him.
Admittedly, no opportunity is stated to have been given to the delinquent official to submit his reply in respect of the said alleged additional charges inferred from the past record, apart from the charge which was being considered by the Managing Director.
It is in this paragraph, he has opined that the delinquent official is not fit to be retained in the service of the Corporation.
The concluding paragraph opens with the word "Accordingly, the official is removed from the service of the Corporation."
18.
Thus, the past record has definitely been taken into consideration while passing the impugned order and admittedly no opportunity has been given to the delinquent official to defend himself vis-a-vis the said alleged charges.
The argument of the counsel for the respondent that the past record can be taken into consideration while formulating over all opinion, there is no restraint in adopting such procedure but in all fairness, the delinquent officials should always be subjected to the said alleged past record and the right to refute the same should be granted before an opinion is formed.
Since no such opportunity had been given, reliance upon the post record is not sustainable.
19.
The cumulative reading of the record shows that the Corporation has dealt with the proceedings in a very shoddy manner and except for the adoption of mathematical approach, the conscious and cautious approach has not been adhered to.
Resultantly, the delinquent official has not been given appropriate opportunity to defend himself.
Thus, the impugned order suffers from rigors of "audi altrem partum".
The law is well settled in this regard by this Court and so also by the apex court.
I need not refer to the well reported and well read judgments.
20.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1251981, copy Annexure P-12 passed by the Punishing Authority and that the order of the Appellate Authority, copy Annexure P-14 are quashed.
Consequently, the petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential reliefs inclusive of re-instatement and arrears of salary as may be permissible under law.
The compliance as aforesaid be made by the concerned quarters within three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.