SR Nayar, J - This appeal is filed by the writ petitioner being aggrieved by the order of the learned single Judge in W P No. 27208/99 dated 2-12-1999 dismissing the writ petition.
2.
In the above writ petition, the appellant herein sought for a relief of regularisation of his service in the cadre of driver.
From the materials placed before the Court, it could be seen that the appellant was appointed by the Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Bangalore, as a 'Driver' on daily wage basis and he worked during 5 spells : for a period of 9 months w.e.f.
15-5-1986; for a period of 2 months w.e.f.
16-2-1987; for a period of 9 months w.e.f.
18-4-1987; for a period of one year w.e.f.
22-1-1988 and for a period of one year w.e.f.
24-1-1989.
It is stated that when the matter stood thus, the respondents sought to terminate the services of the appellant w.e.f.
23-1-1990.
At that stage, the appellant herein preferred WP No. 1505/90 and the learned single Judge of this Court granted an interim direction to continue the services of the appellant.
The said writ petition was disposed of by the learned single Judge on 19-1-1996 with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the appellant for regularisation of his services in accordance with law.
Accordingly, the State Government considered the claim of the appellant and by order dated 3-6-1993, the claim of the petitioner was rejected.
In pursuance of the above Government order, the 3rd respondent issued endorsement dated 22/23-7-1999 dispensing with the services of the appellant.
Being aggrieved by the said action of the Government and that of the respondent No. 3, the petitioner/appellant preferred the writ petition.
Learned single Judge refused to grant relief of regularisation to the petitioner/appellant by opining as under:-  "It is obvious that the period of service in pursuance of the interim order of this Court, cannot be taken into account for reckoning the total period of temporary service of the petitioner.
If the said period is excluded, the period of temporary service of petitioner is only 3 years and 8 months.
The aid period will not entitle him for any order of regularisation, particularly in view of the principles laid down in regard to the contract employments by APMCs by this Court in the case of Ganapati (supra)."
3.
However, while dismissing the writ petition learned single Judge was pleased to observe that his order does not come in the way of respondent No. 3 in considering the case of the petitioner for continuation of temporary appointment, if such temporary service is required during any period.
Hence, the present appeal is preferred by the unsatisfied writ petitioner.
4.
We have heard Sri SV Shastri, learned counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
Sri Shastri, with his usual persuasiveness strenuously contended that since the writ petitioner has had put in roughly 4 years of service and since the petitioner had been continued in service even after filing WP No. 1505/90 till disposal of the same, learned Judge was not justified in refusing the relief.
Sri Shastri would contend that the action of the respondents was not in conformity with the postulates of Article 14 of the Constitution and, therefore, the action of the respondents in dispensing with the services of the petitioner after extracting work from him for a reasonably long period should not be regarded as fair and reasonable.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents would support the order of the learned single Judge.
6.
Sri Shastri, learned counsel for the appellant placed strong reliance on the Division Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in 1999(2) SCT 600 (SC) : 1999 SC 1160, Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Suresh.
But, we do not think that decision would come to the aid of the petitioner to seek regularisation of his services particularly in the light of the three Judge Bench decision of the Supreme Court in Ashwinikumar v. State of Bihar, (1997)2 SCC 1.
In that case, the Supreme Court specifically dealt with the question under what circumstances the Court would be justified in ordering regularisation of services of an ad hoc or temporary employee in the absence of any scheme framed by the employer for regularisation.
7.
It is well settled law that regularisation is not a mode of recruitment.
The petitioner is not seeking the relief of regularisation under any scheme framed by the respondents.
The Apex Court in Ashwinikumar's case speaking through Majmudar, J opined that in order to grant the relief of regularisation de hors a scheme for regularisation, two conditions regarded as conditions precedent should co-exist.
They are : (I) Appointment of the ad hoc employee should be against a clear vacancy in the sanctioned post, and (II) that appointment was in accordance with the Recruitment Rules governing the post.
In such a case, the only flaw would be that the opportunity to apply to the post was not given to all eligible candidates as mentioned by Article 16 read with Article 14 of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court has further held that even in a case where the aforementioned two conditions are satisfied, no applicant as a matter of course or as a matter of right can seek mandamus to regularise his services.
In such situation, whether the relief could or should be granted to an applicant would be within the domain of discretion of the Courts.
In the premise of the aforementioned well settled principles governing relief of regularisation, no relief can be granted to the appellant.
It was not as if the appellant had been in continuous service without any break w.e.f 15-5-1996 till his request for regularisation was turned down after this Court disposed of WP No. 1505/90 on 19-9-1996.
As could be seen from 5 spells of temporary services of the appellant as set out by the learned single Judge in the order, the service of the petitioner was engaged in exigencies of the service during the different spells.
That fact itself would not vest a right in the appellant to seek mandamus to the respondent authorities to regularise his services.
Be that as it may, no satisfactory materials are placed before the Court to show that the two conditions laid down by Apex Court in Ashwinikumar's case are satisfied.
Looking from any angle, the petitioner/appellant is not entitled to the relief sought by him.
In that view of the matter, no exception can be taken to the order of the learned single Judge.
8.
The writ appeal is devoid of merit and it is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.