NK Sodhi, J - Challenge in this writ petition is to the award dated April 15, 2002 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bathinda whereby the reference made to it under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) was answered against the management and in favour of the workman and the latter was directed to be reinstated with continuity of service but without back wages.
2.
Facts giving rise to the petition may first be noticed :  Pritam Singh respondent had been employed as a Secretary of the Panjgrain Khurad Cooperative Agricultural Service Society Limited Tehsil Baghapurana District Moga (for short the Society) and was drawing monthly salary of Rs. 2499/- when his services were terminated on June 23, 1994.
This termination gave rise to an industrial dispute which had been referred for adjudication to the Labour Court.
The case set up by the workman was that his services had been terminated without serving any notice on him and without holding an inquiry and that no compensation was paid to him and this, according to him, was illegal.
He prayed that the order of termination be set aside and he be reinstated with continuity of service with full back wages.
3.
In the written statement filed by the society some preliminary objections were raised in regard to the maintainability of the reference.
It was pleaded that the workman had no locus-standi to raise the dispute and that the society was not an `industry' within the meaning of the Act, and therefore, the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to deal with the reference.
On merits, it was pleaded that the workman had embezzled a sum of Rs. 2,19,173/- which was recoverable from him on the bass of some awards passed by the Arbitrator under the Punjab cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
It was admitted that the workman was working as a Secretary with the society and that his services had been terminated on June 23, 1994 on account of grave misconduct inasmuch as he had embezzled a large sum of money belonging to the society.
4.
Pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following two issues :  1) Whether the reference is not maintainable as alleged in the legal objections taken in the written statement ?
2) Whether the order of termination of services of the workman is justified and in order ?
3) Relief.
5.
On a consideration of the oral and documentary evidence led by the parties, the Labour Court decided both the issues against the society and in favour of the workman and by the impugned award directed his reinstatement with continuity of service but without back wages.
Hence this writ petition.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the society and are of the view that there is no merit in the writ petition.
7.
The first argument of the learned counsel is that the society is not an industry within the meaning of the Act and, therefore, the reference made to the Labour Court was null and void.
Reliance in this regard was placed on the definition of `industry' as contained in clause (j) of Section 2 of the Act as introduced by Act 46 of 1982.
Particular reference was made to clause (9) of the amended definition which excludes from the concept of industry any activity, being an activity carried on by a co-operative society if the number if the number of persons employed by the co-operative society is less than ten.
It was contended that the society has less than ten employees working with it and, therefore, it stands excluded from the definition of `industry' as a result whereof the provisions of the Act do not apply.
The argument is, indeed, fallacious and we have no hesitation in rejecting the same.
After the judgment of the Apex Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa and others, AIR 1978 SC 548 wherein the concept of industry was discussed threadbare, the Parliament amended the definition in the year 1982 by introducing the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 46 of 1982.
According to sub-section (2) of Section 1 of this Amending Act, it was to come into force on such date as the `Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.'
The date of enforcement of the Amending Act has not been notified by the Central Government so far with the result that the amended definition of `industry' in clause (j) of Section 2 of the Act has not come into force so far.
In this view of the matter, reliance on this amended definition is wholly misconceived.
There is yet another reason why this argument cannot be accepted.
The plea that the society had never employed more than ten persons was never raised before the Labour Court and it is for the first time that such a plea is being raised before us in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
This plea being one of fact cannot be allowed to be raised for the first time in this court.
8.
The only other argument that was advanced by the learned counsel for the society is that Pritam Singh respondent being the Secretary of the society and been employed in a supervisory capacity and since he was drawing wages in excess of Rs. 1600/- per mensum he was not a `workman' within the meaning of clause (s) of Section 2 of the Act.
Reference in this regard was made to the definition of `workman' given in the Act which excludes persons who being employed in a supervisory capacity draw wages exceeding Rs. 1600/- per mensum.
This argument too cannot be accepted.
No doubt, the society had pleaded before the Labour Court that the workman had no cause of action but it never pleaded that he had been employed in a supervisory capacity and, therefore, he was outside he scope of the definition of `workman'.
The fact that the workman had been designated as the Secretary of the society is by itself not determinative of the question whether he is a workman or not.
This question primarily depends upon the nature of duties performed by him irrespective of the designation given to him.
As to what were the nature of his duties is a question of fact which the society should have pleaded and proved by cogent evidence before the Labour Court.
We find from a perusal of the impugned award that no such plea was raised before the Labour Court.
Such a plea obviously cannot be allowed to be taken up before us for the first time in this petition.
9.
No other point was raised.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same stands dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.