MF Saldanha, J - I have heard the learned advocates who represent the contesting parties on both sides.
The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the 'Corporation' has assailed the correctness of the award dated 20-3-1998 whereby the respondent-Conductor has been directed to be reinstated with continuity of service and 25% back-wages and consequential benefits.
The charge against him was that on 31-8-1994 he is alleged to have not issued tickets to 15 passengers in the bus.
The Checking Staff have noted down on the prescribed form the names of the passengers and other details and the fact that since they were found without tickets they were made to pay the requisite penalty.
It was the case of the passengers that they had paid the requisite fare and that the Conductor had not issued the tickets to them.
The defence of the Conductor was that there were 66 passengers in the bus, that this particular group of 15 passengers had recently boarded the bus, that they were unwilling to pay the fare and that he was therefore about to stop the bus in order to off load them when the checking took place.
At the enquiry the requisite evidence was led, and the disciplinary authority held that the charges had been proved.
One of the factors that was taken into consideration in this case was the fact that the Conductor had been involved in 15 cases of misconduct on earlier occasions, that he was given enough of opportunity to mend his ways as minor punishments had been imposed on earlier occasions and that despite this, since he had committed serious misconduct on this occasion that he deserves to be dismissed from service.
The order of dismissal was challenged by him before the Labour Court and the preliminary finding was to the effect that the enquiry was just and proper.
The Labour Court thereafter re-examined the material before it and found fault with the manner in which the misconduct was established.
Among other things, the Court took note of the fact that the cash bag of the Conductor had not been checked and that consequently, there was certain lacunae in the case.
It is clear from the order passed by the Labour Court that effectively, the Court has given what may be termed as a sympathetic judgment because the Court has directed reinstatement but has limited the backwages to 25% for the obvious reason that the Court was satisfied on the record that the Conductor had in fact misconducted himself to some extent.
These two petitions assail the correctness of that decision.
The Corporation has come up with a plea that in a case of the present type the disciplinary order should have been confirmed, that no reinstatement should have been directed nor should any backwages have been awarded.
The respondent-Conductor has also assailed the correctness of the order and it is his contention that once the reinstatement has been ordered that logically, it must be held that the charges have not been proved and in the absence of the guilt being established it is his contention that the Labour Court ought to have ipso facto ordered full backwages and not limited the benefits to 25%.
2.
At the hearing, the Corporation's learned Counsel submitted that the Corporation was under no obligation to produce any further evidence before the Labour Court because this is one of the cases wherein the enquiry has been held to be just and proper.
The learned Counsel has submitted that the case really rests on documentary evidence the first of them being the documents which establish that the passengers had paid the prescribed ticket amount and that they had thereafter been penalised because they were found to be without tickets.
Furthermore, what is contended is that this is a case wherein as far as 15 passengers were found travelling without ticket, that the defence pleaded is absolutely sham and that having regard to the service record of the employee who was involved in numerous acts of misconduct amounting to 15 as per the service sheet, that the order of reinstatement and backwages must be set aside.
The usual argument is once again put forward that if a liberal view is taken with regard to gross cases of the present type that it would only amount to a premium on misconduct.
3.
As against this position, the learned Counsel who represents the employee submitted that the Corporation should have examined the passengers in question and could not have only relied on documentary evidence which is in a cyclostyled proforma.
It is now well settled that in cases of this type the feasibility of examining the passenger being extremely low that if the Court is satisfied that the documentary evidence produced such as the records relating to what exactly has transpired is good enough that it is unnecessary and not obligatory to examine the passengers.
With regard to the ground on which the Labour Court has interfered, namely, the fact that the cash bag was not checked, learned Counsel submitted that this is a serious infirmity because the allegation is a grave one, namely, that the employee had collected the fares from the passengers and had not accounted for them by issuing tickets and putting the amount in the cash bag.
The submission is that if the employee had dishonestly collected the money and not issued the tickets that the amount would have been found in the cash bag if the same had been checked.
I find it a little difficult to accept this argument because one has to take note of the fact that if an employee is motivated by dishonesty and decides not to issue the tickets it would be an absolute absurdity to expect that the employee would still be putting the money in the Corporation's cash bag.
On the other hand, there is no means of ascertaining as to how much of his personal money an employee would have been carrying and, therefore, if some amount of cash is found on the employee, assuming that his person is checked, there is still no guarantee that this excess can be established to be the amount collected from the passengers.
In sum and substance therefore, the real question that arises is as to whether the credibility of the Checking Staff and the Corporation's records should be accepted.
Normally, a Court will not dispute or discard this evidence because there is no reason why an employee of the Corporation should be falsely implicated unless the employee is able to satisfy the Court that there was some ground for doing this.
Under the circumstances, this objection would also have to be overruled.
4.
With regard to the alleged past misconduct of the employee it is true that the Labour Court has interfered on the ground that no evidence was produced.
This position is further incorrect because when the enquiry records form part of the record of the Labour Court, the Labour Court having held that the enquiry was just and proper and that the disciplinary authority has taken note of the 15 acts of past misconduct which are referred to in the dismissal order and consequently, the finding of the Labour Court in this regard is factually incorrect and will have to be set aside.
5.
On behalf of the employee, another submission was advanced, namely, the fact that since the documents produced by the Corporation indicate that the fare was collected from the passengers and that a penalty was imposed on them, that this would be tantamount to holding that the Corporation has recovered the money in question and no loss is caused to the Corporation and the argument proceeds further to contend that since a penalty was imposed, that this is ipso facto proof of the fact that the passengers had travelled not having paid the fare and that the employee is not at fault.
To my mind, both these submissions are fallacious.
In a situation where the Conductor collects the fare from the passengers and does not account for it and does not issue a ticket to the passenger, the situation that emerges is that when the Corporation's Checking Staff apprehend the passenger without the ticket, it is the passenger who is at the receiving end insofar as in order to avoid further penalties the passenger is left with no option except to tender the fare, obtain the requisite ticket and pay the penalty for travelling without a ticket.
It may be that technically every passenger is required to demand that a ticket be issued when the fare is tendered but one needs to take note of the realities and of the fact that particularly in rural India, if a Conductor collects money from a villager and does not issue a ticket to him that the passenger can do nothing about it.
Under these circumstances the fact that the Corporation has recovered the fare and the penalty, to my mind, is totally irrelevant to the main issue, namely, the misconduct having been proved which has got to be done independently and which has been done in the present case ?
6.
To my mind, having regard to the present record this is a case in which the Labour Court ought not to have been interfered.
Unfortunately, it is pointed out to me that not only did the Labour Court direct reinstatement with 25% backwages but that this Court had at earlier point of time directed the Corporation to implement the earlier part of the award, namely, to reinstate the employee.
That order has been complied with.
It is not as though this Court is precluded from reversing that order at this point of time but to my mind, having regard to the overall facts and circumstances and the fact that a Court of co-ordinate jurisdiction has passed an interim order, only in keeping with judicial discipline which respects, the orders passed by another Court, I am not interfering with the order of reinstatement.
This is one of the cases wherein the order of payment of backwages and the consequential benefits is thoroughly unjustified and consequently the part of the award wherein 25% backwages have been awarded is set aside.
Since the reinstatement has taken effect the employee will still get the benefit of continuity of service.
7. with these observations the first of the writ petition viz. W.P. No. 33485/1998 partially succeeds.
W.P. No. 36956/1999 fails and stands disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs in both the writ petitions.
Order accordingly.