Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner Dr. Vijay Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of Certiorari for quashing the orders dated December 29, 1999 passed by respondent No. 1, whereby the claim made by him for appointment to the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer has been declined by rejecting his representation.
2.
Brief facts may be noticed as follows :  On November, 1994, the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana issued instructions with regard to the reservation of posts in direct recruitment and decided that the Scheduled Castes in Haryana will be put in the two categories i.e. Block 'A' and Block 'B'.
Block 'B' will consist of Chamars, Jatle, Chamar Rohgors, Raigars, Ramdasias or Ravidasias and the remaining 35 castes were to be in Block 'A'.
A copy of the aforesaid instructions dated November 8, 1994 has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the present writ petition.
3.
The petitioner passed his BAMS examination from Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra in June 1995.
On July 12, 1996, the Haryana Public Service Commission advertised seven posts in the backlog of reserved category and the interview for the said posts were held with effect from July 12, 1996.
It is stated in the petition that out of the seven posts, only 4 posts were filled up due to non-availability of candidates.
It is further stated in the petition that on January 10, 1997, the Haryana Public Service Commission again issued an advertisement (appended as Annexure P-4 with the petition) wherein three posts of Ayurvedic Medical/Officers were advertised.
It is stated that the petitioner also applied in response to the advertisement but was not issued an interview letter but one Shiv Shanker Chaudhary, who belonged to Block 'B' of Scheduled Castes category was selected and appointed.
Subsequently, on April 7, 1998, the petitioner alongwith other candidates was called for interview on April 21, 1998.
As a result of the aforesaid interview, one Dr. Kulwant Singh, who belonged to Block 'A' of Scheduled Castes category was appointed but against the remaining posts, only respondents No. 3 and 4 were selected and were allowed to join on the posts with effect from August 1, 1998.
The petitioner has stated that since as per the instructions dated November 9, 1994, 50% vacancies are to be filled from Block 'A' and 50% from Block 'B' of the Scheduled Castes category and out of seven vacancies, four came to the share of the petitioner's category, therefore, the selection in which the petitioner participated there were three vacancies and out of those three, two were required to be given to the petitioner's category.
Since only two posts were given to Block 'A' while appointing Dr. Om Pal Singh and Dr. Kulwant Singh, therefore, it is stated that respondents No. 3 and 4 could not be appointed against the posts, which were meant for the category of the petitioner i.e. Block 'A'.
4.
The petitioner served a demand notice upon the respondents on April 15, 1994 challenging the aforesaid appointments of respondents No. 3 and 4 and claiming that the posts which were meant for the category of the petitioner could not have been given to the other category by making a joint merit list.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed a CWP No. 13675 of 1999 in this Court.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of vide orders dated September 24, 1999 appended as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition.
Through the aforesaid orders, the respondents were directed to decide the legal notice/representation filed by the petitioner within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of the order.
5.
In compliance with the directions issued by this Court vide orders September 24, 1999, the respondent No. 1 considered the claim of the petitioner and vide orders dated December 29, 1999, the representation filed by the petitioner was rejected.
The aforesaid orders dated December 29, 1999 have been appended as Annexure P-8 with the petition and have been impugned.
6.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid orders Annexure P-8 on the ground that in fact the advertisement for filing up the three posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officer was issued in the month of January 1997 i.e. much after the enforcement of the instructions dated November 9, 1994 and, therefore, the criteria and categories as laid down in the aforesaid instructions were required to be followed while making the appointments to the posts in the month of January 1997.
A challenge is also made that in fact the plea of backlog taken by the respondents while rejecting the claim of the petitioner and for filling up the vacancies was not available to the respondents since after the issuance of the instructions dated November 9, 1994, the State Government was bound to follow the aforesaid instructions and fill up the posts blockwise separately for Block 'A' and Block 'B' of Scheduled Castes categories.
7.
On a notice issued to the respondents, a written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 contesting the claim of the petitioner.
It has been stated in the written statement that the requisition for filling up the posts of seven Ayurvedic Medical Officers for the backlog of reserved category of Scheduled Castes by respondents No. 1 and 2 was sent prior to November 9, 1994 when the instructions regarding category 'A' and category 'B' of Scheduled Castes had not been issued.
On that basis, it has been pleaded that the aforesaid instructions issued on November 9, 1994 were not applicable to the said backlog of vacancies.
On the basis of the aforesaid plea, the respondent claims that the order Annexure P-8 was perfectly legal and valid.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance also gone through the record of the case.
At this stage relevant portion of the order dated December 29, 1999 may be reproduced as follows :  "A requisition for filling up 7 posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officer of backlog of reserved category posts was sent to HPSC before 9.11.94 the date when the instructions for Block 'A' and 'B' of Scheduled Castes category were issued by the government.
These posts were of backlog and as such instructions of the Government regarding appointment as per Group 'A' and 'B' of the Scheduled Castes were not applicable.
Dr. Ashok Kumar has been recommended by the HPSC as a Scheduled Caste candidate for appointment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer on the basis of merit of Scheduled Castes candidates and as such Dr. Vijay Singh has no claim for appointment as AMO in place of Dr. Ashok Kumar as he has been placed below Dr. Ashok Kumar in the merit list prepared by the HPSC.
Therefore, in view of the foregoing and the position explained above, the claim of Dr. Vijay Singh for appointment to the post of AMO as per his request in his representation (Annexure P-3 of CWP No. 13675/99) is hereby rejected."
It is apparent that the entire defence raised by the respondents in defending the order Annexure P-8 and rejecting the claim of the petitioner is that the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers sought to be filled through an advertisement in January 1997 were in fact the backlog posts and, therefore, the instructions dated November 9, 1994 vide which the Scheduled Castes category had been put in two blocks namely Block 'A' and Block 'B' were not attracted.
9.
Mr. JS Maanipur, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Anita v. Haryana Public Service Commission and another, 1996(3) SCT 234 (P&H) : 1995(4) RSJ 643, to contend that in fact there was no revision under the rules for carrying forward the backlog of the seats and the vacancies which had to be filled up were required to be filled up in accordance with the rules and eligibility conditions as applicable on the date of the advertisement.
On the other hand Mr. Amol Rattan, learned AAG, Haryana and Mr. RS Mamli, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 4 have submitted that in fact the posts sought to be filled up through an advertisement in 1997 were the backlog of the reserved posts and had arisen at a time prior to the enforcement of the instructions dated November 9, 1994 and, therefore, the rule and criteria for filling up the posts was to be determined ignoring the instructions dated November 9, 1994.
The reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents on the judgment of Apex Court in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983(3) SCC 284.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find that this petition must succeed since the controversy in question is fully covered by the decision of this court in the case of Anita v. Haryana Public Service Commission and another (supra) wherein it has been laid down as under :  "The argument of the petitioner that there was a backlog of 19 seats which should be filled up on the basis of old qualifications is accepted would lead to disastrous results inasmuch as the persons may come to the Court and insist for filling up the vacancies year-wise and not on the basis of the vacancies existing at the time when the directions are issued for holding the examination of filling vacancies.
Admittedly, there is no provision under the rules for carrying forward the backlog of the seats.
The petitioner has also not been in a position to show us any provision of law or the judgment of any Court to the effect that the vacancies falling vacant should be carried forward and filled up on the basis of the qualifications prescribed at the time when the vacancy had occurred.
No person has any vested, legal or fundamental right to claim appointment against a post falling vacant at a particular time.
Generally, it is for the employer to fill the post as and when desired.
On the failure of the employer State to perform its constitutional obligations, appropriate directions can be issued as we have already initiated in CWP No. 15693 of 1994.
The petitioner admittedly has acquired no right to claim selection against a post allegedly falling vacant before the judgment of the Supreme Court in All India Judges Association case (supra) and further insist to fill those posts without insisting upon the qualifications prescribed after the amendment of the Rules consequent upon the judgment of the Supreme Court.
The proposition put forth by the petitioner if accepted would amount to issuance of direction for filling the posts from amongst the persons who admittedly do not possess the requisite experience which is a condition precedent for appearing in the selection process.
The claim of the petitioner is neither bona fide nor genuine."
10.
We find that the law laid down in YV Rangaiah's case (supra) by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is not attracted to the present case.
That was a case were the vacancies had arisen and the appointments were required to be made by promotion and it was in those circumstances that it was held that vacancies in the promotional posts occurring prior to the amendment have to be filled up in accordance with unamended rules.
11.
Thus, we allow the writ petition and while quashing the appointment of respondent No. 4 direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner of appointment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer and if found eligible to order his appointment.
The respondents would implement the judgment within a period of three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.