MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No 12419 of 2001, 14050 of 2001, 14135 of 2001 and 14145 of 2001 as the common questions of law and facts have been raised in these all petitions.
2.
For convenience, the facts are being referred from Civil Writ Petition No 12419 of 2001.
After having qualified in the Pre-Medical Entrance Test, both petitioners had applied for admission to MBBS Course.
Both of them secured 136 and 132 marks out of 200 respectively, in the test held on 2272001 vide letter dated 2672001, they were asked to appear for the counselling, which was scheduled to be held on 682001 at 1000 am They were also asked to file affidavits sworn by their parents, individually in the specified format.
The standard form affidavit required, vide Clause (2), to declare whether the parents of the candidates were working in the office/department of the Government and they were also required to specify their emoluments.
Accordingly, the parents of petitioner No. 1 filed their affidavits (Annexures P-18 and P-19).
It has been stated therein that both of them have been working on the post of SS Mistress and SS Master, respectively and they were posted in rural areas drawing salaries of Rs. 13,572/- and Rs. 13,753/-.
It was claimed that the petitioner No. 1 was entitled to be granted admission as rural area candidate as she has been issued certificates by the competent authority and the same are placed on record as Annexures P-1, P-2 and P-3  3.
In respect of petitioner No. 2, the rural area certificates appended are Annexures P-4, P-5 and P-6.
The certificates afore-mentioned are given in standard form of Appendix `B' and other certificates have also been issued by the competent authority as per the requirement of the prospectus in the form of Appendix `B-II'.
The resident certificate has also been issued by the competent authority.
On the basis of afore-mentioned facts, the petitioners have sought the following relief :  a) A suitable writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant admission to the petitioners in Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (respondent No. 3) for the MBBS Course under the category of rural area candidates.
b) The clause in the interview letter dated 2672001 (Annexure P- 16) which required the parents of the petitioners to submit a fresh affidavit, disclosing whether the parents of the candidates are employed is sought to be quashed.
4.
In their separate replies filed by respondents No. 2 and 3, 8 and 10, the stand taken is that the petitioners did not fulfil the requirement as laid down in the Rural Area Certificate No. 1, Appendix `B' of the prospectus.
According to the certificate Appendix `B', it is required that the principal means of livelihood of the parents should be from the income earned in the village.
Such a certificate is required to be issued by the Tehsildar/Sub Divisional Magistrate in favour of the parents of the candidate.
It is further averred in their written statement that as the parents of both the petitioners have been working as SS Mistress and SS Master in the Department of Education of the State of Punjab, their principal means of livelihood cannot be considered from the village.
It is also claimed that according to Clause 117 of the prospectus it has been made clear that a certificate was required to be filed by both the parents stating that they have been bonafide residents of rural area which is neither a notified area nor it is a municipality of a town area committee.
A further requirement of the certificate is that the names of both the parents should be reflected in the electoral roll of the rural area.
Clause 117 on which the whole controversy revolves is reproduced hereunder along with the certificate Appendix `B' :  117.
In case of a candidate, wanting to avail benefit of reservation against the Rural Area Seat :  (a) Certificate that both parents are bonafide residents of Rural Area, which is not a notified area and does not have either a Municipality or a Town Area Committee and the names' of both parents is in the electoral roll of the Rural Area.
(Appendix B)  (b) Certificate from the Head of the Institution, in proof of the fact that the candidate has studied for a total period of 10 years ie, upto class 10th in a school, situated in a Rural Area which is not a notified area and does not have either a Municipality or a Town Area Committee and has appeared and passed class 10th from that school(s).
(Appendix B-II)" "RURAL AREA CLAIM CERTIFICATE No. 1 This certificate should be signed by a Tehsildar/Sub-Divisional Magistrate/Executive Magistrate with the court seal.
Certified that both the parents of _____________, a candidate for admission to MBBS/BDS course at Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Sri Amritsar/Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Dental Sciences and Research, Sri Amritsar, whose names are : Father : Shri _______ Mother Smt.__________are bonafide residents of village________Police Station____________ Tehsil__________ District______which is not a notified area and does not have either Municipality or town Area Committee.
The latest electoral Roll No. of Shri______________ is_________ and of Smt.______________ is__________.
It is further certified that their principal means of livelihood is from the earning in the village.
Signatures with stamp of Tehsildar/Sub- Divisional Magistrate.
1.
Village Sarpanch.
2.
Lakhapal/Patwari.
1.
Name in Capital Letters.
2.
Designation 3.
Tehsil 4.
Distt.
(Court Seal)" It is admitted position that 50% of the seats in the institute belonging to respondent No. 3 are reserved for the candidates belonging to Sikh community and in its letter dated 262001, the criteria for admission to the candidate belonging to rural area, was laid down in the following terms :  "1.
Seats for the candidates of Rural Area are being reserved keeping in view the fact that more than 50% of people of Sikh masses reside in villages and most of them have their principal means of livelihood from the earnings in the village and not from Government/Private services.
This reservation is exclusively made to facilitate such lot of villagers and provide opportunity to their wards which otherwise, is remotely available to them, which is usually, circumvented by affluent people, who have though base in villages but have income from service/other professions/business etc." 5.
In accordance with the afore-mentioned criteria, the affidavit in the form of Annexure-B in pursuance of Clause 117, was required to be filed stating therein that the principal means of livelihood of the parents of the candidate is from the earning in the village and not from Government/private service.
It is also admitted that the parents of the petitioners have been in Government service.
I have heard Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, Mr. RS Bains, Mr. Ashwani Arora, Mr. Sarbjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. NS Boparai, Additional Advocate General, Punjab for respondent No. 1, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Senior Advocate for respondents No. 2 and 3, Dr. MS Rahi, Advocate and Mr. Bhuvan Luthra, Advocate for private respondents.
The first argument raised by Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur and other learned counsel for the petitioners is that the respondents are bound by Clause 117 as stated in the prospectus.
According to the learned counsel, there is no requirement in Clause 117 that the parents of the candidates should have their principal means of livelihood from the earnings coming from the village.
Elaborating her argument learned counsel has emphasised that the prospectus issued by the respondent institute is dated 2352001 and the criteria requiring the parents to have earning from village was prepared later on i.e. on 262001 (Annexure R-3).
Therefore, she has claimed that whatever has been stated in the prospectus, is binding on the respondent institute and it is not permissible to travel beyond the prospectus.
For this proposition she has placed reliance on a Full Bench judgment of this court in the case of Amardeep Sihota v. State of Punjab, 1993(4) SCT 328.
6.
Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur has further argued that the requirement with regard to principal means of livelihood from the earning in the village in any case, is unconstitutional and cannot be relied upon by respondents No. 2 and 3.
According to the learned counsel, such a requirement would not meet the test of Articles 14 and 15(4) of the Constitution, as interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. Pardeep Tandon, AIR 1975 SC 563 and Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Amarbir Singh and others v. M.D.U.
Rohtak, ILR 1980(II) Punjab and Haryana 493.
According to the learned counsel, the only criteria for reservation of rural area candidate, constitutionally sustainable is that a candidate should have got his education from the rural area schools which may have the solemn object of uplifting the rural area candidates by providing healthy competition between themselves rather than asking them to compete with the candidates or a person who has principal means of livelihood from the earning in the village and who have got his children educated in convent schools.
7.
Another argument raised by the learned counsel is that the respondent Trust has so many other institutes where no such conditions have been imposed.
The ugly consequence of such a condition according to the ld.
counsel is that only two candidates from the rural area category namely Gagandeep Kaur and Satinder Kaur could be admitted as is clear from the letter dated 14.12.2001 issued by respondent No. 3.
According to her, out of 10 seats available in the rural area category 8 were offered to some other candidates who have got nothing to do with the rural background.
The argument is that the criteria adopted by the respondent institute has remained unable to attract the rural area candidates.
The only aim is to reserve the seats under the category of rural area and then to offer them to general category candidates.
It has also been argued on behalf of the petitioners that lapse of one year should not be used to defeat their rights for admission in MBBS course if they are otherwise found eligible.
The learned counsel has relied upon a judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M Sridevi v. University of Medical Sciences, AP, 2001(1) SCT 100 (SC) : 2000(4) RSJ 29 and also Full Bench judgement of this Court in Swaranjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) SCT 511.
8.
In C.W.P.
No. 14135 of 2000 Mr. RS Bains has raised an additional argument that the father of the petitioner in that case resides in village who is a lawyer by profession.
After working in the courts during day time he comes back to the village.
The mother of the petitioner is a District Education Officer posted at Mansa.
According to the learned counsel, it cannot be claimed on the basis of these facts that their principal means of livelihood are not from the earning in the village.
He has also drawn my attention to Annexures P-2, P-3, P-4 and P-5 to argue that those certificates sufficiently verify that they are residents of the village.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be denied admission on the ground that she is not a rural area candidate.
9.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram has drawn my attention to notification Annexurs R-2 dated 342001 and letter Annexure R-3 dated 262002, making 50% reservation for the members of Sikh Community and also the condition imposed by Clause 117 read with certificate Appendix B The learned counsel has argued that there is no challenge to the requirement that the principal means of livelihood of the parents of the candidates should be from the earning of the village and not from the Government/private service.
According to the learned counsel, there is requirement of the certificate stating that the principal means of livelihood of the parents of the petitioners should be from the earning in the village and not from the Government/private service.
He has referred to the provisions made in Clause 117 and also the certificate Appendix `B' (supra).
He has further submitted that once it is the admitted position that the parents of both the petitioners are in government employment then they were not entitled to be considered for admission in the category of rural area candidates.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of the Full Bench in case of Amarbir Singh (supra) to argue that the Full Bench judgment is not based on the case of Pardeep Tandon (supra) and the reservation, in favour of rural area candidates, was upheld.
10.
Another argument raised by the learned counsel is that in medical colleges, semester system is followed and studies up to two semesters have already been undertaken by the admitted candidates.
Therefore, the petitioners are bound to be non-suited on the ground that one year of the course has already been completed.
He has argued that the availability of seats in rural area category would not be a ground to allow admission and has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. Anupam Gupta, 1992(2) S.C.T.
292 : AIR 1992 SC 932 and a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Swaranjit Singh's case (supra).
11.
The learned counsel has further argued that the petitioners have not challenged the terms of prospectus on the ground that there is violation of Articles 14 and 15(4) of the Constitution and has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of Ashu Kamboj v. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, 2000(3) SCT 406 and Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 2000(3) SCT 666.
12.
Still further, another argument raised by the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 is that those 8 candidates who have been admitted from the general category have not been impleaded as party, despite the fact that their names were disclosed in the order dated 14.12.2001 (Annexure R-6) and, therefore, no order could be passed by this Court which may cause any prejudice to their interest.
13.
Appearing for the private candidates, respondents No. 8 and 10, Dr. MS Rahi and other learned counsel have argued that no prayer has been made by the petitioners for admission to B.D.S.
Course to which private respondents have been admitted.
Therefore, their admission cannot be cancelled.
The prayer made in the writ petition is for admission to MBBS Course.
They have further argued that the private candidates were admitted on the basis of their position in the merit list and not as candidates belonging to reserve category of rural areas.
None of the private respondents has misrepresented or played any fraud, which may result into cancellation of their admission.
14.
The question as to whether rural area itself constitute a valid basis for reservation, came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in Pardeep Tandon's case (supra).
Holding that such a reservation could not be sustained on the ground that the rural area represent social and education backward classes of citizen because large number of masses living in rural areas, cannot be a homogeneous class by itself.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :  "Some people in the rural area may be educationally backward.
Some may be socially backward, there may be a few who are both socially and educationally backward, but it cannot be said that all citizens residing in rural areas are socially and educationally backward.
80 per cent of the population in the State of Uttar Pradesh in rural areas cannot be said to be a homogeneous class by itself.
They are not of the same kind.
Their occupation is different.
Their lives are different.
Population cannot be a class by itself.
Rural element does not make it a class.
To suggest that the rural areas are socially and educationally backward is to have reservation for the majority of the State.
On behalf of the State, it is said that it is necessary to have reservation of seats for the people from rural areas in order to attract people from those areas who are otherwise handicapped in the matter of education, so that they can serve the people in the rural areas on completion of their medical education.
In order to attract medical men for service in rural areas arrangements are to be made to attract them.
The special need for medical men in rural areas will not make the people in the rural areas socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
The reservation for rural areas cannot be sustained on the ground that the rural areas represent socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
This reservation appears to be made for the majority population of the State.
80 per cent of the population of the State cannot be a homogeneous class.
Poverty in rural areas cannot be the basis of classification to support reservation for rural areas.
Poverty is found in all parts of India.
In the instructions for reservation of seats it is provided that in the application form a candidate for reserved seats from rural areas must submit a certificate of the District Magistrate to which he belonged that he was born in rural area and had a permanent home there and is residing there or that he was born in India and his parents and guardians are still living there and earn their livelihood there.
The incident of birth in rural areas is made the basic qualification.
No reservation can be made on the basis of place of birth, as this would offend Article 15."
15.
The afore-mentioned judgment fell for consideration of a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 3371 of 1978 decided on 2621979, titled as Kumari Pamila Jain v. The State of Haryana and others.
In that case, Maharashi Dayanand University (for brevity, 'the MDU'), reserved 25 seats for admission to MBBS course from rural areas.
The reservation required a candidate to satisfy following three conditions : (1) the names of parents of the candidate should be in the village electoral roll; (2) the parents should be engaged in cultivation or allied activities in the village; and (3) the candidates should have received at least Primary Education from a school situated in any village not having a Municipality or notified area or Town Area Committee.
The Division Bench, while relying upon the judgment in Pradeep Tandon's case (supra) concluded that the population living in rural area would not constitute a homogeneous class.
The observations of the Division Bench in Kumari Pamila Jain's case (supra) read as under :  "It is in the backdrop of this wholesome principle that we have to find out if the section of the society fulfilling the three conditions prescribed for admission against the impugned reserved seats constitute a homogeneous class.
This section would obviously include the land owners, tenants of land, animal breeders, agricultural labour and the rural artisans like the blacksmith and the carpenter etc.
It is difficult to conceive that the land owners, including big and small, would constitute homogeneous class with the agricultural labour and others.
Similarly, the animal breeders have nothing in common with the blacksmith and carpenters etc.
This section is rather heterogeneous and far from homogeneous.
It can hardly be treated a distinct class."
The Division Bench further held that such a criteria of fulfilling three conditions can also not satisfy the well known test of Article 14 of the Constitution, namely, that there has to be a reasonable classification and that classification shall be founded on an intelligible differentia which must have a rational relation to the objects sought to be achieved.
By such reservation the object sought to be achieved could not be the only upliftment of the weaker society which pre-supposes that the section of the society to be uplifted is weaker.
On that basis, the Division Bench held that such a reservation fails to satisfy the test of Articles 14 and 15(4) of the Constitution.
The observations of the Division Bench read as under :  "As stated above, the object sought to be achieved is stated to be uplift of the weaker section of the Society.
This object pre-supposes that the section of the Society to be uplifted is weaker.
Is the section of the society fulfilling the three conditions weaker which requires their education interests promoted with special care ?
In the first place, no material has been placed on record to warrant a finding that it is weaker section of Society.
Secondly, this section of Society which obviously includes affluent peasantry and the like can hardly be treated as weaker section requiring constitutional safeguards in the matter of promotion of their educational interests.
It being the case, the classification of differential cannot be said to have nexus with the objection sought to be achieved.
Mr. Sibal, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the section of the Society, fulfilling the three conditions is a socially and economically backward class of citizens.
The impugned reservation is justified under clause (4) of Article 15 of the Constitution and in the alternative it would be reasonable to treat that class a distinct one being socially and economically backward.
He relied upon DN Chanobala etc. v. The State of Mysore and others, AIR 1971 SC 1762, wherein it has been held that the principle underlying Article 15(4) is that a preferential treatment can validly be given because the socially and educationally backward classes need it so that in course time they stand in equal position with the more advanced sections of the society.
It is not improper to apply that principle to those who are handicapped but do not fall under Article 15(4).
Thus, it is not reasonable to extend the principle to the children of political sufferers who in consequence of their participation became unsettled in life and in some cases economically ruined.
It is necessary that the section of the society must be socially and educationally backward class of citizens for the application of clause (4) of Article 15 nor can this clause be made use of for treating the section a distinct class.
In Pradip Tandon's case (supra), the reservation of seats in Medical Colleges in UP for candidates from rural areas was not sustained on the plea that the rural areas represent socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
This reservation was held to have been made for the majority population of the State.
It was observed that 80 per cent of the population of UP in rural areas, cannot be a homogeneous class by itself.
They are not of the same kind.
Their occupations as also their standards, are different.
Population could not be a class by itself.
Rural element did not make it a class.
The observations made by the Supreme Court apply with full force in the instant case.
The learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the ratio of this authority has no application to the cases under consideration for the reason that in the case of UP, the reservation had been made for rural areas and in the present case, the impugned reservation has not been made for rural area but for specific section of society in the rural area which is socially and economically backward."
16.
The principle that rural area is not a class by itself and cannot on that basis be considered to be socially and educationally backward, mainly, because it is a rural area has again been reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Narayan Sharma v. Dr. Pankaj Kumar Lehkar, 1999(4) S.C.T.
879 : (2002)1 SCC 44.
17.
The provisions concerning reservation in this case has to be examined in the light of the principle consistently approved by the Supreme Court as well as by a Division Bench of this Court in the above mentioned judgments.
Clause 117 requires following three conditions to be satisfied :  (a) a certificate that both parents are bonafide residents of rural area; (b) the candidate has studied for a total period of 10 years ie upto class 10th in a school situated in a rural area; (c) the principal mean of livelihood of both the parents is from the earning in the village.
The above mentioned clause in sum and substance is similar to the clause which was considered by the Division Bench in Kumari Pamila Jain's case (supra).
On parity of reasoning it must be held that the whole population living in rural areas cannot be considered to be socially and economically weaker section which could be one of the basis of reservation under Article 14 of the Constitution Population living in the rural areas does not constitute a homogeneous class as has already been observed by the Division Bench in Kumari Pamila Jain's case (supra).
It also cannot be concluded that everyone living in the rural area belongs to weaker section of society.
The clause requiring the filing of an affidavit by the parents of the candidates that the principal mean of livelihood of the parents is from the earning from the village would be illusory and has no rational basis for keeping those candidates out of the zone of consideration whose children are educated from Class 1 to Class 10 in a rural area merely because their means of livelihood is not from the earning from the village.
A teacher, a doctor, an engineer or any other professional posted in the rural areas and getting his children educated in the rural area school would be deprived of the benefits which the candidates educated in rural area schools would get by competing amongst themselves.
However, such candidates educated in rural area schools, would be forced to compete with the candidates of general category who have got education in city areas with all modern equipments and infrastructure at their disposal.
After all the object of the provision could only be to provide some solace to the rural area candidates and to avoid an unequal competition for them.
The object cannot be to give or deprive the benefits to the parents.
Another impelling reason is that the classification has not been able to achieve the desired results.
Out of 10 seats reserved for rural area candidates on the basis of clause 117 only 2 candidates have been admitted which lead to belief that the reservation in the name of rural area is meaningless.
The intention behind the rule might be bone fide but it has failed to achieve the aimed results.
The clause requiring that the meaning of livelihood of parents is from the earning from the village would have no nexus with the object sought to be achieved and hence is held to be illusory.
Similar reasons would be applicable to sub- clause (a) of Clause 117.
Therefore, such a reservation offends Articles 14 and 15(4) of the Constitution and is thus, declared to be ultra virus.
18.
The question then arises as to what relief could be given to the petitioner because the seats reserved for rural area candidates has already been filled up albeit from the class of candidates belonging to open category or paid seat category.
The admitted students have already studied for almost complete one professional i.e. one and half years.
Therefore, no direction could be issued for admission of the petitioner.
However, respondents No. 1 to 3 are directed to make admission hereinafter by ignoring the reservation made under clause 117, which has been found to be ultra vires of Articles 14 and 15(4) of the Constitution.
The Writ petition is allowed to the extent stated above.
Petition partly allowed.