Swatanter Kumar, J - Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying quashing of order dated 1412002 Annexure P/13 passed by the District Education Officer(S), Ferozepur rejecting the claim of the petitioners for grant to 5% house rent allowance in lieu of non-providing of rent free accommodation.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon a Division Bench judgment of this court in support of his claim dated 17.2.1994 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 10907 of 1993.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners at some length.
On merits, we are not able to trace any error in the order passed by the District Education Officer as he had relied upon the instructions issued by the concerned authorities in compliance to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Notification dated 31.3.1999 is not subjectmatter of challenge in this writ petition.
Government had issued instructions that it was not bound to pay any other allowance except pay and dearness allowance as per decision of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 9103-05 of 1996.
Thus, on that regard this petition has no merit.
However, the only question which requires consideration is whether the order by which they were denied the benefit could be made effective retrospectively and recoveries for the amount received by the employees/petitioners in normal course of their service without making any misrepresentation can be recovered at this stage.
It may be not quite fair to permit the recoveries for the past period.
Disentitlement to their claim prospectively certainly cannot be questioned.
3.
This question has been considered repeatedly by the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as by this Court in different cases and even in similar cases as well.
We may refer to the order passed in Bharat Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(4) S.C.T.
432, Civil Writ Petition No. 1988 of 2000 decided on 252002.
The Court held as under :-  "The ancillary question that requires consideration by the Court is whether the amounts already paid to the petitioners should be permitted to be recoverable from their salary or not.
No doubt in law the petitioners were not entitled to receive this benefit of higher standard pay scale but equally true is that the petitioners made no misrepresentation to the respondents or in no way induced the respondents to make this payment in a wrongful manner.
If the respondents have committed the error, may be bona fide, they cannot be permitted to make the petitioners suffer for such consequences.
The bona fides of the petitioners can also not be doubted inasmuch as they rendered their service to the satisfaction of all concerned legitimately expecting that they were entitled to the upgradation of pay scales in terms of the policy decision of the Government and the scheme formulated.
Absence of any intentional error or misrepresentation on the part of the petitioners as well as no positive act intending to induce the respondents to make wrongful payment, the principle of equity would come to the rescue of the petitioners and they cannot be made to suffer and the orders of the respondents cannot be permitted to take retrospective effect.
In this regard reference can also be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana 1995(1) Service Cases Today 668, where the Hon'ble Court held as under :- "However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances the amount paid till date may not be recovered from the appellant."
4.
In the case of Gurdeep Kumar Uppal and others (supra) also the Hon'ble Apex Court granted similar relief to the petitioner and rejected the contention of the respondents that they could recover the amount already paid and held as under :-  "However, we make it clear that if any of the respondents has drawn any amount on the basis of the higher scale of pay under the proficiency step-up scheme granted to him by including the period of his ad hoc service then the State Government shall not recover the amount already drawn by the employee though for fixation of the cadre seniority, the position as laid down in this order will govern.
No costs."
5.
Keeping in view the principles of equity and the law settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court, we are of the considered view that the respondents cannot be permitted to recover the amounts which have already been received by the petitioners.
The payment of further amount was obviously stopped in furtherance to the letters Annexures P/6 to P/8 in the year 1999-2000 itself.
The writ petitions have been filed subsequent thereto.
For the reasons afore-stated, this petition is disposed of with a direction as afore-noticed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.