VK Bali, J - Naresh Kumar, petitioner herein, through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to treat him equal to other persons, to whom PPMG Medal had been awarded and then to grant the same very medal to him.
Primarily, the case of the petitioner is that he was on duty under the command of Inspector/Commandant Officer Shri Rattan Singh on 332000.
On the information received regarding hiding of group of war terrorists in a village, two platoons were sent for the raid with the police of Police Station Makhdumpur.
The petitioner, along with the raiding party, reached in the village and participated in liquidating 4 terrorists.
In the raid aforesaid, a total 11 number of terrorists were killed.
The petitioner also got serious bullet injuries near the neck.
It is further the case of the petitioner that whereas members of the raiding party were awarded PPMG Medal, he was ignored for the same.
2.
In response to the notice of motion issued by this Court, respondents have filed reply and opposed the cause of the petitioner.
It has, inter alia, been pleaded in the written statement that Director General, CRPF, sent recommendations for award of the President Police Medical for Gallantry/Police Medal for gallantry to Shri BR Singh, Commandant and 11 others including the petitioner.
Recommendations of the Director General, CRPF were placed before the High Powered Committee, namely, Central Police Award Committee on 5122000.
After scrutinising all relevant facts of the case, the Committee did not judge gallant action dated 332000 conspicuous individual for award of gallantry medal for 10 other police personnels.
The High Powered Committee, which is handed by Union Home Secretary with all Director Generals of C.P.Os.
as members, has recommended the names of late AS Kareem, Constable, CRPF, for award of President Police Medal for Gallantry and Police Medal for Gallantry to JN Pandey, Constable.
The Committee did not find the gallant action of the petitioner conspicuous individual for award of gallantry medal.
It is further pleaded that the medal has to be awarded to those who have either shown exceptional courage and skill or exhibited conspicuous devotion to duty.
It is not necessary that each and every one, whose name is recommended by the Director General is to be awarded the President Police Medal or Police Medal, as the case may be.
In fact, role of each nominee is critically examined before a decision is taken for award of gallantry medal.
Paragraph third of the Statutes and Rules relating to the President Police Medal/Police Medal is reproduced as follows :-  "Thirdly the medal shall only be awarded to those who either performed act of exceptional courage and skill or exhibited conspicuous devotion to duty as members of the police affairs and police/security organisation within the territory of India."
3.
After hearing learned counsel representing the parties and going through the records of the case, we are of the view that no case is made out for grant of Gallantry Medal to the petitioner.
Statutory rules, reproduced above, apart, we are also of the firm view that it is not necessary that every individual of a raiding party must necessarily get an award.
It all depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
In a given case, it is possible that one individual or some of those, who, constitute the raiding party, may show extra ordinary courage and risk their lives in liquidating the terrorists than others, even in the same group.
As to who, out of the raiding party, had shown courage only to risk his life and liquidated the terrorists is a question of fact, which in the present case, has been gone into by the High Powered Committee.
No occasion at all arises to differ with the opinion of the High Powered Committee nor any such material has been brought on record that may show that the role of the petitioner in the raiding party was the same as of those, who were actually granted Gallantry Medals.
Petition dismissed.