MM Kumar, J - The prayer made by the petitioner in the present writ petition is to the validity of fixing the date of application of notification dated February 3, 1990 (Annexure P-5) whereby the benefit of pension scheme has been extended to the regular employees of the Bhakhra Beas Management Board (for short `the BBMB') only to those, who have been in service on January 1, 1990.
The petitioner having retired earlier to that date has felt aggrieved by the fixation of date and have challenged the same.
2.
The petitioner joined as work charge driver in Beas Satluj Link Project (for brevity `the BSL') at Pandhoh on July 30, 1963.
On the re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab by virtue of provisions of Punjab Re- organisation Act, 1966, the B.S.L.
Project was taken over by the Central Government with effect from November 1, 1966.
He continued to work as work charge under the Seas Construction Board constituted by the Central Government in exercise of powers conferred by section 80(2) of the Act.
On October 1, 1957 BBMB was constituted under Section 79(1) of the Act.
The petitioner was given appointment in the BBMB The petitioner was brought on regular establishment of BBMB with effect from January 1, 1988 in pursuance to the letter dated February 5, 1988 (Annexure P-2).
At the time when the petitioner opted to come over to the regular establishment, it was agreed that for general conditions of service, he was to be governed by the provisions of Punjab Civil Rules as adopted by BBMB from time to time except those pertaining to the payment of gratuity, GPF/CPF and pension because to the regular employees of the BBMB directly recruited by them no provision was made for grant of pension.
It is evident from the office order annexure P-2 that the petitioner himself opted for coming over to regular establishment and also to be governed by GPF/CPF available to the employees of the BBMB The regular employees of the Board succeeded in persuading the Board to promulgate pension scheme, which ultimately was issued on February 3, 1990 vide Annexure P-5 and it was made applicable to those employees, who were in service on January 1, 1990.
The petitioner superannuated on attaining the age of 58 years on October 31, 1989.
On the basis of these facts, the grievance made by the petitioner is that he should have also been granted pension in accordance with the pension scheme issued on February 3, 1990.
3.
The respondents have taken the stand that the petitioner was governed by the provisions of Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, BBMB Employees Provident Fund regulations as well as the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 at the time of his retirement.
Accordingly the petitioner has been granted the benefit of gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act as well as provident fund accumulated under the Employees Provident Fund Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 for the service rendered by him in Beas Construction Board upto March 1984 by the Regional Provident Fund and Commissioner, Chandigarh.
However, he did not submit appropriate application for withdrawal of contributed provident fund available to the employees of the BBMB It is claimed that the benefit of pension was available to those regular employees of the Board, who were in service on January 1, 1990.
The petitioner having retired on October 31, 1989 was not entitled to those benefits.
4.
Mr. GS Bal, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner has exercised his option to come over to the regular establishment of the BBMB because assurance was given by the Board that its regular employees would also be given pension, gratuity etc. on the same terms as is being given to the employees of the Punjab Government under the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
On the basis of this assurance, the petitioner had come over to regular establishment of the BBMB with effect from January 1, 1988.
According to the learned counsel, the demand of the employees of BBMB for grant of pension and gratuity was considered by the then Chairman Lt. Gen. BN Kumar but on account of his assassination, the policy concerning pension could not be implemented and since no Chairman was appointed for a considerable period, no decision for grant of pension to the regular employees of the BBMB could be taken.
The learned counsel has pointed out that the petitioner has lost on both counts namely he has scarified his two years service to come over to the regular establishment of the BBMB as otherwise he would have retired at the age of 60 years and on the other hand the petitioner has lost even the benefit of pension.
He has further pointed out that in these circumstances, the fixation of January 1, 1990 for grant of pensionary benefits must be declared as arbitrary and illegal.
He has further submitted, that there is no rational basis for excluding those, who have retired earlier to January 1, 1990 and granting benefit to those who were in service on January 1, 1990 and thereafter.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130.
He has also referred to a Full Bench judgement of this Court in Rikhi Ram Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1996(4) SCT 640 (P&H) (DB) : 1997(1) RSJ 554 and two judgements of the Supreme Court in the case of V Kasturi v. Managing Director, State Bank of India, Bombay and another, 1998(4) SCT 662 (Panta) : (1998) 8 SCC 30 and Tamilnadu Electricity Board v. R Veerasamy and others, 1999(2) SCT 589 (SC) : 1999(2) RSJ 334.
On the basis of the afore-mentioned judgements, the learned counsel has argued that no financial stringency has been pleaded and, therefore, the pensionary benefits cannot be denied to the petitioner.
He has further contended that the rules considered in the afore-mentioned judgments have specifically provided for prospective application of the rules and since no provision has been made in the pension scheme (Annexure P-5) declaring it to be prospective, it would apply to the case of the petitioner.
5.
Mr. Daya Sarup Nehra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted that it is now well settled principle of law that the contributory provident fund retirees and the pension retirees constitute two distinct classes and no grievance can be made by those, who have retired under the contributory fund scheme as it would not violate Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
For this proposition, the learned counsel has referred to a Constitution Bench judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Krishena Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1990(4) SCC 207 and All India Reserve Bank Retired Officers Association v. Union of India, 1992 Suppl.
(1) SCC 664.
The learned counsel has further argued that the decision to introduce the scheme was taken in December 1989 and it has been made applicable prospectively from January 1, 1990.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel the judgement in DS Nakara's case (supra) would not be applicable to the facts of this case.
There the scheme was made applicable from a retrospective date and the one class of employees was artificially divided in two classes, which persuaded the Supreme Court to hold that the Article 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution was violated.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that this petition is devoid of any merit and is liable to be dismissed.
The contributory fund retirees are a class different than the one, who are to retire under the pension scheme introduced with effect from January 1, 1990.
According to the judgement of the Supreme Court in Krishena Kumar (supra), it has been held that the pension retirees and provident fund retirees constitute distinct classes because of various factors.
In this regard, the observations of their Lordships read as under :  "32.
In Nakara it was never held that both the pension retirees and the PF retirees formed a homogeneous class and that any further classification among them would be violative of Article 14.
On the other hand the Court clearly observed that it was not dealing with the problem of a "fund".
The Railway Contributory Provident Fund is by definition a fund.
Besides, the Government's obligation towards an employee under C.PF Scheme to give the matching contribution begins as soon as his account is opened and ends with his retirement when his rights qua the Government in respect of the Provident Fund is finally crystallized and thereafter no statutory obligation continues.
Whether there still remained a moral obligation is a different matter.
On the other hand under the Pension Scheme the Government's obligation does not begin until the employee retires when only it begins and it continues till the death of the employee.
Thus, on the retirement of an employee Government's legal obligation under the Provident Fund account ends while under the Pension Scheme it begins.
The rules governing the Provident Fund and its contribution and entirely different from the rules governing pension.
It would not, therefore, be reasonable to argue that what is applicable to the pension retirees must also equally be applicable to PF retirees.
This being the legal position the rights of each individual PF retiree finally crystallized on his retirement whereafter no continuing obligation remained while, on the other hand, as regards Pension retirees, the obligation continued till their death.
The continuing obligation of the State in respect of pension retirees is adversely affected by fall in rupee value and rising prices which, considering the corpus already received by the PF retirees they would not be so adversely affected ipso facto.
It cannot, therefore, be said that it was the ratio decided in Nakara that the State's obligation towards its PF retirees must be the same as that towards the pension retirees.
An imaginary definition of obligation to include all the Government retirees in a class was not decided and could not form the basis for any classification for the purpose of his case.
Nakara cannot, therefore, be an authority for this case."
7.
The other argument that the cut off date violates the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution is equally devoid of merit and is liable to be rejected.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :  "This argument is fallacious in view of the fact that while in case of pension retirees who are alive the Government has a continuing obligation and if one is affected by dearness the others may also be similarly affected.
In case of PF retirees each one's rights having finally crystallized on the date of retirement and receipt of PF benefits and there being no continuing obligation thereafter they could not be treated at par with the living pensioners.
How the corpus after retirement of a PF retiree was affected or benefited by prices and interest rise was not kept any track of by the Railways.
It appears in each of the cases of option the specified date bore a definite nexus to the objects sought to be achieved by giving of the option.
Option once exercised was told to have been final.
Options were exercisable vice versa.
It is clarified by Mr. Kapil Sibal that the specified date has been fixed in relation to the reason for giving the option and only the employees who retired after the specified date and before and after the date of the notification were made eligible."
Similar views have been expressed by the Supreme Court in numerous other judgments and reference may be made to the All India Reserve Bank Retired Officers Association v. Union of India, 1992 Suppl.
(1) SCC 664, Indian Ex- Servicemen League v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 468 (SC) : (1991) 2 SCC 104, State of Rajasthan v. Rajasthan Pensioners Samaj, (1991) 2 Suppl.
141, Union of India v. KG Radha Krishana Panickar, 1998(2) SCT 604 (SC) : (1998) 5 SCC 111, State of Punjab v. JL Gupta, 2002(2) SCT 8 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 3410 and V Kasturi, (supra).
8.
The principles enunciated in the afore-mentioned judgments of the Supreme Court when applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that the pension scheme (Annexure P-5) has been made applicable to those employees, who were in service on January 1, 1990.
It is undisputed that the petitioner has retired on October 31, 1989.
He has taken the benefit of gratuity under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and he has also withdrawn the Employees Provident Fund accumulation for his service rendered under the Beas Construction Board.
Even the contributory funds has been withdrawn by the petitioner after his retirement as on that date no pension scheme was in vogue.
Therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.