JS Narang, J - Petitioner Nos. 1 to 11 are employed as Moharrirs with the Municipal Corporation, Amritsar and are posted at different octroi Barriers on the outer limits in the city of Amritsar.
They are discharging the functions of collecting octroi and maintaining the records pertaining thereto and also incidental clerical work.
The petitioner Nos. 117 to 222 have been employed as Peons in the Octroi Department of the Corporation.
2.
The Corporation maintains a joint seniority list of all the clerical establishment and whenever a clerk is posted for performing the job of collection of Octroi, his designation is changed from that of clerk to Moharrir.
All the petitioners are old employees of the Corporation as they had been employed prior to 1969 on different dates.
It shall be appropriate to mention here that prior to incorporation of Municipal Corporation of Amritsar, which was incorporated on 3.12.1976, the Municipal Committee was in existence and the employment to the petitioners was granted accordingly.
Upon incorporation of the Corporation, the assets, liabilities and the employees of the Municipal Committee, Amritsar became those of Municipal Corporation.
Since the incorporation of the Corporation, all the functions of Municipal Committee came to be preformed by the Corporation.
Resultantly, the employees of the Committee continue to perform the same duties on their jobs but their employer came to be the Corporation.
3.
However, a Pay Committee known as Punjab Municipal Employees Pay Committee submitted a report in the year 1969 and in the report, provisions have been made for the work hours, weekly off days, public holidays over time allowance and leave etc. A specific head has been provided known as Holidays and leave, which reads as under :-  "1108 Holidays and Leave - (1) Public Holidays, casual leave of other kinds to the employees covered by the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and the Factories Act, 1948 should be given as provided in the Punjab Industrial Establishment (National and Festival Holidays and Casual and Sick Leave) Act, 1965 and the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 governing the grant of maternity leave; and (2) the other employees including office staff should have public holidays, casual leave and other kinds of leave as admissible to corresponding Government employees."
4.
The Government of Punjab notifies the number of public holidays to be observed in each calender year and those holidays are adopted by the Corporation.
However, a settlement is stated to have been arrived at between the Corporation and Nagarpalika Karamchari Sangh (Regd.
), Amritsar whereby the public holidays stood defined and if Moharrir, Octroi Peons, Well Driver, Assistant Tubewell Driver and Chowkidar upon Water Works, if required to perform duties, the said employees will be paid at double the wages as admissible under the rules.
Copy of the same has been appended as Annexure P-1.
The petitioners have stated that they had never ever become the members of the Nagarpalika Karamchari Sangh.
The aforesaid resolution was incorporated as resolution No. 1235/7 by the Corporation but the same was annulled by the Government of Punjab while exercising powers under Section 236 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
5.
Some of the petitioners addressed communication to the Corporation demanding the arrears of payment in pursuant to have worked on public holidays since 1974.
The plea taken is that they are entitled to be paid double the wages having worked on the said public holidays.
The Corporation did not act or react in pursuant to the said notice.
Consequently, the petitioners filed applications under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act for computing in terms of the money, the amounts which are admissible to them for having worked on gazetted holidays from January 1974 to December, 1979.
The application was contested, reply was filed which was adopted in respect of all the individual applications filed by the claimants.
Replication was filed.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, the following issues had been framed.
1.
Whether the applications are not maintainable as alleged ?
2.
Whether the applicants are entitled to the amount claimed ?
3.
Relief.
6.
The parties before the Labour Court deposed that they shall rely upon the answers submitted to the interrogatories.
Resultantly, the replies submitted to the interrogatories were submitted before the Labour Court.
It is alleged that the Corporation made a categoric admission that all the public holidays, which had been declared by the Government of Punjab, were also being observed as public holidays by the Corporation.
It is further alleged that the corporation admitted that the post of Octroi Moharrir was always treated as equivalent to that of the Clerk.
In addition thereto, the witness who appeared for and on behalf of the Corporation stated that the octroi department is not a public utility essential services department.
However, reiterated that the post of Octroi Moharrir is equivalent to the post of a Clerk in grade and status.
He further admitted that the Octroi Moharrir can also be transferred to other departments of the Corporation.
It has also been admitted that the petitioners were not the members of the Nagarpalika Karamchari Sangh.
7.
Upon pleadings of the parties and the evidence brought on record by way of interrogatories and otherwise, the Labour Court held that the petitioners do not have any existing right and resultantly, no such claim can be filed under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
A copy of the order has been appended as Annexure P-11.
Being dissatisfied with the aforesaid order, the present writ petition has been filed whereby the aforesaid order has been made the subject matter of challenge.
8.
The Corporation has contested the petition and a detailed written statement has been filed.
The plea taken is that the post of Octroi Moharrir cannot be equated with any post in the Government Department because such posts do not exist in the Government Departments.
It is further averred that there is no resolution passed by the Corporation or by the erstwhile Municipal Committee to pay double the amount to the employees who would work on the public holidays.
However, if a corresponding post exists in the department of Government, employee of the Municipal Corporation would still get the same benefit.
It is further pleaded that the public holidays were adopted for the office staff and not for the field staff.
Since the Octroi Moharrirs belong to the field staff, the benefit of the public holidays by way of payment of double the wages would not be available to them.
It has been further pleaded that the resolution No. 1237 dated 121970 and 614 dated 1391971 and 260 dated 30.6.1972 had been annulled by the Government of Punjab vide order dated 571974.
Thus the question of granting extra salary for six days in a year did not arise.
So far as their claim that a right had accrued to the petitioner in pursuant to the resolution adopted and accepted by the Corporation is neither here nor there.
Resultantly, the Labour Court correctly decided the issue and held that the petitioners had no existing right as the resolution allegedly adopted by the Corporation stood annulled by the Government.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners, services are governed under the Civil Services rules, as such, are entitled to all such holidays which are declared by the Government and which are adopted by the Corporation and that on those days the offices are to remain closed.
Resultantly the employees required to work on such holidays shall be entitled to double the wages.
It has been further argued that the petitioner acquired an existing right and that the Labour Court was required to adjudicate the enforceability of that right and that the right to the amount claimed fell within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court.
Reliance has also been placed upon the provisions of the Punjab Industrial Establishment (National and Festival Holidays and Casual and Sick Leave) Act, 1965.
It is argued that under the provisions of that Act, the workmen are entitled to all the Festival and National Holidays.
The applicability of the provisions of Minimum Wages Act have also been sought to be enforced and that according to Sub-rule (4) of rule 23 of the Rules, a person called upon to work on national and Festival holidays shall be paid as overtime work, which according to sub-para 25(2) is nothing less than double of the earning wages.
10.
Thus, the petitioner are entitled under law to claim the wages twice the ordinary wages of the working day and that the claim being based on existing right under the statute, the application was maintainable and that the Labour Court fell into error in dismissing the said application.
Reference has been made to some of the orders passed by the Labour Court.
Upon the applications filed by some of such similarly situated persons, the relief has been granted accordingly.
Copies have been appended as Annexures P-12, P-13, P-15 and P- 17.
The Civil Writ Petition filed against the said orders have been dismissed and that in the case of Chander Shekhar v Municipal Corporation, the order dated 7.9.1992 passed by this Court has been appended as Annexure P-14.
Similarly, in the case of Mohinder Kumar v. Municipal Corporation, the order dated 17.9.1992 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 215 of 1992, has been appended as copy Annexure P-16.
Some of the claimants who filed such similar applications before the Labour Court at Bathinda, similar relief was granted and the said order has been upheld by this Court while dismissing in limine the Civil Writ Petition No. 6987 of 1998, Copy Annexure P-18.
Against this order, the SLP also stood dismissed by the apex Court vide order dated 1041998, Copy Annexure P-19.
11.
It is argued that the claim of such similarly situated persons have been granted relief by different Labour Courts and the same having been affirmed by this Court, the claim of the petitioners also need to be granted accordingly.
12.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner, I find that the point which had arisen for consideration before the Labour Court is :-  "Whether the petitioners have existing right and the Municipal Corporation had ever taken the decision to allow them double the wages against the public holidays as alleged by them ?"
The declaration of the holidays is primarily dependent upon the notification of Government of Punjab and that the Municipal Corporation adopts the same.
The Municipal Corporation has concededly accepted that the public holdings are to be observed by the Municipal Corporation but the same are not meant for field offices.
Thus, the octroi department of the Corporation i.e., the Moharrirs and the Octroi Clerks are not entitled to these holidays.
The Municipal Committee infact had taken a decision and passed a resolution on 12.2.1970 and similarly on other dates resolving that six festival and national holidays should be given to the Octroi Moharrirs and the Octroi Peons etc. and in case they are required to perform duties on these days, they shall be paid double the wages.
However, this resolution did not find favour with the Government and vide order dated 571974, the said resolution was annulled.
It would mean that the Moharrirs and the Octroi Peons etc. are not entitled to national festival holidays and that the question of payment of double the wages did not arise.
Since the resolution of Municipal Corporation stood annulled, no existing right remains claimable by the petitioners.
13.
In the first instance, labelling a right to be an existing right it has to be established that the right came into existence, it is only then the claim could be made and an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act would be sustainable.
The question could not be raised before the labour Court as to whether the applicants should be given public holidays or double the wages in lieu of working on the said public holidays.
The Industrial dispute has to be raised where the right has come into existence and the enforcement of the same is being claimed by way of speaking commutation and award in pursuant thereto from the Tribunal.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to establish that the petitioners had an existing right regarding which the dispute had been referred to the Labour Court.
Though the Municipal Corporation did pass a resolution but by virtue of the powers conferred upon the Government under Section 236 of the Act, the resolution stood annulled.
Consequently, no right came into existence.
The order dated 571974 has not been made subject matter of challenges anywhere.
Thus, I hold that the Labour Court has correctly dismissed the Applications of the petitioners.
In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.