Satish Kumar Mittal, J - Shri Kans Raj, petitioner herein, has filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him the pensionary and other retiral benefits after regularising his services which were not regularised illegally and arbitrarily while he was in service and after counting his entire ad-hoc service upto the age of superannuation.
He has also prayed for quashing of the letter dated 3111992 (Annexure P-4) vide which respondent No. 2 rejected the claim of the petitioner for the grant of provisional pension and other retiral benefits on the ground that he was serving as ad-hoc employee on the date of his retirement and his services were not regularised till his retirement.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Compounder/Pharmacist on ad-hoc basis by respondent No. 3 on 1231963.
He was relieved of his duties on 31.7.1968 and after giving break of one day, he was again re-appointed on ad-hoc basis on the same post on 2.8.1968.
His services were again terminated on 511971.
On representation, the petitioner was again appointed on ad-hoc basis on 26.11.1971 and he was given a fresh appointment for a period of six months or till a regular appointment was made.
After serving more than 10 years, the services of the petitioner were terminated with effect from 2371982 vide order dated 1971972 on the ground that he did not possess prescribed qualification and his services could not be regularised.
The petitioner challenged that order in this Court by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 3473 of 1982, which was allowed vide order dated 18111988 (Annexure P-1), wherein it was held that the services of the petitioner were illegally terminated in spite of availability of the post.
It was further held that the respondents have discriminated while terminating the services of the petitioner and regularising the services of a similarly situated employee, namely Jagmohan Malhotra, after giving relaxation in the prescribed qualification.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner was possessing better qualification than the said Jagmohan Malhotra, his services were not regularised and the same were illegally terminated.
It was observed in the said judgment that the respondent-State has treated the petitioner in most unkind manner and it was a fit case where services of the petitioner should have been regularised by giving relaxation in qualifications.
3.
In view of the aforesaid judgment, the petitioner was reinstated in service on 2951989 and ultimately he retired from service on 3181991 on attaining the age of superannuation.
In spite of the aforesaid observation made by this Court, services of the petitioner were not regularised before his retirement and he retired as an ad-hoc employee.
Therefore, he was not granted pensionary benefits.
After his retirement, the petitioner filed representation to the respondents for grant of pension and other benefits, but ultimately vide letter dated 3111992, respondent No. 2 intimated the petitioner that since his services were not regularised and he retired as an ad-hoc employee, therefore, the benefits of provisional pension cannot be granted to him.
However, it was observed in this order that case of the employee to grant him pension will be taken only if his services are regularised and decision in this regard will be taken after the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India where the matter regarding regularisation was pending.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed the present petition challenging the action of the respondents while not granting pensionary benefits to him.
4.
Pursuant to the notice issued by this Court, the respondents filed the written statement, in which they have stated that since the entire service of the petitioner was on ad-hoc basis, therefore, he was not entitled for any pension under the rules.
However, it was mentioned in the written statement that the case of grant of pensionary benefits to the petitioner will be considered after the regularisation of his services, which depend upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana and others etc. etc. v. Piara Singh and others etc.etc., 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : JT 1992(5) SC 179 and the petitioner cannot be granted provisional pension, as there was no instructions from the Government to grant provisional pension to the employees, who retired on ad-hoc basis.
5.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner had completed more than 20 years of continuous service on ad-hoc basis when he retired from service, therefore, he was entitled for regularisation of his services and the respondents should have regularised his services on the basis of his long ad-hoc service.
It was further contended that while setting aside his termination order, this Court had observed that the services of the petitioner should have been regularised after giving relaxation in qualification but inspite of that services of the petitioner were not regularised and the services of similarly situated employee, namely Jagmohan Malhotra, were regularised after giving relaxation in qualification.
He submits that since the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) has observed that services of the ad-hoc employees would be regularised as per the policy decision taken by the State, on 2981991, the State of Punjab issued a policy for regularisation of the services of all those ad-hoc or temporary appointed employees holding Class III posts who had completed a minimum of two years of service on 31.12.1990 and who were in service on that day.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that case of the petitioner is fully covered under the said policy and the petitioner was legally entitled to be regularised under the said policy before his retirement.
He also submitted that if services of the petitioner are deemed to be regularised under the aforesaid policy, then he was also entitled for the pensionary benefits after counting his ad-hoc services for grant of pension in view of the Full bench decision of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(5) SLR 27.
6.
Learned State counsel could not controvert the factual position in the present case.
He only submitted that the case of the petitioner for regularisation was not considered prior to his retirement as the matter was pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra).
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the case and am of the opinion that the petition deserves to be allowed.
Admittedly, the petitioner was working continuously on ad-hoc basis at least from 26.11.1971 till the date of his retirement on 3181991.
The order dated 1971982, vide which the petitioner was terminated from services on the ground that he was not eligible for regularisation was set aside by this Court and he was ordered to be reinstated with continuous service.
It was also observed in the said order that services of the petitioner should have been regularised keeping in view the ad-hoc service rendered by him.
In spite of that, the respondents did not regularise the services of the petitioner before his retirement and his case for regularisation was not considered on the ground that the matter regarding regularisation of services is pending in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra).
Even after the decision of that case by the Apex Court and even after the policy decision dated 2941991 taken by the State, the respondents did not consider the case of the regularisation of the petitioner and granting him the pensionary benefits to him.
In the letter dated 3111992 (Annexure P-4), respondent No. 2 has mentioned that case of the petitioner for grant of pensionary benefits will be considered after the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Since the State of Punjab took a policy decision to regularise the services of ad-hoc employees in view of the statement made before the Hon'ble Supreme in Piara Singh's case (supra), the respondents should have regularised the services of the petitioner.
Since the respondents have regularised the services of the similarly situated employee, namely, Jagmohan Malhotra, after relaxing the essential qualification, the case of the petitioner should also have been considered on the similar footings and after taking the decision of regularising his services, his case for grant of pensionary benefits should have been decided.
For counting the qualified service for the purpose of pension and other retiral benefits, the ad-hoc service rendered by the petitioner immediately before the date of his regularisation should have been taken into consideration and the amount of pension payable to the petitioner should be calculated.
8.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to pass an order of regularisation of services of the petitioner and thereafter grant the pensionary and other retiral benefits to him within a period of three months by treating him as a regular employee on the date of retirement and after taking into consideration the ad-hoc service rendered by him before his regularisation.
It is further directed that after calculation of the pension and other pensionary and retiral benefits payable to the petitioner, the arrears of the same be paid to him with interested at the rate of 12% per annum.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.