Swatanter Kumar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners at some length.
2.
This case is a glaring example of least concern showed by the government servant who appears as witness on behalf of the department in cases pending before the learned labour Court.
Even if the workman has not proved his case by leading definite and cogent evidence, still the witness appearing on behalf of the management supplied the lacunas in that regard and intentionally or otherwise did not produce the relevant or complete record before the labour Court.
This attitude resulted in drawing adverse inference against the department by the labour Court for non-production of relevant evidence.
In all these events, the consequences are that public money is wasted.
Though the Labour Court in this case has taken some safeguards and has granted backwages only from the date of the notice which is 9 years subsequent to the date of termination.
The Labour Court in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum- Processing Service Society Ltd & Anr., 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : JT 1999(3) SC 38 has moulded the relief and has rightly declined to answer the reference in favour of the workman.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the workman had not worked for 240 days and no person junior to him has been regularised.
Both these submissions have no merit in view of the categorical findings recorded by the Labour Court upon proper appreciation of evidence.
MW1 has clearly admitted in his cross-examination, that, "daily wagers used to be employed on M/Rolls record as indicated in their written statement before one month and after one month.
But he has not explained anywhere as to why he has not produced the record from 1089 to 131190.
I do agree with the AR of the workman that the entire record of the service of the workman has not been produced by the respondent intentionally though maintained by them and they have intentionally withheld the best evidence from the Court.
So, the case of the respondent is directly hit by authority referred to and relied upon by the AR of the workman cited as Bal Kishan v. PO (supra) and it has to be held that the workmen have completed continuous service of 240 days so as to bring their case within the ambit of Section 25-F of the Act.
Similarly, the workman has also stated in para No. 3 of his statement of claim that Gurdev Singh etc. have been recruited after termination of their service without giving them any opportunity and this statement has been repeated by WW1 in his examination-in-Chief on this point.
As per settled law to any specific point deposed by him in his examination-in-chief the same shall be deemed to have been admitted by the opposite party.
Besides as already stated above, MW1 has admitted the regularisation of some workman junior to the workman concerned without giving them any chance of re-employment.
So in my view, there is no violation of Sections 25-G and 25-H of the Act.
As per settled law, where there is dispute violation of Sections 25-G and 25-H, there is no requirement of 240 days continuous service as required u/s 25-F of the Act by the workman although in this case each workman has proved their continuous service of 240 days in a calender year so as to bring their cases in the ambit of Section 25-F of the Act.
For this view, reference may be made to a case reported as 1996(4) RSJ 87, S Saiyam and others v. Central Bank of India wherein it has been held that re-employment of retrenched workman required by Section 25-F is not confined only to the category of retrenched workman covered by Section 25-F who have been in continuous service for not less than one year."
4.
Nothing has been brought to our notice which could persuade us to take view contrary to the one taken by the Labour Court which is in consonance with settled principle of law and is based on proper appreciation of evidence particularly of MW1.
While declining to interfere in the impugned award, we dismiss the petition with clear direction to the petitioners to take appropriate steps in the light of the above observations and issue directions to the officials.
We may also notice that in future the Court would not hesitate to impose heavy costs which may be recovered ultimately from the erring official.
Petition dismissed.