Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner Pawan Kumar, who at the time of filing of the writ petition was working as a Statistical Officer in the Transport Department of the State of Haryana has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of Certiorari to quash the decision dated May 12, 1999, vide which the claim of the petitioner to grant pay parity to Statistical Officers of Transport Department with the Research Officers Working in the ESA Department has been rejected.
A further direction has been sought in the writ petition to grant the pay scale of Rs. 2375-3600/- to the petitioner with effect from May 5, 1990 and the scale of Rs. 7450-11500/- with effect from January 1, 1996.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed :-  The petitioner states that he was appointed as Statistical Assistant in the Transport Department and was promoted as Statistical Officer with effect from October 16, 1996.
It is the case of the petitioner that the Statistical Officers in the Transport Department were getting the scale of Rs. 250-600 prior to February 1, 1969 and on the recommendation of the Pay Commission the Statistical Officers of the Economical and Statistical Organisation (hereinafter called as ESA department) were granted the scale of Rs. 350-800 with effect from February 1, 1969 and that in this manner the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department were discriminated.
On the recommendation of the Transport Department, the Finance Department vide notification No. 1141-FD (PRC)-70/8982 dated April 9, 1970, removed the anomaly and directed that the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department shall also be entitled to the scale of Rs. 350-800 with effect from February 1, 1969 which was admissible to the Statistical Officers of the ESA Department.
Subsequently, with effect from April 1, 1979, the pay scales were again revised and on the aforesaid revision on the recommendations of the Pay Commission, the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department as well as ESA department were again granted the scale of Rs. 750-1450.
However, subsequently with effect from February 1, 1981 when the pay scales of the Statistical Officers of the ESA department were revised from Rs. 750-1450 to Rs. 800-1600 then the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department were ignored.
This anomaly was brought to the notice of the Finance Department by the Transport Commissioner recommending that the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department were also entitled to the same pay scales, which were admissible to the Statistical Officers of the ESA Department.
The aforesaid recommendation of the Transport Commissioner made on June 25, 1983 is appended as Annexure P-2 to the present petition.
The aforesaid recommendation made by the Transport Commissioner was accepted by the Finance Department and the anomaly in the case of Statistical Officers of the Transport Department was removed and the aforesaid officers of the Transport Department were also granted the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600 with effect from February 1, 1981.
An order passed in this regard by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Transport Department dated April 24, 1984 is appended as Annexure P-3 with the present petition.
3.
The petitioner further states that the pay scales were again revised on the recommendations of the Pay Commission with effect from January 1, 1986 and the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department as well as ESA Department were granted the same pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 with effect from January 1, 1986.
On further revision of the pay scales with effect from May 1, 1990, pay scales of the Statistical Officers of the ESA department were revised again from Rs. 2000-3200 to Rs. 3275-3600.
A copy of the aforesaid revision of pay scales of the Statistical Officers in ESA department has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the petition.
4.
The specific case put up by the petitioner is that the Statistical Assistants in all the departments were having the same qualifications and, therefore, the State of Haryana had taken a decision on January 20, 1992 that all Statistical Assistants having same qualifications and designation as having in ESA organisation would be granted the scale of Rs. 1600-2660 and in pursuance of the aforesaid decision, all Statistical Assistants in all departments were granted the scale of Rs. 1600-2660 and thereafter they were treated at par, whenever pay scales were again revised from time to time.
5.
The petitioner, still further, states that he was promoted as Statistical Assistant on October 16, 1996 and then represented that as a Statistical Officer in the Transport Department, he was also entitled to the pay scales of Rs. 2375-3600 since the Statistical Officers in the Transport Department were also entitled to the similar scale as Statistical Officers in the ESA Department with effect from May 1, 1990.
However, at that stage the representation made by the petitioner was turned down by the State Government by making an observation that the aforesaid anomaly would be taken into consideration whenever the pay scales were revised on the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission.
The aforesaid communication dated January 28, 1998 issued by the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport Department addressed to the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, is appended as Annexure P-6 with the present petition.
6.
The petitioner has stated that a similar anomaly existed in the case of the Statistical Officer working in the Directorate of Land Records, Haryana, and for the redressal of their grievance and for removal of the aforesaid anomaly, the aforesaid Statistical Officers of the Directorate of Land Records approached this Court by way of a Civil Writ Petition No. 5090 of 1996.
The aforesaid civil writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgement dated February 19, 1997 and thereafter in compliance to the Court directions, the aforesaid anomaly was removed and they were granted the pay scales of Rs. 2375-3600/- with effect from May 1, 1990.
A copy of the judgement passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 5090 has been appended as Annexure P-7 to the present petition whereas the copy of the compliance order pursuant to the directions of this Court in the aforesaid writ petition is appended as Annexure P-8 to the present petition.
It has further been clarified by the petitioner that Statistical Officers, when they are posted in Head Office with ESA Department are designated as Research Officers and when the same very persons are posted in the field are designated as District Statistics Officers.
7.
The petitioner states that all the Statistical Officers in the ESA Department, who were in the scale of Rs. 2375-3600 were granted the scale of Rs. 7450-11500 with effect from January 1, 1996.
On the aforesaid revision, an anomaly had arisen in the case of the Statistical Officers of Forest Department but the Finance Department on their representation removed the same and the Statistical Officers working in the Forest Department were granted the pay scale of Rs. 7450-11500 with effect from January 1, 1996.
8.
Since there was an anomaly in the pay scale of the petitioner vis-a-vis, the Statistical Officers in the ESA department, therefore, he approached this Court through a Writ Petition No. 16530 of 1998.
Vide orders dated October 28, 1998, a Division Bench of this Court disposed of the writ petition with a direction to the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Government of Haryana, Finance Department, to consider and take action in accordance with law on the representation filed by the petitioner.
A copy of the aforesaid direction issued by this Court in CWP No. 16530 of 1998 has been appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition.
9.
In compliance with the directions issued by this Court, the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the State Government called for the comments from the Transport Department for the purposes of disposing of the representation of the petitioner.
A copy of the aforesaid comments has been appended as Annexure P-11 to the present petition.
It is the specific case of the petitioner that not only the qualifications, duties and responsibilities of Statistical Officers in the Transport Department and ESA department are identical but even the Statistical Officers/Research Officers of the ESA Department are some times posted in the Transport Department as Statistical Officers on deputation.
In fact one such order illustrating the aforesaid averments by the petitioner has been appended as Annexure P-12.
10.
Though the Transport Department vide recommendation Annexure P-11 had recommended that the qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the Statistical Officers in the ESA, Land Records, Forest and Transport Department are the same and had requested the Finance Department to remove the anomaly and grant the same pay scales to the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department but still the Financial Commissioner-respondent No. 3 rejected the claim made by the petitioner, vide the order dated May 12, 1999.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P-13 with the petition.
11.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the order Annexure P-13 and has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
As noticed above, his twin prayers are for quashing the orders Annexure P-13 rejecting his claim for pay parity with the Statistical Officers in the ESA department and for issuance of directions to the respondents to grant him the pay scale of Rs. 2375-3600 with effect from May 1, 1990 and the scale of Rs. 7450-1150 with effect from January 1, 1996.
12.
On notice having been issued to the respondents, they have put in appearance and filed a written statement contesting the claim made by the petitioner.
The case put up by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is as follows:  "a) The post of Research Officer in ESA Department has different modes of recruitment i.e. both by direct recruitment as well as by promotion from amongst Assistant Research Officer having different sets of scale i.e. Rs. 6500-9900 (2000-3200) and qualifications to those of single post for Statistical Officer in Transport Department which is filled by promotion from Statistical Assistant having different scale of Rs. 5450-8000 (1600-2660 pre- revised).
Both the posts are governed under distinct service rules and conditions of service, the avenues for promotion are also not identical as their further promotional posts carry different sets of pay scale in comparison with other officers of the respondent-department and have their distinct hierarchical structure.
The only post of Statistical Officer held by the petitioner has the avenue of promotion as Deputy Transport Controller, which post carried the scale of Rs. 8000-13500 (Rs. 2200-4000 pre-revised).
The Research Officers in the ESA Department are promoted as Deputy E.S.A.
in the pay scale of Rs. 10000-13900 (Rs. 3000-4500 pre-revised).
therefore, any artificial parity if created as per contention of the petitioner will put the existing hierarchical system of the respondent-department in an anomalous situation leading to multiplicity of claims and counter claims for higher pay scales on the basis of discrimination within the services of the respondent- department.
Hence, the present petition seeking an artificial parity with other departments is not maintainable."
13.
We have heard Sh. RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Sh. Amol Rattan, the learned AAG, Haryana and with their assistance have also gone through the record of this case.
14.
Sh. RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that in fact once a conscious decision had been taken to grant a parity to the Statistical Assistants in all the departments and even all the Statistical Officers working in various departments were granted the similar scales and on various occasions when the pay scales were revised still the aforesaid parity between Statistical Officers working in various departments including the Transport Department was maintained with the Statistical Officers of the ESA department, then there was no occasion at all the treat the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department, such as the petitioner, differently vis-a-vis the Statistical Officers of the ESA department.
Sh. Malik has further submitted that when the Transport Commissioner and Secretary Transport Department had strongly recommended that the qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the Statistical Officers in the ESA, Land Records, Forest and Transport Department were similar and had requested the Finance Department to remove the anomaly and grant the same pay scales to the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department then there was absolutely no reason to reject the just claim of the petitioner.
15.
On the other hand Sh. Amol Rattan, learned AAG, Haryana has supported the order Annexure P-13 by submitting that in fact the Research Officers in the ESA department had a different mode of recruitment i.e. both by direct recruitment as well as by promotion and further that both the posts were governed under distinct service rules and conditions of service.
It has also been argued by Sh. Amol Rattan that the avenues for promotion of the two officers belonging to the aforesaid two departments were also not identical and, therefore, there was no question of the pay parity between the aforesaid officers of the two departments.
16.
After having given our thoughtful consideration to the above arguments, we find that the present petition deserves to succeed.
The detailed facts have been noticed by us above.
The various averments made in the petition with regard to the similarity of pay scales between the Statistical Officers of the Transport Department and the ESA department and the removal of the anomaly in the year 1970 have not been denied by the respondents in the written statement.
Rather in reply to the aforesaid averments in para 4 of the written statement, it is stated that "para 4 of the petition is further admitted being a matter of record."
17.
At this stage, it might also be relevant to refer to the recommendations made by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, Chandigarh to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Transport Department vide his recommendations Annexure P-11.
The relevant extract of the aforesaid recommendations is as under :  "The post of Statistical Officer in the Transport Department has all along been equated to the post of Research Officer/Distt.
Statistical Officer in the ESO The qualification and experience prescribed for the posts have also been similar.
The nature of duties and responsibilities of these posts in both the departments have also been similar.
The Research Officer, Miss Indira Sehgal of the ESO has also worked on deputation on the post of Statistical Officer in the Transport Department from 7.11.1988 to 841991 and she also been drawing the scale of Rs. 2375-3600 w.e.f.
151990 while working in the Transport Department.
Hence, there is no reason why this grade should not be given to the person from the Transport Department.
The incumbents of similar posts in the Land Record Department and Forest Department are also getting the scale equivalent to Research Officer of Economic and Statistical Organisation.
Hence, the incumbents of the post of Statistical Officer in the Transport Department also deserve to be given the grade of Rs. 2375-3600/- w.e.f.
151990 and grade of Rs. 7450-11500 w.e.f.
1.1.1996."
18.
Thus having covered the entire factual matrix, let us now advert to the law on the point in controversy.
In Kirpal Jeet v. State of Punjab and others, 1987(4) SLR 594, this Court had held :-  "Once the State Government decided to equate the pay scale of a certain post with that of another post, it is not open to it to discriminate between the incumbents of the two posts for the grant of pay scale at the time of subsequent revision of pay scales.
Such an action would be wholly violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as it would be denying the equality of opportunity in the matter of employment.
Incidentally, in the present case the petitioner is in a much better position.
She possesses better qualifications than those possessed by the Lecturers (Junior Scale), who have been placed in the higher pay scales.
She had also been entrusted, throughout her career, with duties of purely educational nature involving the imparting of instructions at various levels.
The mere fact that she has to work in the office of the Director, Public Instruction, Punjab, instead of the educational institutions, is no ground to deny the same pay scale to her which she would have got had she been required to work in the educational institutions."
19.
In the case of Dr. Sukhdev Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) SCT 209 (P&H), a Single Bench of this Court had also held that once the pay scales of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons were equated to the pay scales of PCMS Class II doctors and this had been done on the representation of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons then when subsequently the pay scales of the PCMS Class II doctors were revised then there could be no discrimination in the pay scales of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, who were also entitled to the similar revision of their pay scales as well.
20 Again in the case of Haryana State Biologists Association v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 198 (P&H)(DB), a Division Bench of this Court had observed as follows :  "After going through the pleadings of the parties and various judgments cited on their behalf, we find that once a parity in the pay scale of the employees in two categories is granted, the same cannot be withdrawn and the parity disturbed.
Once the State is shown to have made a conscious decision of providing parity in the pay scales of employees falling in two different cadres, they cannot be permitted to deprive one class of category by disturbing the parity.
Any order passed or action taken which results in deprivation of the parity in the pay scales would be discriminatory being violative of the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution requiring interference."
21.
A reference may also be made with some advantage to the observations made by another Division each of this Court in the case of JL Bhutani v. State of Haryana, 1997(3) SCT 408 (P&H)(DB) wherein it was observed as follows :  "13.
Article 14 of the Constitution provides equality of treatment to the similarly situated persons.
Similarly Article 16 of the Constitution provides for equality in the public appointments.
Under these two articles two set of employees can be treated differently on the basis of reasonable classification based on objective and discernible data.
It is possible for the Government to classify the employees on the basis of nature of duties, extent of responsibilities and qualifications etc.
These factors can be taken into consideration while determining the revision of pay.
Government can give a higher scale of pay to the persons discharging the duties on a post which carries higher responsibility/onerous duties but where all persons are similarly situated, it would not be permissible to the Government to treat the employees differently in the matter of revision of pay scales......" This Court has again taken a similar view with regard to a similar controversy in case of Babu Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(4) SCT 670 (P&H) and Pritam Das and others v. The State of Punjab and Another, 2000(4) SCT 987 (P&H).
22.
Thus under the facts and circumstances as narrated above and in view of the detailed discussion on the controversy and also taking into consideration the consistent view of this Court in various judgments as noticed above, we have no hesitation in holding that the claim made by the petitioner is totally justified and the order dated May 12, 1999 (Annexure P-13) suffers from the vice of a hostile discrimination and has been passed in clear violation of the principles enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and, therefore, is liable to be quashed.
The petitioner accordingly would be entitled to the pay scales in parity with their counterparts in ESA organisation, Haryana.
23.
Accordingly, we allow this petition, quash the orders dated May 12, 1999 (Annexure P-13) and direct the respondents to equate the pay scales of the petitioner with that of his counterparts in ESA Organisation, Haryana.
The petitioner would be entitled to the pay scales asked by him with effect from May 1, 1990 but the grant of arrears to him is confined to 38 months prior to the filing of the present petition i.e. March 24, 2000.
Let the arrears be calculated and paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by the respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.