Swatanter Kumar, J - According to the workman-respondent, his services were terminated on 2541991.
He raised an industrial dispute by serving a demand notice upon the appropriate authority on 22111991.
Reply to the demand notice was filed by the management.
The stand of the management was that the workman had abandoned his employment with effect from 2541991 and as such his name was struck off from the rolls.
The workman had claimed full back wages in the statement of claim.
Claim raised by the workman was contested and opposed by the management.
However, the reference was made to the Labour Court.
On 21101998 the Labour Court published his award holding the termination of the workman to be illegal and granting him relief of reinstatement in service with full back wages.
Copy of the award is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/5.
2.
In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the main ground of challenge to the award is that the workman was not entitled to receive full back wages as he had led no evidence for grant of such relief.
The finding recorded by the Labour Court in this behalf, thus, is erroneous and liable to be set aside.
In fact the challenge in this writ petition is mainly to the grant of full back wages.
As recorded in the order dated 19.10.2001 the workman had been reinstated as no stay was granted for reinstatement of the workman in terms of the award.
Consequently that relief is not pressed.
3.
The bare reading of the award clearly shows that workman had led sufficient evidence to justify the relief claim prayed for.
It is a settled principle of law that the concept of claimant to plead and prove by reasonable evidence is also applicable to the proceedings before the Labour Court, though the standard of proof is much lighter on the workman.
The contention raised by the management in this regard is not even sustainable on the principle of law.
At this stage I may refer to a very recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Hira Lal v. Presiding Officer and others, CWP No. 10850 of 2001, decided on 10102002 where the Court held as under :-  "It may not be very correct to state as a matter of rule that there is no onus upon the workman and grant of full back wages should be an automatic corollary to the grant of relief of reinstatement in each and every case.
The Scheme of the Act and Legislature intent behind the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act clearly shows the Legislature intend not to provide double advantage to the workman.
In other words a workman who is gainfully employed somewhere else cannot claim wages from his employer for the relevant period.
Even to obtain the benefit of interim order under Section 17-B of the Act, workman is required to file affidavit specifically stating that workman was not gainfully employed in any establishment.
Furthermore, under Section 11 of the Act Labour court is vested with the powers as that of Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure and the proceedings before it are judicial proceedings for all intents and purposes.
This would make it necessary that general principle applicable to such proceedings must necessarily relates to principle of pleadings and proof.
The workman is under obligation to discharge a primary onus in regard to the claim raised by him before a Labour Court.
In the case of Range Forest Officer v. ST Hadimani, 2002(3) SCT 382 (SC) : 2002(3) Supreme Court Cases 25 the Hon'ble Apex Court explaining applicability of principle of onus to these proceedings held as under :- "In our opinion the Tribunal was not right in placing the onus on the management without first determining on the basis of cogent evidence that the respondent had worked for more than 240 days in the year preceding his termination.
It was the case of the claimant that he had so worked but this claim was denied by the appellant.
It was then for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had in fact worked for 240 days in the year preceding his termination.
Filing of an affidavit is only his own statement in his favour and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any court or tribunal to come to the conclusion that a workman had, in fact, worked for 240 days in a year.
No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record of appointment or engagement for this period was produced by the workman.
On this ground alone, the award is liable to be set aside."
Still in another case titled as State of Gujarat and others v. Pratam Singh Narsinh Parmar, 2001(2) SCT 1081 (SC) : JT 2001(3) SC 326, the Supreme Court while emphasising the need for a person claiming the relief to prove the same by leading positive evidence held as under :-  "If a dispute arises as to whether a particular establishment or part of it wherein an appointment has been made is an industry or not, it would be for the person concerned who claims the same to be an industry, to give positive facts for coming to the conclusion that if constitutes "an industry".
Ordinarily, a department of the Government cannot be held to be an industry and rather it is a part of the sovereign function."
In the above case there were no specific assertion by the workman that department was an industry and relief was declined to the petitioner.
As it appears from the record before us the workman had not even made a specific averment in his demand notice/claim petition that workman not employed gainfully right from 1.1.1992 even till date.
No evidence has been brought to our notice which would show that the workman on oath stated before the learned Labour Court that he at no point of relevant time was gainfully employed in any establishment or otherwise, on the contrary the workman has stated that he has been doing labour job to earn his livelihood from the date of his termination.
In that event it was for the workman to say what amoutn he was getting, was that amount in excess or short of the last wages draw by the workman.
No such evidence was produced by the workman.
It is true that there is no legal or other presumption against the workman to raise such a claim but he must substantiate his claim by minimum required pleading and proof to claim a relief.
Once the workman discharges such onus then it is for the management to refute such claim by appropriate pleadings and leading cogent and admissible evidence.
Extent of proof is the only variable factor between the workman and management.
Gainful employment is a matter of fact which either party to the proceedings is obliged to prove.
There is no presumption of law attached to such a finding of fact.
In the event management denies the fact averred by the claimant certainly workman has a primary onus to discharge the onus would subsequently shifts to the management.
However, above situation may not arise in a case where the management admits the claim of the workman and does not deny the averments made in the demand notice/statement of claim.
The obligation to lead the minimum required evidence cannot be displaced by any presumption."
4.
In the statement of claim, copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P/3, the workman had made a specific prayer for grant of full back wages.
In reply to the statement of claim, nowhere the management had stated that the workman had been gainfully employed during the relevant period.
Much less details thereof even a specific averment was not made in the reply.
The workman while appearing as his own witness clearly stated in his examination that he remained unemployed for that period and was claiming full back wages along with reinstatement.
Even in his cross-examination no suggestion was put to the workman that he was gainfully employed in any establishment or concern.
We may also notice that a document as W-29 is relating to an order of the appropriate authority under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, wherein immediately after the workman was not permitted to continue his employment after 2541991, he filed an application claiming wages for the period 26.4.1991 to 351991, which was ultimately awarded.
This clearly shows that the workman was pursuing his legal remedies immediately and as and when the opportunity arose.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak and another, 1979(3) S.L.R.
223 : 1979 P.L.R.
720 wherein it was held that full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
5.
In the present case the workman has discharged his primary onus by pleading and placing on record the minimum cogent evidence to establish his claim.
As already noticed, the management at no point of time either pleaded or led any evidence to rebut the claim of the petitioner.
The management having failed to discharge its onus before the Labour Court, cannot take advantage now in writ jurisdiction and argue that in the facts and circumstances of the case, there was no plausible reason before the Labour Court to grant full back wages.
6.
For the reasons afore-stated I am of the considered view that the award under challenge does not suffer from any infirmity much less a palpable error of law apparent on the face of the award.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.