Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - During the course of hearing learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Ms. Lisa Gill, Advocate upon instructions from Shri HS Sidhu, Range Officer, submitted that all these petitions may be disposed of by a consented order.
The agreed terms and conditions are :-  1. the impugned award dated 1st September, 1998 my be set aside and the matter may be remanded to the Labour Court for a fresh trial as per the terms of this order; 2. all these matters will be consolidated, dealt with and disposed of by a common judgment by the learned trial Court, the lead case being Babu Ram's case; 3. each party, the workman and the management would be granted two opportunities each to complete their entire evidence.
No further time would be allowed to either of the parties except for paucity of time with the court; 4. the muster roll sought to be produced before this Court shall be produced by the workman itself before the labour court with liberty to the management to produce such documents, as they may deem fit and proper, however, before the commencement of the evidence; 5. the workman shall produce all the documents one week prior to the date which is given by this Court for appearance and direction before the labour court.
On that date itself, the management shall also produce the documents whichever they desire to produce; 6. the petitioner(s) are at liberty to file copies of the muster rolls and such other documents as they wish to place or which have been placed on record of this Court.
The documents will be filed before that court as directed above.
The petitioners are at liberty to obtain certified copies of the record expeditiously so as to enable them to carry out the afore-noted directions; and 7. the matter shall be listed on 3rd December, 2002 before the learned Tribunal for appropriate directions.
The parties shall appear on that date before the tribunal.
2.
The above agreed terms and conditions are otherwise just, fair and equitable.
We are of the considered view that they would meet the ends of justice and would provide fair opportunities to the parties to the lis to complete their evidence in accordance with law.
3.
The writ petitions stand disposed of in the above terms and conditions.
However, the parties shall bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.