Swatanter Kumar, J - This petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is directed against the award of the Labour Court dated 27.4.1983 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana.
Workman-Manjit Singh was placed under suspension and his services were terminated vide order dated 2091979.
According to the workman, the management had terminated the services of the workman illegally and without following the prescribed procedure in law.
According to the respondent-management, the workman had misappropriated 300 kgs of maize by tampering with the record and for which the enquiry was held fairly and properly, as such, the order of termination was fully justified.
The workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 (for short the Act) vide order dated 421982.
The relief granted to the workman reads as under :-  "The workman has made an application to Dayanand Medical College and was called for interview vide Exhibit M-9.
He had applied for employment with Hindustan Aermeutice Limited which is closer from W-11, National Remote Sensing Agency Ex. E-12, Punjab GAs Cylinders Private Limited Ex. W-13, M/s Majestic Auto Limited Ex. W-14, National Textile Corporation Ex. M-15, Punjab Scooter Limited Ex. W-17.
He had been trying for job at various places, but could not succeed which would make him realised that jobs are hard to get and he should not be rash in official matters.
This realisation would dawn upon him by giving him lesser punishment instead of totally crushing him and throwing him out of job.
The punishment should be commensurate with the offence committed.
Only lapse that could be attributed to the workman in his conduct of lodging report with the police which he should have been not done as a prudent man.
However, the punishment of termination from service would be too harsh for this minor lapse.
It is ordered that the workman shall be reinstated with continuity of service.
He shall be paid only 20% back wages.
The punishment of withholding his remaining back wages will be sufficient in the circumstances of the case to meet the ends of justice.
He shall report for duty within 10 days of the enforcement of the award."
2.
Against the said award, the management also filed a writ petition bearing CWP No. 5879 of 1983 which was dismissed in default vide order dated 1552001.
The workman has also challenged the award in the present writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner while relying upon a Full Bench judgement of this Court in Hari Place Ambala City v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 PLR 720 contends that the petitioner should have been awarded full back wages and not 20% as awarded by the Labour Court.
4.
The Labour Court has exercised its own discretion on the facts of the case and keeping in view the evidence adduced before it.
It may be noticed that the services of the petitioner-workman were terminated in the year 1979 and he made the reference to the appropriate Government in the year 1982, thus, there is a delay of 3 years which is unexplained.
What steps were taken by the workman, have not been stated.
The Labour Court in its wisdom found that the quantum of punishment was excessive or disproportionate to the charges levelled against the petitioner.
It did not set aside the enquiry per se.
The commutative effect of the above discussion is that the workman has been dealt with quite liberally by the Labour Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd., and another, 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1351 has clearly held that the Labour Court can always mould the relief, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and also keeping in mind the delay caused by the workman in approaching the Labour Court.
5.
For the reasons aforestated, I see no reason to interfere with the impugned order which is in consonance with the settled principles of law.
6.
This petition is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.