Viney Mittal, J - The petitioners have approached this court through the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus for directing the respondents to grant to the petitioners the benefit of ad hoc service rendered by them towards granting of medical allowance, earned leave/medical leave from the date of their ad hoc appointment as these benefits have been made available to the other similar situated persons in terms of the orders passed by the Supreme Court of India in Rattan Lal's case and for also granting benefits in terms of orders dated January 6, 1995 passed in CWP No. 4050 of 1994 decided on June 6, 1994 (Haryana Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana and others).
2.
The facts stated by the petitioners are that they are working as teachers, masters, lecturers etc. in various schools in the State of Haryana.
Prior to their regularisation, they had rendered ad hoc/temporary service.
Originally, the petitioners were denied the salary of summer vacation period for which they had worked in various schools.
However, on March 29, 1996, the respondents issued general order because of the directions issued by this Court as well as the Supreme Court of India in various cases, that salary be paid to all the teachers who were denied the same for the period of summer vacation.
The aforesaid communication dated March 29, 1996 has been attached as Annexure P.2 with the present writ petition.
3.
The case of the petitioners is that due to the payment of aforesaid salary of the summer vacation period, the service of the petitioners had been treated as continuous and their ad hoc/temporary service had been recognised by the respondents for the purposes of annual increments, pensionary benefits, higher grade etc.
However, the ad hoc/temporary service was not being counted for the grant of medical leave, medical allowance, earned leave and maternity leave etc.
Claim made by the petitioners is that they are entitled to the aforesaid benefits because the matter has been finally settled by the decision of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Rattan Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1985(3) Services Law Reporter 548, and in the case of Haryana Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 748 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 4050 of 1994 decided on June 6, 1994.
The petitioners have stated that an SLP No. 20692 of 1998 has also been dismissed by the Apex Court on August 24, 1998 which was filed by the Haryana State against the orders passed in Haryana Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh's case (supra).
Copy of the orders dated June 6, 1994 passed in CWP No. 4050 of 1994 has been appended as Annexure P4 whereas the copy of the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India dated August 24, 1998 dismissing the Special Leave Petition has been appended as Annexure P.6 with the petition.
The petitioners even sent a legal notice dated November 17, 2000 to make available all benefits of ad hoc service to them.
However, the District Education Officer, Karnal sent a reply dated March 22, 1999 and refused to grant the aforesaid benefits of the ad hoc service rendered by the petitioners by merely observing that the aforesaid benefits had been granted only to such teachers who had approached the Court.
A copy of the aforesaid reply has been appended as Annexure P12 to this petition.
4.
Upon a notice issued to the respondents, they put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
The claim of the petitioners has been contested.
The stand taken by the respondents is that originally the petitioners were appointed on ad hoc basis and used to be relieved from their duty before the commencement of summer vacation.
They were also allowed to resume their duty after the expiry of period of summer vacation.
The plea taken by the respondents is that since the petitioners were ad hoc employees, they were not entitled to medical leave, maternity leave, earned leave and other benefits.
The Government instructions are that only regular Government employees were entitled to those benefits.
5.
We have heard Mr. Rajesh Arora, learned Counsel who put in appearance for Shri HN Khanduja, the learned Counsel for the petitioners and Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents.
We have also perused the record of the case and various judgments produced by them.
6.
The short controversy involved in the present petition is as to whether the petitioners, who were earlier working on ad hoc/temporary basis, were entitled to medical leave, maternity leave, earned leave and other similar benefits claimed by them from the date these benefits have been granted to regularly appointed employees or even from a date of their initial appointment on ad hoc basis.
7.
In our considered opinion the controversy in the present case stands concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court rendered in Rattan Lal's case (supra).
In the aforesaid case, the State of Haryana was adopting the practice of appointing various teachers at the commencement of academic year and their services used to be terminated in April, later on being re-employed after the conclusion of summer vacation.
They were working on ad hoc basis.
The Supreme Court deprecated the said practice and held that the aforesaid employees were entitled to maternity and medical leave in accordance with rules and would also be paid salary for the summer vacation period.
The following observations made by the Supreme Court in Rattan Lal's case (supra) which are relevant, read as under :-  "We strongly deprecate the policy of the State Govt. under which ad hoc teachers are denied the salary and allowances for the period of summer vacation by resorting to the fictional breaks of the type referred to above.
These ad hoc teachers shall be paid salary and allowances for the period of summer vacation as long as they hold the office under this order.
Those who are entitled to maternity or medical leave, shall also be granted such leave in accordance with the rules."
Again in Haryana Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh's case (supra) the claim made by the petitioners in the aforesaid case was allowed and the Special Leave Petition filed by the respondents was dismissed.
The matter again came up in the case of Ms. Savita Bhoria v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 11658 of 1999 decided on November 7, 2000.
In Ms. Savita Bhoria's case (supra) the petitioners who had remained employed on ad hoc basis claimed maternity leave, earned leave and medical leave.
The aforesaid claim was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court and the respondents were directed to release the benefits forthwith, to the aforesaid petitioners.
However, the arrears were restricted to the period of 38 months prior to the filling of the writ petition.
8.
We find absolutely no reason to take any different or contrary view in the present case.
To be fair to Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, the learned Deputy Advocate General, we must notice the contention raised by him to the effect that the controversy in Rattan Lal's case (supra) was not similar to the one involved in the present case.
However, we find ourselves unable to accept the aforesaid contention.
We have noticed the observations of the Supreme Court of India in Rattan Lal's case (supra), which has been reproduced above.
The observations made by the Supreme Court of India are categoric in nature.
The aforesaid observations under Article 141 of the Constitution of India are the law of the land and are binding upon all Courts in India including this Court.
Note only this various other judgments viz. Haryana Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh and Ms. Savitri (Savita ?)
Bhoria also cover the controversy in hand.
9.
We also notice that when the notice of motion was issued in this case on February 1, 2001 then it was ordered that this case be listed alongwith CWP No. 3690 of 1999.
However, it appears that the present petition got separated from the aforesaid civil writ petition at some stage.
The aforesaid civil writ petition No. 3690 of 2001 itself was allowed by another Division Bench of this Court vide order dated May 24, 2001.
When the aforesaid civil writ petition was allowed then we do not find any justification to take a different view, at this stage, when the controversy involved in the present case and the aforesaid civil writ petition No. 3690 of 1999 is identical.
10.
We may also notice that a similar controversy had come up before another Division Bench of this Court of which one of us (Viney Mittal, J) was the member in CWP No. 6868 of 2001.
The aforesaid civil writ petition had been decided by the Division Bench vide order dated August 20, 2002 by making the following observations :-  "The learned Counsel for the petitioners states that the benefit of medical allowance, maternity leave, encashment of leave, Medical/half pay leave has been given to the petitioners in view of the general order passed on 782001, but the benefit of bonus has not been given to them.
He further contends that the benefit of bonus has been given to persons similarly situated vide another general order No. E-2/2001/294-343 dated 1932001 and if this benefit is given, the petitioners would be fully satisfied.
We accordingly dispose of this writ petition and direct that the respondents shall consider the petitioners claim for bonus as well within a period of two months from today in the light of the general order dated 1932001, and convey the decision thereof to the petitioners."
11.
It is rather strange that even though the general order had been issued by the respondents themselves on August 7, 2001 still the respondents have chosen to contest the claim made by the petitioners even thereafter.
The stand taken by the respondents in this regard cannot, in any manner, be appreciated.
12.
Before parting with the judgment, we deem it proper to reiterate the observations made by a Division Bench of this court vide judgment dated May 24, 2001 in CWP No. 3690 of 1999 and other connected matters.
A similar reply as Annexure P12 in the present case was given by the District Education Officer in the aforesaid case as well.
The claim of the petitioners was refused only by observing "only such teachers have been given benefit who approached the Court."
The aforesaid reply was deprecated by this Court and this Court expressed its anguish upon the aforesaid approach of the respondents.
It was observed that the State in this process in unnecessarily increasing the litigation.
It was also observed that it is unfortunate that the State is compelling certain persons to approach the Court all over again rather than complying with the provisions of the law laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court.
The court had further observed that as a model employer, it does not behove the State to take a plea which an ordinary litigant would even avoid.
13.
We find ourselves in respectful agreement with the aforesaid observations and while reiterating the same express the hope that in future this attitude shall be avoided by the State of Haryana.
14.
In view of the above discussion, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to grant the benefits of medical allowance, maternity leave, encashment leave, medical/half pay leave to the petitioners as admissible, in the same manner as have been granted to the regular appointed employees and even for the period they served on ad hoc basis.
However, if any arrears have to be paid, the same would be confined to 38 months prior to the date of filing of the present petition i.e. January 29, 2001.
No costs.
Petition allowed.