Arun Kumar Goel, J - Petitioner has challenged his termination ordered by respondent No. 3 in his capacity as Principal of Sainik School Nagrota- respondent No. 2, dated 20122000.
Photostat copy of the said order is annexed as Annexure-E with the writ petition and for ready reference this order is extracted herein below :  "CONFIDENTIAL Sainik School, Nagrota, Jammu.
Pin :- 181221.
No. SSN/291/MO/41.
Dt. 20th Dec., 2000.
Shri Rattan Lal,  General Employee (Mali), Sainik School, Nagrota, Jammu.
TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
1.
Refer to Court of Inquiry dated 09 Dec, 2000, and Memorandum No. SSN/MO/COI/40, dated 30th Nov, 2000 and Show Cause Notice No. SSN/291/MO/40, dated 10th Dec, 2000.
2.
As per Chapter 7, Para 706 of Sainik Schools Society Rules and Regulations, keeping in view the continuation of your service in the school being detrimental to the interest of the school, your services are no longer required in this School and therefore your services are terminated from the school with effect from 20th Dec., 2000.
A cheque No. 515537 dated 08th Dec, 2000 for Rs. 11,760/- (Rupees Eleven thousand, Seven hundred and sixty only) is being attached as your three months pay in lieu of three months notice.
3.
You are advised to get the clearance formalities completed from the school latest by 23rd Dec, 2000 so that your final account can be settled.
Sd/- (K Mukherjee) Lt. Cdr.
(IN),  Offg.
Principal.
Copy to :- The Chairman,  Local Board of Administration,  (Sainik School, Nagrota) C/o 56 APO."
A perusal of the writ petition, as well as objections filed to it on behalf of respondents indicates that petitioner was employed as a Mali by respondent No. 1 and was working in the School, i.e. respondent No. 2, when the impugned order (supra) was passed by respondent No. 3, who was working as Headmaster of the said School.
A Memorandum (copy whereof is annexed as Annexure-A with the writ petition) was issued alongwith Statement of Articles of Charges, and list of documents as well as witnesses.
This was duly replied to by the petitioner vide Annexure-B which is dated 9122000, 10th being a holiday it was submitted on 11122000 by the petitioner.
2.
Respondents vide Annexure-C issued a show-cause notice to the petitioner on 10-12-2000, as according to them, petitioner had failed to reply within the stipulated period of ten days which according to them expired on 9122000, thus he was afforded last chance to submit reply by 19th which he did vide Annexure-D  3.
After receipt of the aforesaid reply from the petitioner, respondent No. 3 in his capacity as Principal of respondent No. 2 has passed the termination order.
This order is challenged having been passed in haste.
According to the petitioner, he did submit his reply vide Annexure-B to writ petition on 11122000, but without conceding the same impugned order has been passed.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties at the time of hearing were not at variance that services of the petitioner are governed by Sainik Schools Society Rules and Regulations.
These have been followed more in breach than compliance by the respondents, as per Mr. Kaul.
Respondent No. 3 while passing the impugned order has thrown the principle of fair play and other legal safeguards to winds.
According to him, as per Chapter 10 of the aforesaid Rules and Regulations procedure is prescribed for imposition of minor as well as major penalties, that having not been done the entire action of the respondents is illegal and thus the impugned order is liable to be struck down.
5.
It is further case of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 has acted arbitrarily and has become a judge of his own cause inasmuch as that he was a member of the Court of Inquiry, at the same time has passed the impugned order.
Approval of the Chairman of Local Board of Administration as per Clause 10.3 of the above noted rules and regulations was to obtained before passing of the impugned order, that having not been done therefore, Annexure-E above referred deserves to be quashed.
6.
Respondents were put to notice.
They have filed objections.
According to them, this Court is not exercising the appellate jurisdiction over the decision of competent authority in this writ petition which also raises disputed questions of fact.
Petitioner ought to have approached the departmental authorities, therefore, writ petition is not maintainable.
7.
Another preliminary objection raised is that since petitioner has pocketed Rs. 11,760/- as salary in lieu of three months notice he cannot file and maintain the present writ petition.
So far engagement etc. of the petitioner is concerned, it is not disputed.
However, pleas referred to hereinabove urged on behalf of the petitioner have been specifically repudicated as well as denied by the respondents.
According to them, reply to memorandum Annexure-A was not submitted by the petitioner on or before 9122000, therefore, show cause notice was served upon him on 10122000.
According to them, adequate and due opportunity has been afforded to the petitioner.
Impugned order thus has been rightly passed according to them, after due consideration of the reply submitted by the petitioner to show cause notice Annexure-E to writ petition has been passed after due consideration of the entire record as well as after following the prescribed procedure under Rules and Regulations (supra).
It is further pleaded by the respondents that due approval of Chairman was obtained before passing the impugned order as such plea to the contrary is not correct.
Whatever was required as well as expected of the respondents under the relevant rules and regulations had been completed by them before passing the order in question which is challenged in this writ petition.
As such there is no merit in it and the same is liable to be dismissed.
8.
At the time of hearing of this petition, learned counsel for the respondents was directed to produce record relating to enquiry is question, which she has done.
9.
Learned counsel for the parties appearing in this case have reiterated the stand of their respective clients as pleaded in their respective pleadings.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and having examined the pleadings filed by them, papers of enquiry file submitted by Mrs. Goswami have also been examined.
From the record, it is clear that petitioner did submit his reply to Annexure-A as is evident from its copy which is there on the file.
It is clearly shows that it was received on 11122000 at 11 am in the office of respondent No. 3, thus, stand to the contrary is factually incorrect and is falsified from the record.
30112000 is the date of Annexure-A attached with the writ petition.
In any event this date was to be excluded.
Thus, petitioner had time till 10122000 to have filed the reply to Annexure-A That day being admittedly a holiday, he submitted the same vide Annexure-B on 11122000, therefore, plea of the respondents that petitioner did not file his reply within the time allowed as per Annexure-A, cannot be accepted and is hereby rejected.
Admittedly, reply submitted by the petitioner to the Memorandum has not been considered before issuing show-cause notice, therefore, the entire edifice of the case of the respondents must fall.
This is one aspect of the Memorandum.
The other side of the Memorandum is the statement of article of charges which were framed against the petitioner as per Annexure-I and as well as Annexures-II, III and IV attached with Annexure-A to the writ petition.
10.
Respondents on the basis of Memorandum could have dealt with the petitioner which could further deprive him of his job as such they were required to give pin-pointed specific Article of charges as also details of the documents on which those were intended to be sustained, in the absence whereof respondents were not justified to call upon the petitioner to furnish his reply.
For ready reference Annexures-I, II, III and IV are extracted hereinbelow :-  "ANNEXURE-I STATEMENT OF ARTICLES OF CHARGES FRAMED AGAINST SHRI RATTAN LAL, MALI/GE.
ARTICLE-I You have caused infringement to rule 9.01(c) & 9.01(e) & 908 by remaining absent from the place of duty without permission on number of occasions despite verbal & written warnings.
To be sustained by letters issued to you from time to time.
ARTICLE-II You have caused infringement to rule 903(v) & 9.01(p) by tampering and Duping the Medical Certificate.
To be sustained by the Medical Certificate and letter No. SSN/291/MO Dated 25th June, 1993.
ARTICLE-III You have failed to perform duties assigned to you from time to time and as such involved in misconduct.
To be sustained by letter No. SSN/291/A dated 13th June, 1990 issued to you.
Sd/- (Lt. Cdr.
K Mukherjee) Headmaster, Presiding Officer,  Court of Inquiry.
Dated : 30th Nov 2000."
"ANNEXURE-II School correspondence and your reply on the ibid subject already possessed by you.
Copy of the Fact Finding Board.
ANNEXURE-III Same as above.
ANNEXURE-IV List of witnesses.
(a) Mr. KC Katoch.
(b) Mr. Dev Dass.
Sd/-  (Lt. Cdr.
K Mukherjee) Headmaster,  Presiding Officer  Court of Inquiry.
Dated :- 30th Nov, 2000."
Respondents forgot that law enjoins a duty upon them to pin-point nd specify what petitioner has to meet and on what material.
In the face of these vague, uncertain and cryptic charges he could not has been called upon to submit his reply/explanation, therefore, on this ground also the very foundation of the case of respondents is knocked.
11.
From the minutes of 60th Meeting of the Local Board of Administration held on 17th November, 2000 at 1100 hours in the Principal's office Sainik School Nagrota, it is clear that respondents had already made up their mind as far back as on 17th November to terminate the petitioner's service, thereafter, they were just trying to give a shape to show that though they have already made up their mind still they are trying to give shape to it.
Item No. 8 of this meeting was in the following terms :-  "Item No. 08.
Staff Appointment/Resignation/Retirement/Retrenchment.
(a) to (c) noted.
(d) Approved.
The Chairman desired that the services of Shri Rattan Lal, GE should be terminated at the earliest after following the necessary procedures/Court of Inquiry.
All the members agreed with the Chairman and Member Secretary emphasised that such individuals should not be kept on the rolls of such a prestigious institution."
It is not understood that what was required to be done after it had been decided to do away with the services of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3, thereafter, ensured that ignoring all canons of fair play, equity and good conscience he ensures that the service of the petitioner are dispensed with, and thus order Annexure-E (supra) came to be passed.
12.
When a reference is made to the so-called proceedings of Court of Inquiry it is nothing but an excuse in the name of the holding inquiry.
This is in addition to the fact that a decision had already been taken to terminate the service of the petitioner even before issuance of Memorandum and charge-sheet as well as show-cause notice.
Above all respondents had the courage of conviction to state that Memorandum Annexure-A was not replied to by the petitioner which position, as already observed, stands belied from the record of the respondents.
13.
Statements of two witnesses, namely Dev Dass and KC Katoch have been recorded in the absence of the petitioner.
Both the statements are dated 9122000, which further strengthens the observations of this Court that further action was a mere ritual and nothing else.
14.
Respondents forgot that Sainik Schools Society Rules and Regulations are subject to Article 311 of the Constitution of India and this is not a case wherein respondents are dealing with an employee belonging to Defence Services so as to seek exemption under Article 33 of the Constitution of India.
Still they chose to treat Article 311 of the Constitution of India being the law of land governing all service regulations as non est on the Statute Book.
They further forgot that they were required to be careful in following law and procedure and thus passed impugned order in poste-haste arbitrarily.
15.
A perusal of Annexure-E extracted hereinabove clearly supports the fact that decision to terminate the services of the petitioner was taken before recording the evidence on 9122000.
Reason being that services of the petitioner were terminated by means of impugned order on 20122000 and as per record produced by Mrs. Goswami, the evidence of Dev Dass and KC Katoch was recorded on 9122000 and 7.12.2000, respectively.
Without receipt of reply to Annexure-A how could the respondents forestall as to what is going to be the stand of the petitioner.
Not only this.
But fact finding was completed on 27th/28th November, 2000.
16.
A perusal of Annexure-E clearly suggests that though termination order purports to be of 20122000 cheque for Rs. 11,760/- which was to become payable in the event of termination of service of the petitioner had already been prepared on 8122000, when even the evidence had not been recorded by the Court of Inquiry with a view to support the Articles of Charges.
This was only possible when respondents had decided either on 8122000 or before that to do away with the services of the petitioner.
17.
Faced with this situation learned Additional Central Government Counsel forcefully urged that petitioner should be directed to approach the competent authority to challenge the impugned order Annexure-E (supra).
Ordinarily, this submission should have found favour with the Court, but then the question that arises is should the petitioner be directed to still go to the authority concerned in the face of the facts discussed hereinabove and overwhelming material available in the contemporaneous official records of the respondents as also in the face of their stand that Annexure-A was never replied to by the petitioner ?
Answer being that it would be an exercise in fatality and unnecessarily prolonging the agony of the petitioner.
In no circumstances impugned action of the respondents can be allowed to stand which is consequently declared to be the result of decision having already been taken before even recording of evidence on the basis of the Articles of Charges as well as to show cause notice having been issued without consideration of the reply filed by the petitioner to the Memorandum Annexure-A  18.
No other point is urged.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, this writ petition is allowed after having been formally admitted when it was stated that objections filed may be treated as counter and was heard finally with the consent of learned counsel for the parties.
19.
Consequently, impugned order Annexure-E extracted hereinabove is hereby quashed and set aside and as a result of it, it is further held that petitioner for all intents and purposes shall be deemed to be in service from 20122000.
So far amount received by him in lieu of three months notice is concerned, he is directed to deposit back the same within two months from the date of this judgment failing which he shall be liable to pay interest at the rate of 12% per annum on this amount w.e.f.
152001 till he refunds the same to the respondents.
While allowing this writ petition, it is further held that on the basis of vague, uncertain and cryptic charges-Annexures I to V no action can be taken against the petitioner.
In case respondents decide to still hold further enquiry it is ordered that none of those who were, in any manner, connected directly or indirectly with the Meeting held on 17112000, wherein Item 8(d) extracted hereinabove was approved, shall deal with the matter.
In such a situation respondent No. 1 will depute some independent agency to decide to hold an inquiry, such a decision would be taken within eight weeks of this judgment by issuing specific charge sheet which will be duly served and if the after receipt of reply from the petitioner to such a charge sheet still authorities feel that they intend holding an inquiry, an Inquiry Officer shall be appointed within next four weeks who shall conclude the inquiry within next three months after following not only Rules and Regulations referred to hereinabove but will also keep in vie the principles of natural justice, equity and fair play.
Writ petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms, with no order as to costs.
Record produced by Mrs. Neeru Goswami has been retained on the file.
Petition allowed.