Swatanter Kumar, J - All the petitioners in this petition are working as part-time sweepers or peons in different schools under the Education Department of State of Haryana.
They have been working on their respective posts for the period varying from 6-14 years and were directly appointed by the respondents the period 1st March, 1986 to 15th April, 1997.
2.
According to the petitioners, the respondent-State issued a policy on 30th December, 1998 regarding regularisation of class IV employees in the department.
Copy of this policy is placed on record as Annexure P/2.
The petitioners claim to have made various representations for regularisation of their services and even served a demand notice dated 15th October, 2001, but the respondents are not regularising the services of the petitioners.
On the contrary, the respondents are threatening to terminate the services of the petitioners.
Thus, the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
In reply, it is stated that the policy of regularisation framed by the government, Annexure P/2 is admitted.
However, it is stated that the claim of the petitioners cannot be considered for regularisation for the reason that there are not vacant sanctioned post in the schools where the petitioners are employed and secondly, they do not satisfy the conditions of regularisation under the policy of the government.
It was also argued that the petitioners do not possess the requisite qualifications for being appointed to the regular post.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ranbir Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(1) SCT 796 (P&H) : 2001(4) R.S.J.
676 to contend that the respondents should be directed to create the post and to regularise the services of the petitioners.
There is hardly any controversy to the facts pleaded by the parties.
The only question that arises for consideration by the court is whether the services of the petitioners should be regularised, and if yes, then the manner and method of such regularisation.
This controversy need not detain us any further in view of the judgment passed in the case of Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(3) S.C.T.
644, Civil Writ Petition No. 193 of 2001 decided on 2132002, wherein after detailed discussion on the policy of regularisation framed by the State and in view of the stand taken by the Advocate General, Haryana in that case, the Court had passed the directions granting limited relief to the petitioners in those petitions.
5.
At this stage, it will be useful to refer the relevant extract, which reds as under :-  "The learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana submitted that in view of the various pronouncements not much of choice is left with the State.
However, he stated that the Government had already framed a policy and it had further taken a decision to relax the prescribed qualifications in the case of part-time sweepers who have already been working for a considerable period, but he also submitted that the posts have to be available.
In fact in another case, being 2002(2) SCT 333 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 5926 of 2000, titled as Vidya Devi and others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 2022002, the Court after considering the statement of the Advocate General passed the following order :- "During the course of hearing, the learned Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana sought time to seek instructions if the State could work out some via-media within the frame-work of its existing policy for regularising the services of the petitioners and alike situated persons.
We must note with some appreciation that the learned Advocate General, Haryana informed the Court and upon the instructions from the State, Mr. Amol Rattan, Assistant Advocate General made statement in the Court that the State would not strictly enforce the conditions of prescribing qualifications against the petitioners if there are regular sanctioned posts of Sweepers available at any point of time.
It is also stated that the State, in order to accommodate such class, would consider the case of the Sweepers against the posts of Peons.
Of course, again subject to same conditions of availability of posts and the part-time sweepers satisfying the qualification prescribed for the post of a Peon.
In view of the statement made on behalf of the State, the controversy in the present case falls in a very narrow compass.
The entire argument is with regard to the applicability of the instructions of 1998 retrospectively or retroactively.
The petitioners have been working for a considerable time and discharging the functions of the part-time employees in the departments of the State of Haryana.
Once the State has given the above relaxation, the only exception for regularising the services of the petitioners is that firstly, there are no posts available and secondly, there is no work.
There is a serious dispute raised before us as to the nature and quantum of the work being available in the schools.
We are of the considered view that while exercising its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is not appropriate forum to determine such matters.
They primarily fall in the domain of the State and its specialised agencies.
What is the prescribed infrastructure of the school; what is the strength of the school and how many employees are needed, is not a matter inviting judicial determination, but at the same time the Courts except the administration to take a view which will be in consonance with the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and the various Division Benches of this Court.
The petitioners have placed reliance upon the recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Umed Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 2001(3) SCT 79 (P&H) (DB) : 2001(1) R.S.J.
752, wherein it has been held that after 10 years, the petitioners in the case cited above were considered to be eligible for regularisation.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioners are also claiming that the expression "part-time" does not indicate with regard to nature of their work and the time spent by them in the schools.
According to them they are working for the entire day in the school and performing their functions and duties assigned to them by the Administration.
It is specifically disputed that they work only for an hour or two in a day.
It is contended that there are nursery schools where small children are studying.
Thus, the cleaning process of the class rooms etc. is carried out for the hours during which the school is run."
"Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, the statement made on behalf of the State and in order to resolve this prolonged dispute, we would issue direction so as to enable the State to act effectively within the frame-work of its policy and to achieve the ends of justice by granting to the petitioners what is due to them in accordance with law.
Thus, we issue the following directions:- (i) The case of the petitioners for regularisation as part-time employees would be considered by the State within a period of six months in the light of its policy dated December 30, 1998/February 25, 1999; (ii) The claim of the petitioners would not be declined on the ground that they do not possess the essential qualifications as stipulated in the said policy (as per the statement made in the Court by Mr. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General upon the instructions of the State; (iii) The State shall appoint the sub-committee headed by an officer not below the rank of Under Secretary to Government of the State to examine the building, infrastructure, staff and number of children studying in every school of the State of Haryana and in the light of that to recommend how many regular posts can be created in every school depending on the work and the strength of the employees and students.
The committee shall consider the availability of the posts as and when it became available/vacant in a particular school to identify the total number of posts which can be filled up as of now, under the policy of the Government.
(iv) We also consider it appropriate that the Committee afore-stated shall hear the part-time employees in a representative capacity before determining the criteria to implement this order.
Thereupon services of the petitioners would, thus, be regularised in the above terms.
All these petitions are disposed of in the above terms directing the State to comply with the above directions within a period of six months from today.
It is made clear that no further extension would be allowed for this exercise."
In view of the above enunciated principle of law the State is obliged to regularise the services of the part-time in phases and endeavour its best to avoid unnecessary litigation between the Courts by compelling these part-time employees who approach the Court for redressal of their grievances.
In the present case the petitioners have been working since the year 1987.
The very fact that they have been working and are continue to work in the said post is sufficiently indicative of availability of work.
The State Government, thus, may not be justified in denying regularisation to the petitioners."
In view of the above referred decision, we have no reason to pass any different orders than one passed in Dharam Pal's case (supra).
6.
Accordingly, this petition is also disposed of in terms of the above order.
The petitioners would be entitled to the same relief and the respondents would abide by the statement made before the court in the afore-referred case.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.