Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners were working as regular Junior Engineers under the General Manager, Project Irrigation Department, Haryana.
They claim to be senior most in their cadre.
All the petitioners were granted current duty charge for doing the work of the post of Sub Divisional Officers which is a promotional posts, the feeding cadre being Junior Engineers.
Subsequently, they were promoted on regular basis to that post.
The dates of promotion of respective petitioner are as under :  Name Dt. of grant of current duty charge Dt. of grant of regular promotion.
Balbir Singh Dalal 131996 5101999 R.P.
Mahla 131996 5101999 Balwant Singh 18.1.1996 22.10.1999  w.e.f.5.
10.
99.
Sarvan Bansal 18.1.1996 5101999 GR Ghambir 15.12.1995 5101999 Bodh Raj 2491995 5101999 KR Dhiman 2491995 5101999 Mangat Ram 7.5.1996 9101999 SK Bhutani 131996 5101999 RS Malik 18.1.1996 712000 w.e.f.
5.10.99 In support of their claim, the petitioners have annexed the copies of orders passed in their favour as Ex.P.1 to Ex.P7.
In the letters issued granting the petitioners the current duty charge, a condition was imposed that they would work in their own pay scales with immediate effect.
Now the petitioner's claim that they are entitled to get pay scale of the higher post for the period 131996 to 1999.
They contend that they have been performing the same duties and functions right from 1996 and there has been no change in their responsibilities and duties for all this period.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply.
The facts are hardly disputed by the respondents.
It is stated that there were vacant posts of the quota reserved for direct recruitment which had to be filled through the Haryana Public Service Commission for which requisition has already been made.
The petitioners were appointed only to look after the duties of the higher posts in those vacant posts for a limited period.
Reliance has been placed on the clause of the letter denying the benefit of high er pay to the petitioners.
3.
During the course of hearing, the learned counsel for the State of Haryana while placing reliance upon Rule 422(iv) contended that a person who has been given current duty charge of the routine duties of another post is not entitled to any additional charges for that duration.
4.
We have already noticed that there is no dispute to the fact that petitioners were performing duties and functions of higher responsibility and were given complete charge of the post of Sub Divisional Officers.
The expression "assigned the current duty charge" cannot mean to suggest that it was merely looking after some functions of the post carrying higher responsibilities.
On the contrary, the petitioners were given the complete charge of the post and they were not performing duties of their original post.
In other words, they were excluded from performing the functions of the lower cadre which was a feeder cadre to the post of Sub Divisional Officers.
Once a person is appointed to hold full charge of the duties of a higher post, even in addition to duties of his own post, has to be allowed pay admissible to him as if he was appointed to officiate in the higher post.
In this regard Rule 422(i) is amply clear.
5.
On the cumulative reading of Rules 44, 413 and 416 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules it is clear that even a Government employee officiating on a higher post is entitled to the higher pay unless for reasons to be recorded, his pay is reduced within the preview and scope of the said rules.
In the present case, there are no reasons recorded by the competent authority for denying the higher scales to the petitioner.
The condition stated in the letter of appointment that they would discharge the functions of the higher post in their own pay scales is not of any consequence.
Once a Rule grants a benefit to an employee, it cannot be taken away by the administrative authority except in consonance with the rules.
It is not the case of the respondents in the written statement that for any reasons recorded in the order passed by the competent authority, it had been decided to grant lessor pay to the petitioners what they are entitled to.
6.
Right from the date of their initial appointment to the higher post in the year 1996, the petitioners have worked continuously undisturbed in the higher post till the time their services were regularised in the same post in the year 1999.
The petitioners have worked for a considerably long time and as such it cannot be even termed as a stop-gap arrangement.
These appointments were made in accordance with service rules and the instructions governing the subject.
Performance of duties and functions of higher responsibilities by the petitioners in the higher post are not in controversy.
At this stage we may make a reference to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(3) SCT 90, where their Lordships, after considering various judgments of the Apex Court and in the circumstances where Government employees were just asked to officiate on stop gap arrangement on higher posts, were entitled to the benefit of higher pay scale and referring to the case of P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, 1993(2) S.C.T.
416 : 1993(2) SCC 340, held as under :-  "Learned counsel for the appellant attempted to contend that when the respondent was promoted in stop-gap arrangement as Junior Engineer-I, he had given an undertaking to the appellant that on the basis of stop arrangement, he would not claim promotion as of right nor would he claim any benefit pertaining to that post.
The argument, to say the least, is pre- posterous.
Apart from the fact that the Government in its capacity as a model employer cannot be permitted to raise such an argument, the undertaking which is said to constitute an agreement between the parties cannot be enforced at law.
The respondent being an employee of the appellant had to break his period of stagnation although, as we have found earlier, he was the only person amongst the non-diploma holders available for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer-I and was, therefore, likely to be considered for promotion in his own right.
An agreement that if a person is promoted to the higher post or put to officiate on that post or, as in the instant case, a stop-gap arrangement is made to place him on the higher post, he would not claim higher salary or other attendant benefits would be contrary to law and also against public policy.
It would, therefore, be unenforceable in view of Section 23 of the Contract Act."
Reference can also be made to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Gurmej Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1995(3) SCT 279 (P&H) (DB) : 1995(3) R.S.J.
491, where the Division Bench, after discussing various judgments on the issue, held as under :-  "Factually, it is not disputed that the petitioner, who was working as a Social Education and Panchayat Officer, was given current duty charge of the post of BD and PO with effect from 20121988 and till retirement on 30111989, he went on discharging the duties of BD and PO to which post he was otherwise also entitled to be considered for promotion, the petitioner was entitled to pay and emoluments of the post of BD and PO with all consequential benefits.
The primary reliance is on the judgment of the Supreme Court in case reported as A.I.R. 1983 Supreme Court 1061.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further relied on a DB judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 13465 of 1991 rendered on 1611992, whereby a similarly situated SE and PO who had been given current duty charge of the post of BD and PO was granted the pay and emoluments of the post of BD and PO A copy of this judgment has been attached as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition."
7.
The learned counsel for the respondent-State relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Rama Kant and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(3) S.C.T.
586 : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1145 to contend that the employees required to look after or directed to officiate in higher post is not a promotion as they continue to hold their substantive lower posts and they only discharge duties of higher posts on stop gap arrangement.
In view of the rules afore- referred and the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Secretary- cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh (supra), this contention hardly has any merit.
The question before this Court is not that whether the grant of current duty charge to the petitioners tantamounts to a regular promotion entitling them the benefits thereof.
The petitioners have been promoted on regular basis in continuation with their appointment on current duty charge.
The later decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer (supra) is squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case.
8.
The essentials for raising such a claim are satisfied in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The petitioners were provided appointments in accordance with rules and were required to discharge functions and duties of the posts which admittedly carried higher responsibilities.
They were not holding a dual charge.
Against the posts to which they were appointed on current duty charges, the services of the petitioners were regularised.
Thus, we see no reason, whatsoever, to reject the request of the petitioners for grant of appropriate pay scales payable to the post of Sub Divisional Officer for the limited period afore noticed.
In view of the above discussion, we allow this writ petition limited to the extent that the petitioners would be entitled to receive higher pay that of Sub Divisional Officer for the limited period afore-noticed.
The claim of the petitioners in regard to interests and costs is declined.
Petition partly allowed.