R Gururajan, J - Both these petitions are disposed of by the common order.
2.
Facts in writ petition No. 18496/93 are as under :  3.
Petitioner was working as an assistant manager in Stores department in BEML Banglore (for short Company).
He joined the services in the year 1967.
He was promoted to the post of store keeper in 1971 and as Asst.
Supervisor in the year 1971 again.
Subsequently, he was promoted as Asst.
Manager, Stores, on 1-8-90.
He was rendering service to the best of his capacity.
His wife was ailing for more than 20 years.
She had to be frequently admitted to the hospital and she was under constant care of the doctors attending on her.
Petitioner in these circumstances thought that he could avail the benefits of voluntary retirement scheme.
Annexures A and B are providing for details of the scheme.
Petitioner made an application seeking for voluntary retirement.
The same was processed by the company and ultimately the Company issued an order dt. 8-5-93.
In the said order they stated that the management has accorded approval for his voluntary retirement and that he would be relieved from the services w.e.f.
the close of the shift on 31-5-93.
Thereafter the Company, in terms of communication dt. 27-5-93 ordered the earlier communication dt. 8-5-93 being kept in abeyance until further orders.
Subsequently on 3-6-93 company withdrew the letter dt. 8-5-93.
Petitioner thereafter, made a representation to reconsider the matter.
4.
Petitioner in subsequent affidavit has annexed various documents in support of his pleadings in the matter.
5.
Respondents have filed their objection statement in this petition.
They admit various facts referred to in the petition.
They say that certain complaints were made against the petitioner and, therefore, they had to keep the order in abeyance and, thereafter, the approval for voluntary retirement scheme stood withdrawn.
They say that the management has every right to retrace and withdraw the acceptance of a request for retirement before the date set down by the employer.
They also say that the petitioner was thereafter transferred to Singroli.
They justify their action.
6.
The facts in WP No. 335/97 are as under :  7.
This petition in also filed by the same petitioner.
In this Petition petitioner is challenging the orders passed at annexures.
A and B by the respondents.
Petitioner refers to the earlier proceedings with regard to his voluntary retirement in terms of a scheme.
Petitioner was issued with an articles of charge on 11-8-93.
An enquiry was conducted in the matter.
The enquiry committee considered the merits on each charge and came to a conclusion that the petitioner is not guilty of any one of the charges in terms of its finding dt. 15-9-94.
Thereafter the disciplinary authority in terms of a communication dt. 14-11-94 differed from the findings and issued a show cause notice proposing punishment of dismissal.
Petitioner did not submit his representation.
In the circumstances company dismissed his services in terms of order dt. 31-3-96, Annexure A.
An unsuccessful appeal was filed in terms of Annexure B Petitioner is challenging these two orders.
8.
Respondents entered appearance and justified their action in the matter.
They say that certain serious allegations were made against the petitioner and the matter was enquired into by the company.
The enquiry committee according to the objection statement did not take into consideration several factors and, therefore, the disciplinary authority differed from the findings and issued a show cause notice to the petitioner.
Petitioner did not submit any reply and, therefore, dismissed him from service.
They justify their action.
9.
Heard the learned counsel on either side.
10.
Sri M C Narasimhan, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that he has to succeed in both the petitions.
According to the learned counsel in terms of the scheme the company could not keep an approval order in abeyance.
He further contends that the subsequent recalling of the approval order is totally opposed to the scheme governing the voluntary retirement scheme.
Counsel also would contend that after the due date i.e. after 31-5-93 the petitioner ceases to be an employee in the light of an earlier approval and, therefore, the recalling of the approval order on 3-6-93 according to the counsel is illegal and unsustainable.
He refers to various judgments in support of his contention.
In so far as the second case is concerned counsel says that there is no material available on record to show that the petitioner is guilty of charges.
He refers to enquiry report which is in his favour.
He says that while differing no opportunity was given to the petitioner and, therefore, he said order of dismissal has to be set aside by this Court.
11.
Per contra counsel for the contesting respondents invited my attention to the scheme to contend that there is no bar for withdrawal of the approval order, he has also placed the original file for perusal of the court.
In so far as second case is concerned he states that serious allegations were made against the petitioner by way of complaints and these complaints were enquired into by the committee.
Since the committee did not take into consideration several factors the disciplinary authority differed and after providing an opportunity his services were terminated.
12.
In writ petition No. 18496/93 what is challenged is annexure F dt. 3-6-93.
Admitted facts reveal that a scheme is available in the company in the matter of voluntary retirement in terms of annexure A Petitioner did make an application and the same was processed by the company.
After processing the application of the petitioner the company accorded its approval for the voluntary retirement of the petitioner in terms of annexure D Thereafter said communication was kept in abeyance in terms of order dt. 27-5-93 and on 3-6-93 approval order dt. 8-5-93 stood withdrawn.
To find out the legality or validity of the order dt. 3-6-93 the court has to notice annexure A a scheme framed by the company.
13.
BEML company voluntary retirement scheme provides for an effective date, service eligibility and the procedure.
It is not the case of the Company that the petitioner is not eligible according to the scheme.
On the other hand, company has accorded its approval on 8-5-93.
Procedure for making application is provided in clause IV of the scheme.
The said procedure reads as under :  "Employees who are desirous of seeking voluntary retirement under this scheme should make an application in the prescribed format as at annexure enclosed to this General Bulletin to the respective Divisional Chiefs, through the department head/personnel department.
The department Head will offer his recommendations/comments if any and route the application to the personnel department, who in turn will verify all the basic data and then route it to the concerned Divisional Chiefs for his recommendation.
The application thus processed will be forwarded to the Director (personnel) for obtaining necessary, approval.
The final decision either to accept or reject the application of any of the employee seeking voluntary retirement vests with the Chairman and Managing Director who has the right to reject any application without assigning any reason for his decision."
14.
A careful reading of the said procedure would show that the applications submitted by the employees are routed through the Division Chief through the department head.
The department head is to offer his recommendation and, thereafter, it is routed through the personnel department, the disciplinary department has to verify the basic data and route the same again for the Division Chief for recommendation.
Thereafter the same is sent to the Director (Personnel) for approval.
The power to accept or reject application is vested with Chariman or Managing Director.
In the case on hand admitted facts reveal that there is an acceptance but the same has been rejected subsequently.
Power can be exercised only by chairman or managing director.
The original file is placed before the court for its perusal.
I have carefully gone through the original file made available to me.
It is seen from the original file that a complaint was submitted by certain companies to the company on 30-4-93.
In the complaint it is stated that there are certain discrepancies in the preparation of auction catalogue favours are extended to certain known business men by the petitioner.
They also state that the petitioner is a mischief monger in the department and as a parasite in the organization.
They have made certain suggestions in the matter.
On receipt of the same matter was handed over to the Vigilance and the Vigilance has made an initial report on 1-6-93.
From the file it is seen that Dy.
Vigilance Officer has stated that the investigation report did not pinpoint any malpractise on the part of the petitioner.
It is stated that the petitioner is of doubtful integrity.
His VRS was accepted by the Company.
He has stated that it is difficult to charge-sheet petitioner in the absence of evidence and proof.
This was noticed by another senior official who in his note dt. 1-6-93 has stated that the petitioner's involvement cannot be ruled out.
It is further stated that the petitioner be posted to some other places like Bilaspur or Gauhati in which case he would quit on his own.
On 3-6-93 the CMD has agreed with the view of the Chief Vigilance Officer.
The CMD has stated that the officer should not have been given benefit of voluntary retirement scheme "in the absence of vigilance clearance".
He should be transferred to a non-sensitive area.
Records do not disclose that any specific order as such has been passed by the CMD ordering the recalling of the earlier approval order in terms of the scheme.
Moreover the scheme do not provide for any vigilance clearance.
In these circumstances from the original the made available to me it is clear to me that the order dt. 3-6-93 is contrary to the scheme at Annexure A Annexure A as mentioned earlier provides for a power to reject the application without assigning any reason.
In fact the scheme is silent with regard to recalling the approval order of voluntary retirement.
Assuming that such power is available to the respondents, even then the file does not disclose that the CMD has ordered withdrawal of the approval order.
Even the reason for withdrawal viz., vigilance clearance is not provided in the scheme.
The application is processed at every level in terms of the scheme.
In these circumstances I am clearly of the view that annexure F had to be set aside in the light of the facts of this case is referred to above and in the light of the original file made available to me.
Therefore, I have no hesitation in accepting the writ petition in the case on hand.
15.
I am also of the view that it is necessary for this court to point out that the acceptance or rejection of a VRS application is a serious matter and it has to be done with all seriousness by the company.
It is presumed in the case on hand that the authorities have looked into the antecedents of the petitioner before accepting the same.
Having accepted it, it is not open to respondents to recall the same on the basis of a suggestion of vigilance in the matter.
Even otherwise the facts in the subsequent writ petition would show that there is a good case in favour of the petitioner.
Even the vigilance is not sure of a finding in favour of the employee as I see from the investigation.
16.
Counsel for the petitioner has placed argument with regard to the right of the management in recalling the order after due date in the case on hand.
Since I have come to a conclusion on facts that there is no order to recall as such available on record, it is unnecessary for me to go into this question as to whether the Company could have ordered recalling the approval order after 31-5-93.
It is also unnecessary for this court to give any finding with regard to the right of the management in the matter in this case.
That question is left open.
17.
Though in the light of this order it may not be necessary to consider the second writ petition, still I have given my finding in the second petition in the light of the parties arguing the case.
Let me consider the submission in the other writ petition also, so that a common order can be passed in both the cases.
18.
In the second petition the petitioner is challenging the dismissal order and the confirmed order by the Appellate Authority.
Material facts reveal that an enquiry was conducted against the petitioner in the light of a complaint by certain dealers.
An enquiry was held by the Management.
The enquiry committee consisting of one Sri H.G.
Ramchandra Rao and NSS Sastry came to a categories conclusion that the prosecution has failed to establish the charges against the petitioner.
They have given a verdict that the petitioner is not guilty of any one of the charges made against him.
They have referred to the evidence on record to come to this conclusion.
The disciplinary authority in terms of a communication dt. 14-11-95 has differed from the findings of the enquiry committee.
The disciplinary authority issued a show cause notice dt. 14-11-95.
In the show case notice the disciplinary authority has stated that the petitioner is guilty of the charges of misconduct.
Thereafter the disciplinary authority states as under in the show caused notice :  "I have considered your past record also.
Notwithstanding your past record, having regard to the seriousness of the charges proved against you, I propose the punishment of : DISMISSAL FROM SERVICE under Rule 25(g) r/w Rule 27(b) of the BEML Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules.
11.
You are required to show cause why the punishment of dismissal should not be imposed on you.
The same should reach the undersigned on or before 25-11-95 failing which action will be taken as proposed."
(emphasis is supplied).
19.
Petitioner seems to have not filed a reply to the proposed punishment and, thereafter, the disciplinary authority has passed an order ordering dismissal from service in terms of dt. 31-1-96 annexure A.
From the records made available to this Court it is clear that no opportunity was given by the disciplinary authority with regard to its disagreeing with the finding of the enquiry committee.
It is a well settled principle of law now that an opportunity has to be given in the event of disagreement by the disciplinary authority.
No such opportunity is given in the case on hand.
On the other hand an opportunity was given only with regard to the proposed punishment.
This is very clear from the show cause notice and the order itself.
The Supreme Court in the case of Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Behari Misra, 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC) : (1998)7 SCC 84 : (AIR 1998 SC 2713) ruled as under :  "17.
These observations are clearly in tune with the observation in Bimal Kumar Pandit case (AIR 1963 SC 1612) quoted earlier and would be applicable at the first stage itself.
The aforesaid passages clearly bring out the necessity of the authority which is to finally record an adverse finding to give a hearing to the delinquent officer.
If the enquiry officer had given the adverse finding, as per Karunakar case (AIR 1994 SC 1074) the first stage required an opportunity to be given to the employee to represent to the disciplinary authority, even when an earlier opportunity has been given to them by the enquiry officer.
It will not stand to reason that when finding in favour of the delinquent officer is proposed to be overturned by the disciplinary authority then no opportunity should be granted.
The first stage of the enquiry is not completed till the disciplinary authority has recorded its findings.
The principle of natural justice would demand that the authority which proposed to decide against the delinquent officer must give him a hearing.
When the enquiry officer holds the charges to be proved, then the report has to be given to the delinquent officer who can make a representation before the disciplinary authority takes further action which may be prejudicial to the delinquent officer.
When like in the present case, the enquiry report is in favour of the delinquent officer but the disciplinary authority proposes to differ with such conclusion, then that authority which is deciding against the delinquent officer must give him an opportunity of being heard for otherwise he would be condemned unheard.
In departmental proceedings, what is of ultimate importance is the finding of disciplinary authority."
20.
In the case on hand since no such opportunity is given and hence the order suffers from denial of an opportunity in terms of the Apex Court ruling.
21.
In the subsequent judgment in the case 1994(4) SCT 403 (SC) : (1999) 7 SCC 739 : (AIR 1999 SC 3734) Yoginath D Bagde v. State of Maharashtra the Apex Court has ruled that a show cause notice issued to a petitioner with regard to proposed punishment do not meet the requirement of the law because final decision to disagree with the enquiry officer had already been taken before issuing show cause notice.
22.
In the light of these two decisions and in the absence of any opportunity to the petitioner annexure A the order of disciplinary authority has to be set aside.
When once annexure A suffer from this patent legal errors, the subsequent order of the appellate order also has to go in the light of these serious legal errors committed by the Company.
Therefore, the impugned orders are set aside by me in this order.
23.
In the case on hand the petitioner has also attained the age of superannuation.
24.
In these circumstances taking into consideration all aspects of the matter I deem it proper to allow both the petitions by setting aside the impugned orders but without a order to costs.
Order accordingly.
Petitions allowed.