Tejinder Singh Doabia, J - The petitioner was reduced in rank.
An order to this effect was passed on 03/06/1996.
The petitioner challenges this order.
In addition to this, the petitioner submits that when his request for voluntary retirement was accepted then this should have been accepted as if he was holding the post of Lance Naik and not on the post to which he stood reduced in rank.
The second relief depends upon the nature of relief which would ultimately granted in this petition.
In case the order of reduction in rank is found to be justifiable, the second relief can obviously not granted.
It is not necessary to go into the service profile of the petitioner.
2.
What is relevant is the event which took place on the night intervening 31/03/1996 and 01/04/1996.
The petitioner was put on Naka-duty opposite to international border.
He was found remiss in the performance of duty.
He was found sleeping in an improvised Jhuggi on the night intervening the two days referred to above.
The petitioner was proceeded against in terms of Section 40 of th Border Security Force Act.
A Summary Security Force Court was held on 03/06/1996.
The petitioner was found guilty.
The sentence was passed accordingly.
The petitioner submitted a representation to the Inspector General of Police.
It is submitted that the sentence imposed on the petitioner has been duly promulgated.
For this reliance is being placed on an order dated 11/04/1996.
3.
The petitioner challenges the proceedings of the court referred to above.
It is submitted :-  i) that the allegation levelled against him was false; ii) that the petitioner had submitted a representation on 15/03/1996 for home posting.
This was not done; and iii) that Summary Security Force Court was conducted in breach of Section 17 of the Act.
4.
In addition to the above plea, it is submitted that under Section 40, the term `good order' means conduct which is prejudicial to the good order.
It is submitted that petitioner has done nothing which may be considered as prejudicial to good order.
It is further submitted that order dated 25/06/1996 has been effective from 23/06/1996.
It is also submitted that proceedings were recorded in English and petitioner was not able to understand the implication of what was attributed to him and also recording the nature of proceedings which were conducted in this regard.
5.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner was found sleeping.
A Summary Security Force Court was held.
The petitioner admitted his guilt.
The petitioner also tendered his voluntary retirement w.e.f.
05/06/1996.
In this he has mentioned as Lance Naik.
He was directed to submit application in accordance with rank to which he stood reduced.
6.
A perusal of the file indicates that the petitioner was given opportunity to indicate whether he pleads guilty or not.
The petitioner pleaded guilty.
There is a endorsement dated 03/06/1996 which reads as under :-  "**The accused having pleaded guilty to the charge, the court explains to the accused the meaning of charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertains that the accused understands the nature of the charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty.
The court also inform the accused the general effect of that plea and the difference in procedure which will be followed consequent to the said plea.
The Court having satisfied itself that the accused understands the charge(s) and the effect of his plea of guilty, accepts and records the same.
The provisions of Rule 142(2) are complied with."
7.
On 22/06/1996, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Director General of the Force.
In this he admits that Naka was checked.
The Inspecting Officer, however, found a hut near the Naka.
This was objected to.
He submitted that he had 30 years of service to his credit.
He further submitted that he was promoted as Naik.
There has nothing been adverse against him, that he should not have been punished.
In yet another communication dated 11/10/1996, he admits that there was a small hut.
There were other personnel.
These were Sukhdev Singh and Gurmukh Singh.
Sukhdev Singh fallen ill.
He was taken to hut.
In this manner he submits that he should not have been punished.
Statement of Sukhdev Singh who appeared as P.W.-1 is to the effect that Mohinder Singh was not sleeping in the hut but he was lying there.
8.
In his earlier statement, he had stated that Gurmukh Singh was in fact looking after the Naka.
Shri SN Sharma who was the Commanding Officer and he checked the Naka, makes following statement :-  "On 31/03/1996, NK Mohinder Singh, Ct Sukhdev Singh and Ct Gurmukh Singh were detailed for Naka No. 1 and they left Manihari BOP at about 1830 hrs for Naka duty.
NK Mohinder Singh was Naka Comdr.
Comdt accompanied by me left BOP Manihari at 2145 hrs for Naka checking.
After checking four Nakas, we reached near Naka No. 1 at about 2215 hrs.
I saw that Ct. Gurmukh Singh was on Naka duty.
NK Mohinder Singh, Naka Comdr and Ct. Sukhdev Singh were lying in the but and taking rest there because Naka was closed at that time because of moon light Ct. Gurmukh Singh who was on Naka Duty challenged the checking officer.
Then Comdt went close to the hut and asked them "why you are in the hut".
He told them that he had given instruction not lay Naka in the hut.
After this, we returned to the BOP Manihari."
9.
From the perusal of the statement of Shri SN Sharma, Commanding Officer, it becomes apparent that petitioner along with Sukhdev Singh were inside the hut and it was Gurmukh Singh who was keeping the watch.
The charge against the petitioner was that he was found sleeping.
This is so stated in para 3 of the reply, which reads as under :-  "That in reply to the contents of para 3, it is submitted that the petitioner was found sleeping in an improvised Juggi on the intervening night of 31st March-Ist April, 1996 at about 2115 hours while he was on Naka Duty opposite to international border.
That being so the charge framed under section 40 of BSF Act against the petitioner is in consonance with the gravity of the offence."
10.
As a matter of fact, in the Summary of proceedings the exact charge against him is as under :-  "BSF Act U/S-40 an act prejudicial to good order and discipline of the force.
in that he, at BOP Manihari on intervening night 31st Mar/01 April 1996 at about 1215 hrs.
while on naka duty opposite to International Border, was found sleeping in a improvised Juggi, contrary to standing order."
11.
If above be the situation then the question arises as to whether the petitioner against whom allegation was that he was found sleeping could be punished on the ground that he was lying in the hut.
Lying in the hut and sleeping in the hut are two distinct and different situations.
As indicated, the Inspecting officer in his statement has categorically stated that Mohinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh were lying in the hut and were taking rest.
Thus the evidence which has come on the record and on which reliance has been placed is quite contrary to the statement of the officer who inspected the Naka.
The charge against the petitioner was not that he was found lying in the Hut.
The charge against the petitioner that he was found sleeping.
Thus what has been ultimately found to have been proved against the petitioner is not projected by the P.W-2.
This is a case where inference has been drawn is not supported by the evidence of the record.
The plea of guilt has to be examined vis-a-vis the evidence which is there on the record.
The petitioner can be said to have pleaded guilty to his taking rest and not the act of sleeping.
This distinction has to be kept in view.
This is because the consequence which ensue have serious civil consequence.
It is accordingly held that the petitioner has been found guilty on the basis of material and on the basis of evidence which does not support the charge.
The proceedings of the Summary Security Force Court are held to be vitiated.
If this be the situation, the petitioner would be entitled to the second relief also.
His voluntary retirement would have to be accepted against the rank he was holding before the order of of reduction in rank was passed.
This petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Normally the respondents would have been left free to hold fresh proceedings, however, as the charge levelled against the petitioner is not sustainable at all on the basis of evidence which has come on the record, it has not been thought apt to put the petitioner to the rigor of facing another court.
The petitioner accordingly is held entitled to the benefit of post which he was holding before 03/06/1996.
Petition allowed.