SS Nihar, J (Oral) - This Writ Petition seeks issuance of writ of Certiorari quashing the award dated 15.1.2001 under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Respondent No. 2-Workman was issued a charge sheet on 26111984 for embezzlement of an amount of Rs. 88,53886.
The workman being an employee of a Cooperative Society, the dispute was referred to an Arbitrator.
On 10111984, the Arbitrator held the workman responsible for embezzlement.
Thereafter, a domestic enquiry was conducted and the workman was found guilty of the charges.
On 781985 the workman was ordered to be dismissed from service.
Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana allowed the appeal filed by the workman and set aside the order dismissing the workman from service.
Thereafter, second show cause notice was issued to the workman on 21.10.1986.
The matter was placed before the Board of Directors on 911986.
It was resolved that the workman shall pledge five acres of land within 15 days as security against the alleged amount and deposit the amount with interest upto 3041987.
The workman failed to pledge the land or to make payment.
Consequently, the Board of Directors of the Bank again ordered the dismissal of the Workman from service on 151987.
On 2541994, the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana dismissed the appeal of respondent No. 2 and upheld the order of dismissal.
On 1151996, the workman served a demand notice on the Bank (hereinafter referred to as the Management).
Consequently, the matter was referred by the Haryana Government to the Labour Court.
The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court) by its award dated 15.1.2001 held that the order of termination was not justified.
The workman has been directed to be reinstated in service with continuity and 50 per cent back wages from the date of demand notice till reinstatement.
3.
Mr. Lohan has submitted that the respondent-workman could not have been reinstated into service as he had been charge-sheeted for embezzlement.
Learned Counsel has also submitted that even if reinstatement was to be ordered, the workman could not have been granted any back wages as the reference was sought by the workman after the period of two years of the dismissal of the appeal by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana on 25.4.1984.
4.
Mr. Monga, however, submitted that for the same allegations, the respondent-workman had to face criminal prosecution in Crl.
Case No. 334 of 1989/1992.
The trial court acquitted the workman with the observations that there is not even an iota of evidence available on the record to connect the accused with the commission on crime.
It is further argued that the dispute in fact was of a civil nature which has been amicably settled between the parties.
The resolution dated 14121996 has been passed by the Society to this effect.
5.
I have considered the submissions made by the counsel for the parties.
6.
A perusal of the award shows that the Labour Court has given full opportunity to the Management to prove its case.
The Labour Court has held that the enquiry conducted by the Management was vitiated.
On the basis of the evidence led by the parties, the Labour Court has come to the conclusion that the workman has not embezzled any amount as alleged.
Apart from that, it is to be noticed that the workman has been acquitted by the trial court, the trial court has come to the conclusion that there was absolutely no evidence to connect the workman with the embezzlement.
This apart, it is to be seen that the dispute was treated as a civil dispute by the Society itself which was resolved by resolution dated 14121996.
In this resolution, it is categorically stated that there was dispute between the Societies and the workman with regard to some amount.
It is further stated that the matter has been reconciled and the dispute has been settled by the Societies with the workman.
There is said to be nothing due to the Society from the workman.
The resolution further states that during the pendency of the dispute and on the asking of the Society, the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Society, Sirsa initiated a police case.
Now, the dispute having been settled, the Society has no objection if the case is withdrawn.
The resolution in, fact recommends that the case may be withdrawn.
The Labour Court has taken into account the circumstances of the dispute.
The findings of the fact returned by the Labour Court cannot be said to be based on no evidence.
In my view, the award does not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record which would necessitate interference by this Court whilst exercising writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the Writ Petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.