Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we will dispose of two writ petitions being CWP No. 193 and 17428 both of 2001, as common question of law based on somewhat similar facts arise for consideration of the Court in these cases.
2.
The petitioners in both these petitions were engaged as Chowkidar-cum-Water Carrier, Sweeper, Peon and Mali as part time workers in the year 1987 onwards.
According to the petitioners, their names were sent to the Employment Exchange and they were issued appointment letters.
Some of the appointment letters dated 1121987 and 30.12.1987 in favour of the petitioners are annexed to these writ petitions as Annexure P/1.
The Government of Haryana framed a policy to regularise the services of Class-IV employees, working on part time basis on 19.12.1980.
In terms of this policy, services of part time employees, who had completed three years of service if recruited through Employment Exchange and had put in six years service if recruited directly, were entitled to regularisation.
According to the petitioners, services of the persons working on ad hoc basis were regularised.
However, the petitioners were denied this benefit.
3.
Some of the part-time employees filed writ petitions before this Court and vide order dated 2421998, the respondents were directed to draw up and implement a policy of regularisaton for part-time employees.
Vide letter dated 121999.
Annexure P/5 to the petition the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana had written to all Heads of the Departments, the conditions which should be satisfied for regularisation of part-time employees.
Such regularisation was permitted against posts and subject to the following conditions :  i) That the employee should have been recruited through the employment exchange or directly appointed by the appointing authority after obtaining the non-availability certificate from the employment exchange.
ii) That the employee possesses the prescribed qualifications for the post; and  iii) That the work and conduct of such employee has been satisfactory.
Despite this the services of the petitioner were not regularised though they were satisfying the conditions stipulated above.
The petitioners had been requesting the respondents for regularisation of their services particularly in view of a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Baldu Ram and others v. State of Haryana, 2000(3) SCT 288 (P&H) CWP No. 10774 of 1999, decided on 422000 and the Special Leave Petition against which was dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Having failed to get relief at the hands of the respondents, the petitioners have filed the present petitions.
4.
Upon notice written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents in CWP No. 193 of 2001, which was adopted in other case also.
The facts are really not disputed but it has been stated that the Government had now issued instructions prescribing qualifications for appointment to the post of peon as well sweepers.
The petitioners do not possess the requisite qualifications and as such cannot be appointed on regular basis.
It is also states in the reply that the part time employees are to work for few hours.
The schools and the departments where the petitioners are employed, do not have need for full time workers as such no right is vested in the petitioners for claiming regularisation.
5.
It is apparent that the relief claimed by the petitioners is squarely covered by judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Raldu Ram's case (supra) which was subsequently followed in the case of Ranbir Singh and others Versus State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 3593 of 2000, decided on 24.8.2001, where the Court while granting relief to the petitioners in that case held as under :  "Counsel for the petitioners argued that though the petitioners are working as part time workmen for more than 10 years, their services are not regularised, though similarly situated other employees are regularised.
The respondents, vide the impugned orders, Annexures P-6, P-7 and P-8, have rejected the cases for regularisation of petitioners 1, 2 and 3 similar on the ground argued for rejection of the case of other petitioners.
The rejection is mainly on two grounds : (i) eligibility and (ii) age limit.
Petitioners have relied on a judgment of this Court in the case of Baldu Ram etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., C.W.P.
No. 10774 of 1999, decided on 422000, passed by a Division Bench of this Court."
Respondents have not shown as to what is the eligibility required for the post.
Moreover, respondents are working as part time employees on the respective posts for a long period as mentioned above and therefore, the question of age limit cannot come in their way.
It is not the case of the respondents that when the petitioners were appointed as part time employees, they had crossed the required age limit.
Hence, the age of the petitioners at the time of consideration of their case for regularisation is irrelevant as decided by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Raldu Ram (supra).
Counsel for the respondents argued that there is non-availability of the posts for regularising the petitioners.
In the case of Raldu Ram (supra), a Division Bench of this Court has observed as under :  "So far as the second ground is concerned, it is sufficient to point out that the work for the petitioners was with the respondents and they continued to serve and are in service even as on today and since they have already rendered more than 10 years service, it cannot be said that their services cannot be regularised for non-availability of the required posts.
Once respondents have engaged the petitioners on work, which is of continuous nature, and permitted them to serve on their respective posts for more than 10 years, it will be unfair for the respondents to decline the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services or non-availability of posts."
When the respondents have framed the policy of regularisation, it does not lie in their mouth to say that there is no post available.
The petitioners are working on the job and hence the work is available and it is for the respondents to create necessary posts."
6.
The learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana submitted that in view of the various pronouncements not much of choice is left with the State.
However, he stated that the Government had already framed a policy and it had further taken a decision to relax the prescribed qualifications in the case of part-time Sweepers who have already been working for a considerable period, but he also submitted that the posts have to be available.
In fact in another case, being CWP No. 5926 of 2000, titled as Vidya Devi and others versus State of Haryana and others, decided on 2022002, the Court after considering the statement of the Advocate General passed the following order :  "During the course of hearing, the learned Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana sought time to seek instructions if the State could work out some via-media within the frame-work of its existing policy for regularising the services of the petitioners and alike situated persons.
We must note with some appreciation that the learned Advocate General, Haryana informed the court and upon the instructions from the State, Mr. Amol Rattan, Assistant Advocate General made statement in the court that the State would not strictly enforce the conditions of prescribing qualifications against the petitioners if there are regular sanctioned posts of Sweepers available at any point of time.
It is also stated that the State, in order to accommodate such class, would consider the case of the Sweepers against the posts of peons.
Of Course, again subject to same conditions of availability of posts and the part-time Sweeper satisfying the qualification prescribed for the post of a Peon.
In view of the statement made on behalf of the State, the controversy in the present case falls in the very narrow compass.
The entire argument is with regard to the applicability of the instructions of 1998 retrospectively or retroactively.
The petitioners have been working for a considerable time and discharging the functions of the part-time employees in the departments of the State of Haryana.
Once the State has given the above relaxation, the only exception for regularising the services of the petitioners is that firstly, there are no posts available and secondly, there is no work.
There is a serious dispute raised before us as to the nature and quantum of the work being available in the schools.
We are of the considered view that while exercising its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is not appropriate forum to determine such matters.
They primarily fall in the domain of the State and its specialised agencies.
What is the prescribed infrastructure of the school; what is the strength of the school and how many employees are needed, is not a matter inviting judicial determination, but at the same time the Courts expect the administration to take a view which will be in consonance with the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex court and the various Division Benches of this Court.
The petitioners have placed reliance upon the recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Umed Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 2001(1) RSJ 752 : 2001(3) SCT 79 (P&H)(DB), wherein it has been held that after 10 years, the petitioners in the case cited above were considered to the eligible for regularisation.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioners are also claiming that the expression "part time" does not indicate with regard to nature of their work and the time spent by them in the schools.
According to them they are working for the entire day in the school and performing their functions and duties assigned to them by the Administration.
It is specifically disputed that they work only for an hour or two in a day.
It is contended that there are nursery schools where small children are studying.
Thus, the cleaning process of the class rooms etc. is carried out for the hours during which the school is run."
"Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, the statement made on behalf of the State and in order to resolve this prolonged dispute, we would issue direction so as to enable the State to act effectively within the frame-work of its policy and to achieve the ends of justice by granting to the petitioners what is due to them in accordance with law.
Thus, we issue the following directions:  (i) The case of the petitioners for regularisation as part-time employees would be considered by the State within a period of six months in the light of its policy dated December 30, 1998/February 25, 1999;  (ii) The claim of the petitioners would not be declined on the ground that they do not possess the essential qualifications as stipulated in the said policy as per the statement made in the Court by Mr. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General upon the instructions of the State;  (iii) The State shall appoint the Sub-committee headed by an officer not below the rank of Under Secretary to Government of the State to examine the building, infrastructure, staff and number of children studying in every school of the State of Haryana and in the light of that to recommend how many regular posts can be created in every school depending on the work and the strength of the employees and students.
The committee shall consider the availability of the posts as and when it became available/vacant in a particular school to identify the total number of posts which can be filled up as of now, under the policy of the Government;  (iv) We also consider it appropriate that the Committee aforestated shall hear the part-time employees in a representative capacity before determining the criteria to implement this order.
Thereupon services of the petitioners would, thus, be regularised in the above terms.
All these petitions are disposed of in the above terms directing the State to comply with the above directions within a period of six months from today.
It is made clear that no further extension would be allowed for this exercise.
7.
In view of the above enunciated principle of law the State is obliged to regularise the services of the part-time workers in phases and endeavour its best to avoid unnecessary litigation.
In the present case the petitioners have been working since the year 1987.
The very fact that they have been working and continue to work in the said post even today is sufficiently indicative of availability of work.
The State Government, thus, may not be justified in denying regularisation to the petitioners.
For the reasons afore-stated we dispose of these writ petitions with a direction to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners in accordance with its policy and upon giving regularisation (relaxation ?)
to the petitioners in regard to prescribed qualifications as submitted by the learned Advocate General, Haryana.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Ordered accordingly.