Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner was appointed as Mali-cum-Chowkidar in Public Health Division No. 1, of State of Haryana, at Kaithal on 23101991.
According to the petitioner, in June, 1992 he was not permitted to join his duties and as such it amounted to retrenchment/termination of his services without complying with the provisions of Sections 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
After the date of termination, the petitioner-workman claims that he had approached the respondent-department on various occasions but he has not been re-employed and then he served a demand notice upon the respondents under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act on 2922000.
This claim was rejected by the appropriate Government on 2482000 by passing the following order :-  "Sub : Demand notice dated 2932000 given against:  1.
Executive Engineer, Public Health Division, Kaithal.
2.
Sub Divisional Engineer, Public Sub Division, Kaithal.
..................  On the above cited subject you are informed that Government has treated no fit case of you for sending to the Labour Court for decision because after verification it has come to the notice that you have raised the demand after 13 years and no reasonable explanation has been given for delay.
Therefore, in view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in case Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhwan Kutti, 2000(1) SCT 1088 (SC) : LLR, page 340-2000 delay demand cannot be sent to the Labour Court.
Therefore, keeping in view of the above, you demand notice has been rejected."
2.
This order has been challenged by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
3.
The appropriate Government had passed the order after issuing notice to the concerned department.
In reply to the demand notice it was stated before the authorities that the petitioner never approached the department for the last eight years and at no point of time any assurance was given to the workman.
Even in the petition no document has been placed on record to show what steps the workman was taking for this long period of more than 9 years now as the services of the workman were terminated/retrenched in June, 1992 and the notice of demand was served on 2922000.
The allegations made in the writ petition are not only vague but are quite uncertain in their expression.
The workman has not even given the date on which his services were retrenched and/or terminated.
4.
In the present petition, no definite averments have been made and no effort has been made by the workman to explain the delay/laches right from the date of termination of his services till issuance of demand notice.
The dispute, thus, would hardly exist and in any case has become a dispute which is patently stale one.
The competent authority has to discharge obligations imposed upon it under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act on certain principles.
It has relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of KP Madhwan Kutty (supra) but a Division Bench of this Court has discussed other judgments also of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Rohtas v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(4) SCT 945 (P&H) CWP No. 2936 of 2002, decided today in regard to a dispute being staled and has held as under :-  "The appropriate Government must act judicially and fairly.
The principle of fairness inevitably require the authority to act upon due application of mind.
Existence of industrial dispute is the condition precedent for an authority to make reference to the Labour Court/Tribunal, as the case may be.
Disappearance of this essential ingredients may be for the dispute being patently stale one, would take away the basis for a valid reference.
The Hon'ble Apex Court has repeatedly held that a reference or invoking of the provisions under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Act should be within a reasonable time despite the fact that there was no period of limitation prescribed under the statute.
Reference in this regard can be made to the case of Gram Panchayat Karan v. Addl.
Director of Consolidation, 1997(4) RCR(Civil) 498 (SC) : JT 1997(8) SC 430.
It is equally true that no straight-jacket formula or hard and fast rule can be specified for adjudication the expression reasonable period or reasonable time.
This must be decided in context of the facts of each case, but it emerges to be the view of the more recent judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court that the appropriate Government is not debarred from declining a reference of industrial dispute on the ground that the same was patently stale or non- existence.
It is not possible to hold that the appropriate Government while exercising such powers lack inherent or substantive jurisdiction.
The workmen in all these cases before us have intentionally slept over their rights and have rendered no reasons much less sufficient reasons for serving the demand notice after such long period varying from 8-14 years.
In the demand notice, it had not been averred as to what steps were taken by the workmen for all this long period.
Such unexplained inordinate delay has rendered the dispute in question as patently stale.
In these circumstances we are of the considered view that the order passed by the appropriate Government for considering the above industrial dispute as totally stale one in the light of the case of The Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty and others (supra) does not suffer from any error which would call for interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction."
5.
In view of the above facts and for the reasons stated in the case of Rohtas (supra) we find no error of jurisdiction in the impugned order, which is in consonance with the recent pronouncement of the Hon'ble Apex Court.
This petition is, thus, dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.