Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
2.
Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, is to the order dated 2882000 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala.
Vide impugned order, the learned Presiding Officer re-framed the issues on an application filed by the management and as many as five following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the services of the workman have been terminated after holding a fair and proper enquiry ?
OPR  (2) If issue No. 1 is not proved, whether the workman was guilty of acts of major misconduct ?
OPR  (3) Whether the reference is bad in law ?
OPR  (4) Whether termination of the services of the workman is justified and in order ?
OPR  (5) Relief.
While re-framing these five issues, the learned Labour Court declined the request of the management for treating issue No. 1 as a preliminary issue.
3.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner while relying upon the decision of the Apex court in the case of The Cooper Engineering Limited v. Shri PP Mundhe, 1975(2) Supreme Court Cases 661, contended that the onus of Issue No. 1 ought to have been placed upon the workman and secondly that this issue ought to be treated as a preliminary issue and thus, the order of the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court suffers from error of jurisdiction.
4.
On the other hand, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent while relying upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of DP Maheshwari v. Delhi Administration and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 153, contended that the order of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court is in conformity with law enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court that all issues are to be tried altogether and also that the onus has rightly been placed upon the management.
5.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the order passed by the learned Labour Court does not suffer from any error of jurisdiction or otherwise which would call for any interference by this Court in the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
6.
Whether an issue should be treated as preliminary issue or not, is a question which falls within the domain of the Labour Court.
The Labour Court on appreciation of the record produced before it and the controversy involved, rejected the request of the management.
Issue No. 1 is in a way inter- connected with issue No. 2.
Issue No. 2 is to be decided only on the finding recorded on Issue No. 1.
The language of Issue No. 2 makes it amply clear that both these issues are based upon common evidence and no fruitful purpose will be achieved by treating it as preliminary issue.
These orders are procedural in nature and do not cause any prejudice to the substantive rights of the parties.
The purpose of the special Acts alike the Industrial Disputes Act while vesting the jurisdiction exclusively in trying industrial disputes upon Labour Court, certainly is for expeditious disposal of the disputes between the workman and the management.
The judgment relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner is of no help to him in the present case as in that case the domestic enquiry was admitted to be defective even by the employer.
In the present case, the parties are at serious dispute with regard to this fact.
According to the management, the enquiry has been conducted fairly and in accordance with law while according to the workman, the enquiry vitiates even the principles of natural justice.
In its wisdom, the learned Labour Court has chosen to try all the issues together and the parties are to lead their evidence collectively.
Thus, the order of the Labour Court does not suffer from any infirmity in law.
7.
It is always for the management to show that the enquiry was fair and proper.
Thus, the decision of the Apex court in the case of DP Maheshwari's case (supra) is fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
8.
I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
The same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.