Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitions in all these eight civil writ petitions bearing No. 3312, 3313, 3314, 3315, 3316, 3317, 3318 and 3319 of 2000 challenge the award dated 10.4.2001 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala.
In other words, all these writ petitions raise common and mixed question of law and fact, "whether the conclusion of the Labour Court that services of the petitioners were rightfully terminated during the probation period is erroneous in law and calls for any interference by his court."
Thus, it will be proper to dispose of all these eight writ petitions by this common judgment.
For the purposes of convenience we have taken the facts of the case titled Ram Chander v. OSAW Agro Industries and another.
2.
Ram Chander, hereinafter referred to as the workman, was appointed by OSAW Agro Industries as Helper and in pursuance thereto, he joined his duties on 10.6.1996.
The workman was getting the consolidated salary of Rs. 1648/- per month.
The workman was on probation for a period of six months and his services were terminated on 14.4.1992.
According to the workman, the termination of services was illegal and in violation of Sections 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the competent Labour Court.
Upon failure of conciliation proceedings, the management admitted the facts afore-noticed, however, took up the plea that they were fully justified in terminating the services during the probation period as work of the workman was not found satisfactory and up to the mark.
Thus, termination was legal and valid and in accordance with the terms stipulated in the letter of appointment.
3.
The Labour Court answered the reference against the workman.
The learned Labour Court while appreciating the documentary and oral evidence in the following manner rejected the relief prayed for by the workman :-  "The contention of the respondent management that the workman was engaged w.e.f.
11121996 stands substantiated from the employees PF record Ex.M-1 wherein it has been specifically mentioned that the workman joined his duties w.e.f.
11121996.
The termination w.e.f.
1441997 has also been reported in the provident fund record Ex.M-2.
The respondent has also proved the contribution towards Provident Fund from April, 1996 to March, 1997 and April, 1997 to March, 1998 by producing Ex.M-3 and M-4.
The management has also produced Ex. M/1 to Ex.M/4 showing the details of PF account deduction which was submitted to the PF Officer.
The respondent management has also produced the performance and development forms Ex.M-5 and M-6 wherein date of joining has been mentioned as 11121996.
Management has also produced the official from Bank of India's MW-1 who has testified the bank opening Account form MW1/1 in which the date has been mentioned as Feb 97 and copy of the Ledger Book Ex.N-1/2.
The respondent has also produced the certificate from the Bank of India as Ex.M-9 showing the details of salary/other amounts deposited by the respondent in the account of the workman.
From Ex.M-9 it emerges that a sum of Rs. 47465 was deposited in January, 1997.
Therefore, in view of the overwhelming documentary evidence it has to be held that the workman joined the service in view of the appointment letter w.e.f.
11121996 and the respondent management dispensed with the services of the workman during the probation period on 1441997.
There is nothing on the file in order to infer that the workman was in the employment of the management prior to 11121996.
However, the learned representative of workman Sh. OP Malra has pointed out that the account was opened in August, 1996 as shown in Ex.MW-1/2.
However, the said deposits pertain to the period during which the petitioner was in the employment of sister concern of the respondent and the Bank also has given certificate to this effect.
The workman has not produced any other record in order to infer that he was in the service of the respondent-management prior to 11121996.
Therefore, it has to be held that the workman joined the service of the respondent-management w.e.f.
11121996.
The workman was appointed in view of the appointment letter dated 11121996 which is Ex.MW-7 according to which he was to remain on probation for six months and his confirmation was subject to approval by the respondent- management in writing................"  "In the instant case the respondent has produced appraisal report Ex.M-5 and Ex.M-6 which is dated 1331997.
In the appraisal report the assessment was poor during the probation period.
The work and conduct of the workman during the probation period was assessed as being not satisfactory.
The respondent- management did not prefer to retain the workman any more and terminated in services on 1441997 during the probation period itself."
4.
In view of the above premises, the learned Counsel for the workman mainly contended that the services of the workman could not be terminated within the period of probation i.e. six months and the management was obliged to wait for expiry of the period of probation.
In support of his contention, the learned Counsel has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Sumati P Shere v. Union of India and others, 1989(2) S.L.R.
422.
He further contended that services of the petitioner amounts to terminating the services with a stigma during the period of probation and such action would be vitiated in law.
For this purpose, learned Counsel placed reliance upon the case of Kunwar Arun Kumar v. UP Hill Electronics Corporation Ltd and others, 1997(1) S.L.R.
137 and the Management of the Express News Papers Pvt. Ltd. Madurai v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court Madhurai, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 806.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also made a reference to Annexure P/3 to the petition, which is alleged to be the standing orders in respect of the industry, we may notice that it was conceded by the learned Counsel that this annexure was not before the learned Labour Court and the learned Labour Court took notice of the standing orders which were duly exhibited as Ex. MW- 3/3.
When a document is exhibited on record without protest and objections.
We cannot take note of the evidence which was neither produced nor tendered before the Labour Court.
6.
In order to appreciate the merits of the contentions raised before us as well as applicability of the principles enunciated by the Apex Court in the judgments noticed, to the facts of the present case, at the cost of repetition we may notice the admitted facts.
The workman was appointed on 11121996 as per letter of appointment Ex.MW-7.
His appointment was on probation for a period of six months extended by the same period and his services were terminated on 1441997 i.e. within a period of six months from the date of his initial appointment.
The learned Labour Court while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of KV Krishanamani v. Lalit Kala Academy, 1996(4) SCT 255 (SC) : 1997 LLR SC Page 16 and Kartar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) RSJ 806 held that appointment of an employee as probationer is to test suitability and if the appointing authority finds that candidate is not suitable, the employer can terminate the service of the employee during the period of probation.
Terms of the letter clearly showed that it was an appointment on probation and services were terminable in terms thereof.
As such the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not per se attracted.
Further, admittedly the workman had not worked for 240 days as such another presumption would not arise in his favour within the scope of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
7.
Once an employee is on probation he cannot be placed at par with a regular employee or an employee who has completed 240 days of continuous work or an ad hoc employee.
The purpose of putting an employee on probation is primarily to see his performance and suitability to the job for which he was appointed.
Confirmation of an employee in that post would necessarily depend upon his performance of the assigned job.
In the present case even the appraisal reports Ex. M-5 and M-6 were produced on record, copies of which the learned Counsel for the petitioner has himself placed on record, clearly show that during this short period the workman could not improve, output was very low and was found to be irresponsible and quarrelsome.
This Court cannot sit in appeal, moreover, when nothing could be brought on record before the Labour Court to contradict these appraisal reports.
The findings recorded by the Labour Court can neither be termed perverse nor are contrary to the evidence produced on record.
8.
In the case of Express News Papers Private Limited, the Hon'ble Apex Court clearly enunciated the principle that normally services of a probationer could be terminated with the end of the probation period but for two exceptions, firstly, ground of misconduct and, secondly, without sufficient reasons for which services of even a permanent employee could be terminated.
The expression, sufficient reasons, is of wide connotation and must be construed somewhat liberally in context with the factum of probation, a person being a probationer.
If the work is found so wanting that the very purpose of putting him on probation is frustrated and there is apparent persistence with the workmen, the case would certainly fall within the exceptions.
In the case of Kunwar Arun Kumar (supra) their Lordships of the Supreme Court were concerned with termination of services of probationer for unauthorised absence but their Lordships clearly held that authorities are entitled to assess suitability of the candidate and if it is found that the candidate is not suitable to remain in service, they are entitled to record a finding of unsatisfactory performance of the work and duties during the probation, then they are entitled to terminate the services in terms of the letter of appointment.
We are of the considered view that the management in the present case has squarely acted within the permissible canons of law.
Equally the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Sumati P Shere (supra) is of no help to the petitioner inasmuch as in that case a person appointed on ad hoc basis against a substantive vacancy, was terminated without communicating his deficiencies.
There is a fine distinction between a person on ad hoc appointment and a person appointed on probation.
Appointment on probation, clearly postulates adjudgement of a suitable employee and puts the employee at caution for that period.
By the very nature of employment of ad hoc service, these ingredients are to be absent.
However, in the present case in their day-to-day working the workmen were duly informed by their superior staff.
The appraisal reports certainly indicate that the instances constituted sufficient ground for dispensing the services of the petitioner upon unsatisfactory performance of duties and functions by the workmen.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated, we dismiss all these writ petitions in limine, however, without any order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.