Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioner passed his matriculation examination in the year 1978 and thereafter cleared the two years course in electrician trade.
After coming into force of the Apprenticeship Act, 1961, the petitioner was selected for apprenticeship as Lineman in September, 1987 in the Hoshiarpur Branch of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
The petitioner completed two years apprenticeship on 24.9.1989.
In terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of UP State Road Transport Corporation and another v. U.P.
Parivahan Nigam Sishukhs Berozgar Sangh, 1995(2) SCT 367 (SC) : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 1115, the petitioner made various representations for giving him regular appointment as per the steps required to be taken by the Government in terms of the judgment of the Apex Court.
On 1771996 the petitioner submitted a representation before the respondents requesting them to implement the instructions issued by the Government dated 2621996, Annexure P/4 to the petition.
Without deciding the representations made by the petitioner, the respondent-Board on 1521996 invited applications for 754 posts of Lineman.
The selection test for the same was held on 12.10.1996.
The petitioner appeared in the said test.
He was declared successful, but appointment could not be given to him because he was much lower in merit.
Some of the persons challenged this action of the Board in C.W.P.
No. 12312 of 1996, which was dismissed as pre-mature as the Government was to act in accordance with its policy and judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Thereafter the petitioner kept on making various representations but of no consequences.
The representations were also filed in August, 2002.
Having failed to get any relief from the respondents despite various representations, the petitioner has filed this writ petition praying that the respondents be directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Lineman and in any case for treating the apprentices on year-wise seniority and granting them preference in appointment.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
It is stated that the present writ petition is totally misconceived.
The petitioners have no right for appointment to the post of Lineman.
According to the respondents an advertisement was issued for recruitment to the post of Lineman but the same restricted to the candidates possessing national apprenticeship certificate in the trade of Lineman.
Against the advertised posts, only 2731 applications were received and out of those only 2623 candidates were found to be eligible.
The minimum eligibility marks were fixed at 30% and the last candidate appointed in the general category had got 76 marks out of 200 whereas the petitioner obtained 52 marks out of 200.
Thus, the petitioner cannot claim any preference over the appointed candidates.
The written test was conducted to determine the inter se merit of the Lineman for the purposes of drawing a merit list and this has already been up-held by a Division Bench of this Court.
3.
The above referred facts clearly indicate that the apprentices appointed earlier were required to be absorbed in appointment in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of UP State Road Transport Corporation (supra).
The parties rely upon the directions issued by the Hon'ble Apex Court in this behalf, which read as under :-  "12.
In the background of what has been noted above, we state that the following would be kept in mind while dealing with the claim of trainees to get employment with the claim of trainees to get employment after successful completion of their training :-  (1) Other things being equal, a trained apprentice should be given preference over direct recruits.
(2) For this, a trainee would not be required to get his name sponsored by an employment exchange.
The decision of this Court in Union of India v. N Hargopal, AIR 1987 SC 1227 would permit this.
(3) If age bar would come in the way of the trainee, the same would be relaxed in accordance with what is stated in this regard, if any, in the concerned service rule.
If the service rule be silent on this aspect, relaxation to the extent of the period for which the apprentice had undergone training would be given.
(4) The concerned training institute would maintain a list of the persons trained yearwise.
The persons trained earlier would be treated as senior to the persons trained later.
In between the trained apprentices, preference will be given to those who are senior."
4.
There cannot be any dispute to the fact that for appointment to the post of Lineman, a written test was held and merit list was prepared.
Furthermore, such appointments were primarily given to the persons who had obtained a national apprenticeship certificate.
The petitioner has no indefeasible right to the appointment as Lineman unless and until he is entitled on the basis of his merit and the written test and the criteria adopted for selection and appointment to the post of Lineman.
5.
A Division Bench of this court in the case of Gurnam Singh and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board, CWP No. 18004 of 1996, decided on July 8, 1997, considering the effect of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in UP State Road Transport Corporation (supra) and in somewhat similar facts and situation, held as under :-  "We have heard learned Counsel for the parties.
Admittedly, in pursuance of the test, the Board had prepared a merit list.
Appointments to various posts have already been made.
None of the selected candidates or the persons who have been appointed have been impleaded in this petition.
Still further, it is not disputed that the candidates who had been selected and appointed were higher than the petitioners in order of merit.
In this situation, there is no equity in favour of the petitioners which may call for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Another fact which deserves mention is that a similar selection had been conducted by the Board even in the year 1995.
A challenge has been made to these appointments.
A Division Bench of this Court in Pawan Kumar's case (supra) has upheld the action of the Board in making appointments.
Even in the decision in UP State Road Transport Corporation's case (supra), it was not held that when selection is made from amongst the apprentices on the basis of a written test, one apprentice has a right to preference over the other on any basis other than merit.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that in view of the guide- lines laid down by the Apex Court, no written test could have been held.
We are unable to uphold the submission.
There are a large number of persons who have completed the training.
Who out of those could be appointed ?
Only the best and the most meritorious.
How was the merit to be determined ?
The competent authority has held a test.
It is not barred.
It is, thus, not illegal."
6.
The holding of the written test as well as the criteria adopted by the respondents in making appointments to the post of Lineman has been upheld by this Court.
We see no reason to differ with the view taken by the Court in the above case and would respectfully adopt the reasoning given by the respondents.
7.
Upon consideration of the entire matter, we are of the considered view that this petition has no merit and is liable to be dismissed.
Thus, we dismiss this petition leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.