Samaresh Banerjea, J - The present appeal has been preferred against the judgment and order dated March 6, 1995 passed in CR No. 8435(W) of 1983, whereby the trial Court has allowed the writ application.
2.
The writ petitioner who has been working in the appellant company since 1963, in the writ application made a grievance against non-consideration of his case for promotion to the higher post and supersession by Private Respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
3.
By the impugned judgment and order the trial Court has found on fact that the writ petitioner was senior to the said private respondents as a skilled worker and also was getting a higher salary than the said private respondens and therefore, non-consideration of his case for promotion and supersession by his juniors is wholly arbitrary and in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The learned Judge in coming to his decision has also recorded that although the respondents in the writ petition sought to argue before the trial Court that the promotion is to be made on the basis of merits, no Rules could be produced before the trial Court to show that such promotion is based on merits and not based on seniority.
The trial Court in absence of any such Rules proceeded on the footing that seniority should be the criteria for promotion and as the same was not considered in case of the writ petitioner, the impugned action of the respondent was held to be arbitrary and illegal.
5.
The trial Court has also recorded the main contention raised by the respondents before the trial Court that not having objected earlier to the promotion of the respondent Nos. 5 and 6, the writ petitioner accepted the same and therefore the writ petitioner was not entitled to any relief.
6.
It is pertinent to record in this connection as it will appear from the judgment of the trial Court itself that after the writ application was allowed to be amended by the trial Court, the same was directed to be treated as a representation of the writ petitioner to the respondents and the respondents were directed to consider and dispose of the same in accordance with law and to place the order before the trial Court.
Subsequent to that, the Managing Director of the appellant-company considered the said amended writ petition of the writ petitioner as a representation, but rejected the same on the ground indicated therein.
7.
It was also the contention of the writ petitioner as also before us that there was no proper consideration at all of the representation of the writ petitioner by the Managing Director of the appellant company.
8.
Learned Counsel appearing for the appellant has assailed the order of the trial Court on merits mainly on the ground that the trial Court came to an erroneous findings of fact, namely, that the writ petitioner was senior to private respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
It was also sought to be contended that the trial Court failed to appreciate that even if the writ petitioner was drawing pay higher than that of the said private respondents that will not necessarily lead to the conclusion that he was senior to the private respondents inasmuch as, because of various settlements the pay of such employee who has put in less years of service may be higher than his seniors.
It was asserted again that the respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were senior to the petitioner.
9.
From such submission of the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant it will thus appear that the appellants indirectly admitted that no Rules are there by which it can be said that such promotion is made on the basis of merits.
The inevitable consequences of which would be that in absence of any such Rules, promotion will have to be made on the basis of seniority only.
10.
Although learned Counsel appearing for the appellants has strenuously argued that the trial Court same to an erroneous finding holding that the writ petitioner is senior to Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 which in fact is not correct, we do not find any error in the aforesaid finding of the trial Court.
11.
The trial Court has clearly held that in the category of skilled workers the writ petitioner was senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6 and same will also be borne out from the fact that the pay of the petitioner was admittedly higher than that of the respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
The fact that as a skilled worker the pay of the writ petitioner was higher is not disputed by the appellant but it was sought to be contended as pointed out hereinbefore, before the trial Court that such higher pay of a junior may result because of some agreement or settlement, tripartite or otherwise.
12.
Attempt has been made to establish that as an unskilled worker the petitioner was junior to the respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
It is, however, immaterial whether as an unskilled worker the writ petitioner was junior to the respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
Even if the petitioner might have been junior as an unskilled worker, he may certainly become senior to the respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in the skilled category and which in fact has happened in the instant case as admittedly, in the skilled category the writ petitioner was promoted earlier and in fact was also drawing salary higher than that of the respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
The very fact that in skilled category, he was drawing the higher pay and the respondents have failed to produce any materials to show that the same was not because of his seniority, it must be held that the very fact that the writ petitioner was being paid in the skilled category amounts to acknowledgement by the respondents of his seniority over the Respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
13.
Such being the position, there was no justification whatsoever to ignore the case of the writ petitioner and to promote Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 disregarding the claim of the writ petitioner.
14.
Mr. Chatterjee, learned Counsel appearing for the appellant has drawn our attention to certain observations made by the Managing Director in his order disposing of the representation of the writ petitioner wherein, it was sought to be contended by the Managing Director that the writ petitioner was junior to the Respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
15.
It, however, appears to this Court that no affidavit was filed by the respondents to the amended writ petition and therefore the allengations made in the amended writ petition were never denied by the respondents and because of non-traversing, the same should be deemed to have been admitted.
16.
It is true, as pointed out by Mr. Chatterjee, that the said report having been relied on by the trial Court, the same should also be looked into by this Court for examining the contentions of the respondents.
17.
It, however, appears to us that in the said report the Managing Director, in suport of his contention that the writ petitioner has no case, has really emphasised on the point that the writ petitoner not having objected earlier and have accepted promotion, cannot be given any relief.
18.
It further appears from the said report that although it has been stated there that the petitioner was junior to the private respondent Nos. 5 and 6 and he gave dates of appointment of all the persons in his said order, significantly, the date of appointment in the skilled category has not been mentioned at all, which in fact is relevant for the purpose of this case and although in the amended writ petition a specific case was made that in the skilled category the writ petitioner was senior to the private respondents.
19.
It has been further submitted by Mr. Chatterjee, learned Counsel for the appellant, as it was done before the trial Court, that the writ petitioner, not having raised objection earlier when he was first promoted, is estopped from raising such objection.
20.
We are unable to accept such contention of the appellant.
If the writ petitioner is meted out with a discriminatory treatment and his case for promotion was not even considered by the appellants and his juniors are promoted totally ignoring his case, the same is not only arbitrary but is also in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution as the same denies the petitioner equal treatment before law and equal protection of law.
In the facts and circumstances there cannot be any estoppel relating to fundamental rights of the writ petitioner.
21.
That apart, it appears the writ petitioner did make representation subsequently and the same was erroneously rejected by the respondents.
No other grounds have been urged by the appellants on merits.
It has also have been submitted by Mr. Chatterjee before us that the writ application is not maintainable inasmuch as the same involves disputed questions of fact and therefore the remedy, if any, of the writ petitioner is before the Industrial Tribunal.
22.
It has further been submitted by Mr. Chatterjee that in any event, the writ will not lie against M/s Jessop & Co In this connection, Mr. Chatterjee has relied on a decision of the learned single Judge of this Court in the case of Someswar Mukherjee v. M/s. Jessop & Co and others, Matter No. 4405 of 1989 where Justice SB Sinha accepted the preliminary objection of the said company in that case that since it is a commerical organisation and the President of India merely holds 792% shares and the rest of the shares can be purchased by private entrepreneur, the same is not an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution on the ground that in the writ petition no averment has been made as to how and in what manner the said Jessop & Co can be said to be a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
23.
Such decision, in our view, can hardly come in aid of the appellant.
Admittedly, such a point was never raised by the appellant before the trial Court either by filing affidavit-in-opposition or even orally as a result whereof the Court proceeded on the footing that the writ will lie against Jessop & Co  24.
Even from the aforesaid judgment, it appears that the President of India holds 792% shares of the company and therefore majoirty of the shares are held by the President of India.
It cannot be disputed that it is a Government company and the fact that it may be a commercial organisation does not take it out from the purview of the authority under Article 12 of the Constitution as Article 298 of the Constitution itself permits the State to enter into commercial activities.
25.
In this connection the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in the Prasar Bharati's case to which one of us (Samaresh Banerjee, J) was a party may be referred to where referring to large number of decisions and also relying on a Constitutional Bench decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress and others, reported in 1991(1) SCT 675 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 101 held that all actions of the State authorities in all sphere whether commercial or otherwise will have to be free from arbitrariness and have to be decided on the touch-stone of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The relevant observations made in the said Division Bench decision are quoted below :-  "In our view the question whether even in case of concluded contract, arbitrary action of the State or a public authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution can at all be open to judicial review as settled by the decision of the Constitution Bench in the case of Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress and others, reported in AIR 1991 SC 101.
It is true that in the said decision the Supreme Court inter alia, was considering the question whether Regulation 9(b) of the Regulations framed under Section 53 of the Delhi Road Transport Act, 1950 which provides for termination of services of pernanent employees on giving simple one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof in terms of agreement of employment without recording any reason is arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory and violative of the audi alteram partem rule and so constitutionally invalid and void."
26.
But at the same time it can hardly be overlooked that the majority of the Hon'ble Judges, namely, Justice BC Roy, Justice LM Sarma, Justice PB Sawant and Justice K Ramaswamy quoted in their judgment with approval the finding of the Supreme Court in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, reported in 1986(3) SCC 156 : AIR 1986 SC 1571, which is a clear pronouncement of law under Article 141 of the Constitution.
Paragraph 185 of the judgment in which, in our view, such pronouncement of law has been made by the majority of the Hon'ble Judges of the said Constitution Bench is quoted hereunder :  "185.
The Corporation filed appeals before Supreme Court.
The impugned questions for determination were (i) whether the appellant- Corporation was an instrumentality of the State so as to be covered by Articles 12 and 36 of the Constitution, and (ii) whether an unconscionable term in a contract of employment entered into with the Corporation was void under Section 23 of the Contract Act and violative of Article 14 and as such whether Rule 9(i) which formed a part of the contact of employment between the Corporation and its employees to whom the said Rules applied, was void ?
This Court held that it being a Government company within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution has to comply with the rights embodied in Part-III of the Constittuion and the Directive Principles and in Part-IV of the Constitution.
It was further held that by extending the executive power of the Union and each of the States to the carrying on any trade or business, Article 298 does not convert either the Union of India or any of the States which collectively form the Union into a merchant buying and selling goods or carrying on either trading or business activity, for the executive power of the Union and the States, whether in the field of trade or business or in any other field is always subject to constitutional limitations and particularly the provisions relating to Fundamental Rights in Part-III and is exercisable in accordance with and for the furtherance of the Directive Principles of State Policy."
From such observation of the Supreme Court therefore it clearly appears that the Constitutional Bench made a declaration of law that by extending the executive power of the Union and each of the States to the carrying on any trade or business, Article 298 does not convert either the Union of India or any of the States which collectively form the Union, into a merchant buying and selling goods or carrying on either trading or business activity, for the executive power of the Union and the States, whether in the field of trade or business or in any other field, always subject to constitutional limitations and particularly the provisions relating to Fundamental Rights in Part-III and is exercisable in accordance with and for the furtherance of the Directive Principles of State policy."
We hold that the appellants never having raised any point before the trial Court and the petitioner not getting any opportunity to demonstrate before the Court that writ will lie against the said company, the appellants cannot be allowed to take such point at this stage.
27.
That apart, as pointed out hereinbefore, no materials have been produced nor any argument has been advanced by the appellants why the appellant company even being a Government company and admittedly the majority shares being owned by the President of India, it cannot be treated as an "authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
28.
Further submission of Mr. Chatterjee that the writ will not lie when disputed questions of fact are involved and therefore Industrial Tribunal is the proper forum for the writ petitioner is also not tenable.
The fact that the petitioner was drawing higher salary than the Respondents Nos. 5 and 6 in the skilled category and therefore, he is senior is not disputed.
Mere raising of a dispute without producing any materials in support of the same cnanot take out the matter from the purview of the writ jurisdiction.
We, therefore, do not find any merit in the aforesaid submission of the appellants.
29.
For the reasons aforesaid, this appeal fails and the same is hereby dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
30.
Our attention has been drawn that during the pendency of the appeal, the writ petitioner/respondent has retired with effect from 31122000.
In such view of the matter, the appellants shall implement the order of the trial Court by giving the arrears of pay and other retirement benefits to which he would have been entitled had he been promoted from the date as directed by the trial Court.
Such benefits of arrear pay and the retirement benefits shall be paid to the writ petitioner/respondent positively within two months from the date of communication of this order.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment, if applied for, be granted as expeditiously as possibile.
Appeal dismissed.