RL Anand, J - Shri Balkishan has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioner that writ of certiorari be issued against the respondents and order dated 2842000 vide which his services were terminated, be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the service as Sewadar on 111973 in Faridabad Complex Administration.
Later on, the service of the petitioner came under the control of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad.
He was due to attain the age of superannuation in the year 2002.
Village Baselwa became a part of the Faridabad city.
Before the township of Faridabad came into existence, 11 kanals and 8 marlas of shamilat land was in possession of the ancestors of the petitioner and petitioner got this land from his ancestors and he is in possession of the same.
His possession is uninterrupted.
Village Baselwa was absorbed in the old township of Faridabad.
The petitioner is also in possession of 3 Marlas of Shamilat land which was in fact the land of shareholders of the village.
His possession is for the last 50-60 years without any interruption and in fact he has become the owner by way of adverse possession.
His possession is further fortified from the revenue record.
It was also pleaded that Faridabad Complex Administration came into existence in the year 1971 and the land of the village came under the control of Faridabad Complex Administration.
Even the mutation, which was sanctioned vide entry No. 1082 pertaining to khasra No. 117/1, which is the disputed land, shows, that the land was for the benefit of all.
In the year 1989, this land of village Baselwal was acquired by the Haryana Urban Development Authority for the development of Sector 18, Faridabad but the possession of the petitioner was not touched by the acquisition authority.
Before the acquisition, Faridabad Complex Administration, filed a petition for eviction before the Collector.
In the revenue record, the disputed area was shown in the self-cultivating possession of the petitioner who is virtually in possession for the last several years.
3.
On one fine morning vide order dated 811999, the petitioner was placed under suspension and on 861999 the petitioner was issued a charge-sheet on the allegations that he was in possession of 3 Marlas of land of which he took the possession by giving a wrong statement before the Court.
It was also alleged against the petitioner that he had given a wrong statement and had put building material on the land measuring 11 kanals 8 marlas and had removed the hoarding and boards set up by the Corporation.
Thirdly, it was alleged that the petitioner is in unauthorised possession of the land of the Corporation and he wants to grab the same.
The other allegation against the petitioner was that he occupied the land of the Corporation in an illegal manner and had also been availing the house rent which was against the service rules and the house rent provisions.
The petitioner gave the detailed reply on 21.6.1999 mentioning therein as to how he came in to possession of the land in question and that he was not guilty of mal-practice.
However, the punishing authority appointed an Inquiry Officer who conducted the inquiry in a slip-shod manner.
The petitioner was not even supplied with a copy of the inquiry report.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
The petitioner gave the reply to the show cause notice and specifically stated that he was not supplied with the inquiry report.
Inspite of his objection, his services were terminated by a non-speaking order dated 2842000 Annexure P-10.
Hence the present writ petition.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It was contested by respondent No. 1 who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to this respondent, the revenue village Baselwa was a part of Sabha area of Gram Panchayat Wazirpur at the time of merger of 16 erstwhile Gram Panchayats and 3 Municipal Committees in Faridabad Complex Administration.
The respondent denied that the petitioner was in possession of the land measuring 11 kanals 8 marlas prior to the formation of Faridabad Complex Administration or that his predecessors were in possession.
In fact the disputed piece of land forming part of the Sabha area vested in the Faridabad Complex Administration now Faridabad Corporation.
The respondent maintained that petitioner had encroached upon part of Khasra No. 11/1 in village Baselwa by giving misleading facts.
So much so, the petitioner had also been dispossessed under the provisions of Public Premises Act in due process of law.
The land was Shamilat Deh.
It legally vested in the Gram Panchayat and then it became the property of Faridabad Complex Administration with effect from 1511972 and now with the Corporation.
The petitioner was in illegal possession of the land.
He was already been ejected in due course of law.
The respondent, however, admitted that the suit land was shown in the records of rights as Rafae-aam.
It was maintained that under the garb of civil suit the petitioner wanted to grab the land of the corporation.
Being a public servant, he was bound to watch and protect the interest of the respondent corporation but he has Committed an offence of breach of trust, fraud and dereliction of duty and indiscipline by encroaching upon the land of the Corporation which was meant to be used for general public.
The petitioner was rightly charge-sheeted.
His reply was considered.
It was not found satisfactory.
Hence, the inquiry officer was appointed who gave the report against the petitioner and the punishing authority issued the show cause notice to the petitioner.
The reply to the show cause notice was also considered unsatisfactory.
Finally, the impugned order dated 2842000 was passed in an legal manner.
With this defence, respondent No. 1, has prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by the counsel for the parties, it will be appropriate on my part if I reproduce the charges which were levelled against the petitioner Shri Bal Kishan who was working as Sewadar.
There were four charges as contained in Annexure P-10 and those charges are reproduced as follows:-  "1.
That he has occupied 0.3 marlas of land comprised in khasra No. 117/2/(1- 8) by giving a false statement in Court.
2.
That by giving false statement in Court has put building material on 11 K-8 M of land and has removed the hoardings and boards set up thereon.
3.
That he despite being an employee of the Corporation tried to grab the land of the Corporation and has filed a court case.
4.
That he is living on the property of the complex in an illegal and unauthorised manner and has also been claiming house rent from the Corporation which is against the service rules pertaining to house rent and therefore, is guilty of Committing fraud."
7.
It is the right of the employer to proceed departmentally against its Officer/Official if such officer/official commits such acts of commission or omission in the discharge of his official duties.
Before a public servant is to be charge-sheeted the employer has to keep in his mind that charges must be in relation to the duties which are likely to be discharged by a public servant during the course of employment.
Such public servant can also be charge-sheeted for his acts of omissions if those acts of omissions flow from his duties.
However, in the present case, the reading of the charges would show that none of the charge relates to the duties of the petitioner.
8.
Now, I take charge No. 1.
According to this charge, the petitioner allegedly occupied 3 marlas of land comprised in khasra No. 117/2 (1-8) by giving a false statement in the Court.
To my mind, the controversy is between the Court and the petitioner.
If the Court feels that a false statement has been given by a litigant, it has the right to proceed against that litigant in a perjury case.
There is no finding in this regard by the Civil Court on the basis of which the employer had the right to say that he wanted to proceed against the public servant on the administrative side.
9.
The second charge against the petitioner is that he gave false statement in the Court to the effect that he had put building materials on 11 Kanals and 8 Marlas of land.
Further, the petitioner was guilty of removing the hoardings and boards which were set up by the Corporation.
Again it is a case of civil dispute as to whether the petitioner has any right, title or interest on this land or not.
There is no act of commission or omission flowing from his official duties.
An employee can have a genuine or ingenuine dispute with his employer.
If such a dispute is unrelated with the duties of the public servant, in such a situation, the employee cannot be proceeded with on the departmental side.
10.
The third charge against the petitioner was that despite being an employee of the Corporation, he tried to grab the land of the Corporation and that he filed a civil suit.
If some civil rights are involved in a litigation those are to be decided by the competent court of jurisdiction and not by the employer on the administrative side.
It is the defence of the petitioner that he never grabbed the property.
Rather he is in possession of the same since the time immemorial.
11.
The last charge against the petitioner was that he was living on the property of the complex in an illegal and unauthorised manner and has also been claiming house rent from the Corporation which is against the service rules pertaining to the house rent.
Again, to my mind, the employer was nobody to give a decision whether the possession of the petitioner was illegal or unauthorised.
This is within the domain of the Civil Court.
Even assuming for the sake of arguments that the possession of the petitioner is unauthorised or illegal, the remedy lies with the department is to file an ejectment proceedings under the Public Premises Act and to take possession according to law.
Under the garb of these types of disputed rights, a public servant cannot be charge-sheeted for those acts which are totally unrelated with his duties and functions.
12.
In my opinion, the very charge-sheet deserves to be quashed and I order accordingly.
The moment charge-sheet is struck down the order of termination dated 2842000 falls to the ground and the same is hereby set aside.
13.
The net result is that the writ petition is allowed; impugned order dated 2842002 is hereby set aside and a declaration is given in favour of the petitioner that he will be deemed in service from the date of passing of the termination order till the age of his superannuation.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits in the matter of pay, allowances and retiral benefits besides continuity of service till the age of his superannuation.
There shall be no order as to costs.
If the petitioner has already attained the age of superannuation, it will not be obligatory on the part of the respondent authorities to allow the petitioner to join the duties.
Petition allowed.