Amitava Lala, J - In this writ petition, the approval of the panel is under challenge.
Initially, by an order of a single Bench of this Court dated 3091997, the panel was directed to be approved from which an appeal was preferred and the appeal court was pleased to modify the order of the trial Court by directing the Director of School Education, West Bengal, to consider the matter independently and in the light of the submission made by the learned Counsel for the appellant, as also on the basis of the materials on record.
He shall see to it that the school authorities as also the Dist.
Inspector of Schools should produce before him all the records within a period of one week from the date of communication of this order.
He, thereafter, upon giving an opportunity of hearing to the parties may pass an order strictly on the basis of the materials on record and in terms of the recruitment rules at an early date and not later than three weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Such remand order was exhausted by a Departmental order under Memo No. 987/1(4) LS dated 2141999 wherein the Director of School Education, West Bengal, refused to approve the panel and the Dist.
Inspector of Schools was directed to ask the school authority to hold fresh interview of the candidates already sponsored by the Employment Exchange by constituting a fresh Selection Committee and prepare a panel in strict observance of the rules and regulations as laid down by the Government at the material point of time.
2.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with such departmental order a fresh writ petition has been made.
At the time of hearing, I have come to know from the petitioner's counsel that at one point of time the Assistant Inspector of Schools (SE), Malda, was appointed as Administrator of the concerned school to whom all the records in respect of selection by the Selection Committee was produced.
Now, the Managing Committee has been formed.
The Administrator is no longer there.
Mr. Banerjee, learned senior Counsel, appearing in support of the petitioner contended before this Court that one of the Advocates of this Court Mr. Phalguni Sarkar is holding such records.
Under such circumstances by an order dated 2642001, I directed Mr. Sarkar to be present personally in court today along with the relevant records.
Accordingly, Mr. Sarkar, learned Advocate, is personally present before this Court and has produced all the records.
He has also filed affidavit-in- opposition on behalf of the respondent No. 5.
3.
I have verified the records.
I find from the records that the petitioner's name has figured as No. 1 in the panel.
I have also checked up the individual score sheet as well as average score sheet and I find that the petitioner stood first in the panel.
The Administrator alleged before this Court that the teacher-in-charge has shown his interest in favour of one Sukumar Mondal who increased his number.
Therefore, he is very much apprehensive about interference with the selection process.
In turn, Mr. Banerjee, learned senior Counsel, contended before this Court by citing a judgment in the case of The Chancellor and another v. Dr. Bijayananda Kar and others, reported in 1994(1) SCT 524 (SC) : 1994(1) S.C.C.
169 : AIR 1994 SC 579, wherein it has been held that the function of the Selection Committee comes to an end when the proceedings are drawn.
Every member of the Selection Committee has a right to give his fair opinion in respect of each candidate.
Normally, it would not be considered a bona fide act on the part of a member of the Selection Committee to say, after the selection is over and he has signed the proceedings, that he overlooked certain qualifications in respect of a candidate.
4.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State-respondent contended before this Court that since the matter has been dealt with by the Director of School Education, West Bengal, therefore, the matter has to be sent back to the Director of School Education with the relevant records now produced before this Court by the Administrator to come to an appropriate conclusion.
Such submission is also supported by the teacher-in-charge.
5.
I am of the view that in the matter of selection, the Selection Committee will make selection and prepare the individual score sheet and thereafter shall produce the collective score sheet before the Managing Committee or before the Administrator who in turn, will forward the same within a period of fifteen days to the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools and the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools will either approve the panel or forward the matter to the Director of School Education, West Bengal, along with the ground for the approval.
Therefore, the law provides that the matter will be forwarded to the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
A special circumstance for consideration by the Director of School Education pursuant to an order of the Division Bench cannot be regarded as law.
6.
Under such circumstances, I dispose of the writ petition with a direction upon the learned Counsel for the Administrator to produce all the relevant records before the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools and the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools will approve the panel as per marks following the appropriate rules within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order in view of the available records before this Court.
Although the matter is to be formally scrutinised by the Dist.
Inspector of Schools but there is no embargo on the part of the Dist.
Inspector of Schools for approving the panel since this individual score sheet and the tabulation have been produced before this Court and those are verified.
The consequential appointment will be given by the school authority following the approval.
7.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let photocopy of the evaluation sheet of the marks dated 2731997 and the final score sheet dated 1631997 filed in court today be kept with the record.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of the order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the parties within a period of fortnight from the date of submitting the requisites.
Orders accordingly.