Satyabrata Sinha, J - The application is directed against a judgment dated 16th July, 1999 passed by the Learned Central Administrative Tribunal.
Calcutta Bench in Original Certificate No. 60/AN/1995 whereby and whereunder following the decision of the Apex Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, reported in 1982(1) SC 618, the petitioner were held to be entitled to the same pay which is being paid to the Delhi Police Drivers.
2.
The petitioners were 20 in number.
During pendency of this application, the respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 8 have died on 19998, 4995 and 15898 respectively leaving behind them their heirs and legal representatives, details whereof are as follows :-  1.
Habbalj Devi  2.
Gamuma Singh Yadav  3.
Sanjay Yadav  4.
Sunita Devi  5.
Rinku Devi  6.
Alima  7.
KM Basheer  8.
K Moideen  9.
K Yusuf  10.
K Saida  11.
Alagamma  12.
Chandrasekharan  13.
Kallika  3.
Mr. HR Bahadur, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, inter alia, submitted that the learned Tribunal erred in granting the aforementioned relief to the petitioners having regard to the fact that the recruitment rules of the Police Drivers of A & N Administration and those of Delhi Administration are different.
The learned counsel submits that the conditions of service and educational qualifications required for recruitment in those posts being different, the doctrine of equal pay for equal work is not applicable in the instant case.
In support of the said contention strong reliance has been placed on AIR 1982 SC 878, AIR 1997 SC 2006 and AIR 1988 SC 1291.
4.
Ms. Ganguly, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that this writ application is not maintainable as in the contempt application filed before the learned Tribunal the petitioners herein had prayed for extention of time to comply with the order.
It has been pointed out that the question as regard the applicability of the different recruitment rules as also educational qualification had been taken before the learned Tribunal.
The learned counsel further points out that even in the recruitment rules framed for the purpose of recruitment of the Police Drivers in the State of Delhi, the educational qualifications is relaxable upto 9th passed and thus there is a possibility that some of the drivers working with the Delhi Police might be having the same educational qualifications as those of the petitioner.
5.
It is now a well settled principles of law that the doctrine of equal pay for equal work as adumbrated under Article 39 of the Constitution of India read with Article 14 thereof can be applied when a Court of law comes to a clear finding that the duties and responsibilities performed by their counterparts must be at par with all respect including their educational qualifications, experience etc. so as to enable them to get the said benefit.
6.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1982 SC 879, upon which strong reliance having been placed on the learned Tribunal it has been held :  "It is true that equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies like the Pay Commission and not for Court but where all things are equal that is, where all relevant considerations are the same, persons holding identical posts may not be treated differentially in the matter of their pay merely because they belong to different departments.
Of course, if officers of the same rank perform dissimilar functions and the powers, duties and responsibilities of the posts held by them vary, such officers may not be heard to complain of dissimilar pay merely because the posts are of the same rank and the nomenclature is the same."
7.
In that case, however, the question which arose for consideration was as to whether the Delhi Police drivers and other Drivers belong to different departments are performing the same duties as of Delhi Administration or the Central Government.
It was held that the powers, functions and privileges of Delhi Police Officer, their duties and responsibilities are more arduous.
It was held that the classification of unequal scales of pay is based on no classification or irrational classification though they are drawing the different scales of pay doing identical work under same employer.
8.
However, in Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers, (Recognised) and Ors. v. Union of India & Others, reported in AIR 1988 SC 1291, it was pointed out that :  "Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental right.
But equal pay must depend upon the nature of the work done, it cannot be judged by the mere volume of work, there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
One cannot deny that often the difference is a matter of degree and that there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration infixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bona fide, reasonably on an intelligible criterion which has a rational nexus with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
It is important to emphasise that equal pay for equal work is a concomitant of Article 14 of the Constitution.
But it follows naturally that equal pay for unequal work will be a negation of that right."
9.
Yet again in the State of Tamil Nadu v. MR Alagapappan & Ors., reported in 1997(2) SCT 531 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2006, the Apex Court held :  "In the light of the well established facts on the record of these cases to which we have made a reference earlier, it is impossible to hold that the Deputy Agricultural Officers like the contesting respondents are required to be given the same pay scale as Agricultural Officers.
Reasons are obvious.
They do not form a similar class of employees even though they may be substantially discharging the same type of duties and their place of work may be interchangeable.
A glaring difference which results into making the fall in a distinct and separate category of employees deserves to be kept in view.
In the first place the contesting respondents are recruited by promotion from the lower category of Assistant Agricultural Officers.
On promotion as Deputy Agricultural Officers they remain non-gazette employees in the Subordinate Service in the Tamilnadu Agricultural Extension Subordinate Service while the Agricultural Officers are directly recruited to a gazetted service called Tamilnadu Agricultural Extension Service.
The contesting respondents are promoted departmentally while the Agricultural Officers are directly selected through Tamilnadu Public Service Commission.
The minimum educational qualification for being an Agricultural Officer (Direct Recruitment) is B.Sc.
(Agriculture) while for a promotee.
Deputy Agricultural Officer, the minimum educational qualification in SSLC with suitable Diploma as laid down by the Rules.
Though substantially, they carry out the same type of work and the duties, important assignments are exclusively entrusted to Agricultural Officers as seen from para 5 of the Additional Affidavit filed by Shri V Srinivasan, Deputy Secretary to Government at page 193 of the Paper Book, as noted earlier."
10.
The petitioners contend that whereas the recruitment of the Police drivers in Delhi Administration is made in terms of the Notification dated 361994 and the extent Standing Orders, the recruitment of the police drivers in A&N Islands is made in terms of the Standing Order No. 9865 dated 26/27th November, 1992.
11.
It is urged that the educational qualification, method of recruitment etc. are different.
The educational qualification for the Drivers of A&N Islands is 8th class pass with valid Heavy Vehicle Driving licence whereas the following qualification have been prescribed for the MT Drivers/Despatch Rider Constable of the Delhi Police :  "(a) Matriculate or equivalent  (b) Should be able to drive heavy vehicle with confidence.
(c) Current driving licence for Heavy/Light vehicles.
(d) Possesses knowledge of maintenance of vehicles.
(e) The candidates would be sound health, free from disease, defect/deformity.
(f) Better eye.
6/6 without glass.
Worse eye 6/12 without glasses free from colour blindness.
No relaxation permissible."
The Central Government has rejected the prayer of the petitioners stating :  "While considering the demand for parity in the pay scale between the Drivers of A&N Police and Delhi Police, the crime situation in the two union territories, prevalence of terrorist activities skill required from Drivers posted for VIP escort duties, extent of traffic and consequential hazards under which the Drivers of the two Union territories have to function have to be taken into account.
Owing to prevalence of all these factors in Delhi, the efficiency scale required from the Delhi Police Drivers is certainly, much more than that required from the Drivers of A&N Police Force.
It cannot, therefore, be contended that Drivers of A&N Police Organisation are performing the same duties as are being performed by the Drivers of Delhi Police.
The State Government has, therefore, come to the conclusion that the request of the Drivers of A&N Police Organisation for parity in the matter of pay scales with the drivers of Delhi Police Force cannot be agreed to."
The said decision was challenged by the respondents herein, inter alia, on the ground that hostile discrimination has been created thereby, inasmuch as, the working condition, terrorist activities, VIP Escorts etc. which are also done by the A&N Police Drivers had not been taken into consideration.
12.
Before the learned Tribunal, the Union of India did not appear.
The petitioners herein has rejected the claim of the respondent in view of the aforementioned direction of Union of India.
It appears that the staff car drivers working in the local administration have been given higher scale of pay as stated therein but before the learned Tribunal the said case has not been seriously pressed.
The learned Tribunal gave relief to the respondents herein, inter alia, in terms of the judgment of the Apex Court in Randhir Singh (supra).
It also purported to have been taken judicial notice that the nature of the duties of the police car or jeep drivers are hazardous in nature.
According to the learned Tribunal the different degree had not any kind.
It has further been observed.
"The absence of terrorist activities in A&N Islands may also to the credit of the local police personnels, pressure of which should be given to the police constable drivers, who have to keep constant vigil against subversive activities.
We do not find any lawful justification for rejection of the petitioners case by the Government of India as communicated in their letter dated 3051994 (Annexure-R/6) and consequently, the order of the local administration refusing the prayer of the petitioners dated 22.7.1994 cannot be allowed to stand."
13.
The learned Tribunal thus mis-directed itself, inasmuch, the difference in the nature of duties even if of degree may disentitled the claimants from getting the same pay in view of the fact that they would not be similarly situated.
14.
Equality before the law, and equal protection of law as adumbrated under Article 14 of the Constitution of India is a positive concept.
Unequals cannot be treated as equals.
Article 39(d) read with Article 14 of the Constitution postulates equal pay for those who are equally placed.
15.
The finding of the learned Tribunal on the basis of the aforementioned materials are wholly unsustainable.
The claim on the doctrine of equal pay for equal work cannot be adjudicated upon on the basis of surmises and conjectures or by taking judicial notice of certain facts.
Taking of judicial notice in this case by the learned Tribunal was unwarranted, inasmuch as, indicated hereinbefore the onus to prove that the appellant drivers of the Administration are performing the same and similar nature of duties those performed by the police drivers of the Delhi Administration and/or the officers or otherwise similarly situated, was upon the claimants/respondents.
16.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that the matter should be considered afresh by the learned Tribunal.
Before the learned Tribunal all the parties including the Union of India should be granted an opportunity to produce materials which are relevant for the said purpose.
17.
It may be true, as submitted by Ms. Ganguly that the documents produced before this Court had not been produced before the learned Tribunal.
But having regard to the aforementioned findings, we are of the opinion that the same being unsustainable, an opportunity to both the parties to adduce further evidence should be granted so that justice may be done to the parties.
18.
It goes without saying before the learned Tribunal it would be also open to the respondents herein to raise the contention that even the drivers of the Administration who are performing the same or similar nature of duties are getting a higher scale of pay.
19.
The submission of Ms. Ganguly to the effect that the petitioner cannot maintain the writ application in view of the extension obtained for by it for complying its order is not sustainable in view of the decision of the Apex Court in Jagdish Lall v. Premanand, 2000(5) SCC 44.
20.
The remedy to approach this Court by filing a writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India being a part of its basic structure, it is open to a party aggrieved by an order of Tribunal to approach the Court wherever injustice has been caused.
This Court's jurisdiction in such a matter cannot be taken away only because some undertaking had been given under the threat of contempt or otherwise.
21.
For the reasons aforementioned, the application is allowed.
The impugned order is set aside and the matter is remanded back to the learned Tribunal for fresh decision in accordance with law.
Having regard to the fact that the matter is pending for long time it is desirable that the same be disposed of as expeditiously as possible.
In the facts and circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.