Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for quashing of an order dated 12122001.
Annexure P/8 to the petition.
Vide which the petitioner had been retired from service of the State Government of Haryana upon attaining the age of 55 years and not considered fit and enable to continue further.
2.
The petitioner had joined the Government service in the month of November, 1970 and was then promoted as JE in the office of the Executive Engineer, Jhajjar.
For the period 1998-99 and 1999-2000 adverse entries were communicated to the petitioner which were recorded in his confidential report.
On 20.5.2001 the petitioner filed detailed representations against recording of the adverse remarks which also were not accepted.
On 1122001 the petitioner was permitted to cross the efficiency bar.
A show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner and vide order dated 12122000 the petitioner was retired from Government service.
According to the petitioner, on the basis of the service record and particularly the fact that he was permitted to cross the efficiency bar in the year 2001, the action of the respondents in compulsory retiring the petitioner is totally arbitrary and is not justified on the basis of the record.
Further it is contended that the adverse entries were not communicated to the petitioner and as such they could not be taken into consideration while passing the impugned order.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed written statement.
It has been stated that the service record of the petitioner was such that as per policy of the Government he could not be permitted to continue in service.
There were adverse remarks in his annual confidential reports for the year 1991-92, 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
It is further stated on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner has less than 70% good or better confidential reports to his credit during the last 10 years.
The respondents have applied the policy uniformly and since the service record of the petitioner does not justify retention in Government service of the petitioner beyond 55 years of age.
The order was passed after affording opportunity to the petitioner of being heard and as such the order is valid.
4.
We had directed production of service record of the petitioner which was produced before us during the course of hearing.
In terms of the policy of the Government, 10 years record of the petitioner is required to be considered and the petitioner is required to have 70% of the confidential reports as good or above.
From the year 1991-92 till 2001 the petitioner has the following four entries of average or below average in his service record :-  Sr. No. Year of report Remarks in the A.C.R.
Remarks 1 1991-92 Average Conveyed 2.
1997-98 Average Conveyed 3.
1998-99 Below Average Conveyed 4.
1999-2000 Below Average Conveyed The respondents have also reproduced all the confidential reports of the petitioner right from 1991-92 till 2000-2001 in their written statement.
The entries are correct as per original record.
The record also reflects that the adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner.
The representation, if any, filed was also returned to the petitioner being barred by time.
In other words, the petitioner does not have 70% or more, good or above entries in his service record.
The respondents have taken an overall view based on the service record of the petitioner and have decided to retire the petitioner at the age of 55 years.
Such a decision of the Government is subjective and normally would not be interfered by the Court unless such decision was arbitrary or contrary to the record.
If the decision is in the interest of the administration and in intended to weed out the dead wood, then the said decision cannot be termed arbitrary.
In somewhat similar circumstances a Division Bench of this Court in the case of SI Nanak Singh v. State of Haryana, 1997(3) R.S.J.
299.
While following various judgments of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Even on going through the averments made in the writ petition, it is apparent that more than 30% service record of the petitioner is admittedly not good for the last 10 years.
Thus, there appears to be no violation of these instructions at least prima facie.
The Authority must have judged the utility of the officer in public interest and nothing has come on record which would persuade us to hold that the view taken by the authority is contrary to settle principles of law or violative of an instruction or circular of the Government.
In the case of Zakir Ali v. The State of Haryana and another, Civil Writ Petition No. 576 of 1997, decided on 1411997, the Division Bench of this Court has held as under :-  "In fact the very principle behind retiring a Government servant is in public interest and such decision should primarily be based upon evaluation of entire service record of the concerned employee.
The object of such rule is backed by the purpose of weeding out the dead wood from service cadre.
The Authorities may be well within their rights to deny continuation in service even to an average employee who may not in the view of the authorities concerned would be useful to the concerned department.
The authorities appear to have considered the entire service record of the petitioner and passed the impugned order.
In this regard reference can be made to the recent judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of S Ramachandra Raju v. The State of Orissa, AIR 1995 SC 111 : 1994(4) SCT 430 and State of Orissa and others v. Ram Chandra Das, 1996(4) SCT 288 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2436".
5.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 1020 has clearly held that even uncommunicated adverse remarks can be taken into consideration while passing such an order and it would not amount to violation of principles of natural justice.
While recording its subjective satisfaction, the Government can consider the entire service record and having framed the instructions that 10 years service record would be considered, we are unable to see any error in the decision taken by the respondents.
This Court would not sit as a Court of Appeal over the decision of the administrative authorities.
The purpose is to retain the employees having good service record and who would be of greater utility to the State Administration.
6.
The other contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is also without any merit.
The mere fact that the petitioner was permitted to cross the efficiency bar per se would not wipe out or even remove the effect of the adverse entries recorded in the confidential reports of the petitioner.
These are two different aspects and criteria for them is also different.
We do not consider it necessary for us to devolve on this issue any further as the matter has already been settled by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Orissa and others v. Ram Chandra (supra) where the Hon'ble Apex court held as under :-  "Merely because a promotion has been given even after adverse entries were made, cannot be a ground to note that compulsory retirement of the Government servant could not be ordered.
The evidence does not become inadmissible or irrelevant as opined by the Tribunal.
What would be relevant is whether upon that state of record as a reasonable prudent man would the Government or competent officer reach that decision.
We find that self-same material after promotion may not be taken into consideration only to deny him further promotion, if any, but that material undoubtedly would be available to the Government to consider the overall expediency or necessity to continue the Government servant in service after he attained the required length of service or qualified period of service for pension."
We are of the considered view that in view of the settled position of law afore-noticed, which squarely applies to the facts of the present case, this writ petition has no merit.
Consequently, we dismissed this petition, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.