Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the award dated 2742002 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat, vide which the labour Court set aside the termination order of the workman Ms. Meenu Arora and directed her reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages.
2.
Learned counsel appearing for the Chief Administrator, Haryana Urban Development Authority, Panchkula (hereinafter referred to as the HUDA), while impugning the said award, inter-alia raised the following contentions :-  (1) There was no proper or appropriate reason before the Labour Court to proceed and pass ex-parte order against HUDA.
(2) The workman had been appointed for a definite period under specific terms of the contract and she had not worked for 240 days entitling her for any benefits under the Industrial Disputes Act.
3.
In order to appreciate these contentions raised on behalf of HUDA, reference to basic facts would be necessary.
4.
The workman was appointed as a Clerk on contractual basis on 10th April, 1996 on a consolidated salary of Rs. 1500/- per month.
According to the HUDA, she was again in appointed on 27th July, 1998 subject to the conditions stated in the letter of appoinment, copy of which is annexed with the petition as Annexure P/2.
On 911996, the State of Haryana had issued instructions that no appointment on contractual basis be made without prior approval from the Finance Department.
On 23rd December, 1998, HUDA sent a proposal for ex-post-facto sanction of the post on which workman was working along with other employees.
However, the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government Haryana Town and Country Planning on 22nd February, 1999 told the authority to dispense with the services of all the officials appointed on contractual basis and consequently, the services of all those employees were dispensed with on 1st April, 1999 and passed the order of retrenchment on 19th May, 1999.
Whereupon, the workman raised the industrial dispute, which was ultimately answered in favour of the workman, as afore-noticed, giving rise to the filing of the present petition.
The workman, upon notice, filed reply, wherein, it was stated that she had worked for 240 days continuously without any break and consequently, her services were not on contract basis.
In fact, she was regularly engaged and had been performing her duties to the satisfaction of all concerned.
According to her, she was treated as a regular employee by the department, as the department had on its own applied for getting financial sanction for the post which the petitioner was holding.
This letter of the department to the Government clearly shows that there was work and need for the workman to continue in employment.
Further it is contended that no compensation was paid to her and as such her termination was illegal and unjustified.
5.
In the light of the above pleadings of the parties, both contentions raised on behalf of the HUDA are without any basis.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the workman placed reliance on the Division Bench judgment of this court in the case of Administrator, Municipal Committee, Amloh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amloh, 1998(3) SCT 57, where the Court held that even the person appointed ad-hoc basis despite their source of appointment and entry in the service, while falling within the definition of workman, where upon renewal of the term of the appointment, the workman had completed 240 days and was terminated or illegality retrenched the provisions of section 25-F of the Act would be attracted.
7.
The learned Labour Court passed an ex-parte award, as it was left with no other alternative because despite due service and knowledge of the proceedings, HUDA failed to appear before the Labour Court.
Ex-parte evidence was recorded and ultimately award was passed against the HUDA.
If an authority having its own legal department has failed to pursue its remedy before the Labour Court, despite service and due knowledge, it has nobody else to blame except its own officers.
The HUDA of its own and despite full knowledge did not move the Labour Court for setting aside the ex-parte award even within 30 days of passing of the award.
Once, the Labour Court is functus officio, upon publication of the award, even then no efforts were made by the HUDA to challenge he ex parte proceedings against them.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Grindlays Bank Ltd v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, 1980 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 420 has clearly held the scope of the power exercisable by the Tribunal in relation to setting aside ex-parte award.
In the reply filed by the workman to the writ petition, it is specifically averred that the pendency of the proceedings was within the knowledge of various officers of HUDA.
In fact, reference to the pendency of these proceedings was made in the noting of the department dated 2322000 (Annexure P-2/30 to the reply) wherein the legal cell had made the noting and the file was put up to the Deputy Director.
In this noting it was specifically mentioned by these officers that if the workman was re-employed at that stage of the proceedings, the rights of HUDA will be adversely affected.
This note was also put up to different officers in the hierarchy, therefore, it cannot be said that the authority was not duly served with the notice of the Labour Court and was not aware of the pendency of the proceedings in the court of the Labour Court.
The award was passed on 27th April, 2000, while the above noting was made in February 2000.
In face of this documentary evidence, it cannot be said that HUDA was not aware of the proceedings and was not served in accordance with law.
On the contrary, the only plausible conclusion that can be drawn is that the authorities concerned have intentionally and with full knowledge, permitted the Labour Court to pass the award in question and thus, no error can be found in the impugned award on this score.
8.
It is common case of the authorities that the petitioner workman was appointed initially vide letter dated 1041996, copy of which is Annexure P/1 to the petition.
She was appointed for a period of three months.
However, again letter was issued to her on 27th July, 1998, wherein she was appointed on a consolidated monthly remuneration of Rs. 3,000/- on contractual basis.
Vide letter dated 24rd December, 1998, copy of which is Annexure P/4 with the writ petition, the department itself had asked the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Town and Country Planning Department, Chandigarh that ex-post-facto approval of the Finance Department be obtained and these employees should be permitted to continue as their appointments have been made in anticipation of such approval and keeping in mind the urgent work of HUDA and smooth running of computers installed in the office.
The name of the petitioner was mentioned at serial No. 2 of this letter.
The services of the petitioner were terminated after serving notice of retrenchment dated 19.5.1999, after serving notice dated 141999.
It was stated in the notice that the services of the workman were no longer required as ex-post-facto approval of the government had not been received.
9.
The stand of the petitioner, as reflected in these documents and in the pleadings of the writ petition are contradictory.
On the one hand, it is stated that she was employed on contractual basis and as such having not worked for 240 days, she cannot take benefits of provisions of Industrial Disputes Act.
On the other hand, the department itself recommended her appointment and she continuously remained in employment till May, 1999, when for non-receipt of approval/sanction, services were dispensed with.
Services of an employee who has worked for sufficiently long time, could be retrenched only when the workman was given the retrenchment compensation at the time of the dispensing with his services.
Right from 1041996 the date when the letter of appointment was issued, the petitioner had continued to work till such date as is apparent from the documentary as well as oral evidence led by the workman, the labour court arrived at the following conclusion :-  "...In the ex parte evidence the workman has appeared as WW-1 and she has tendered affidavit Ex. W-1 as well as other documents Ex. W-2 to Ex. W-19.
She has also stated there is vacancy in the HUDA Department.
She has also tendered photo copy of the advertisement in news papers Punjab Kesari and Jan Satta Ex. W-20 and W-21.
She has also stated that her services have been wrongly and illegally terminated.
I have perused the evidence led by the workman.
In the affidavit Ex. W-1 workman has stated that she was kept on the post of Clerk w.e.f.
1141996 to 19.5.1999 meaning thereby the workman remained in service for the period of more than 240 days.
5.
There is no evidence on the file against this ex-parte evidence of the workman.
There is also no evidence to prove that legal notice was served upon the workman before terminating her services or any enquiry was held.
Therefore, the management has not complied with section 25-F of the Act.
10.
The above findings are based upon documentary as well as oral evidence which remained unrebutted and nothing has come before us which would justify interference by this Court under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
For the reasons afore-stated, I affirm the view taken by the Labour Court and dismiss this petition, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.