Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners at some length.
2.
Challenge in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the impugned award dated 14101999 by the State is mainly on two grounds.
Firstly, that there was unreasonable delay for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court and secondly that the appointment of the respondent herein was for a fixed term of two months.
3.
There is no substance in either of the submissions.
Firstly, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-operative Marketing- cum-Processing Service Society Ltd. and another, 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : JT 1999(3) SC 38 has categorically held that delay per-se is not ground for rejection of claim of a workman.
The view taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh's case (supra) was followed by this Court in the case of Shambhu Nath Tewari and Union of India and others, 2000(3) SCT 1050 (P&H)(DB) : 2001-I-LLJ 408.
In any case, the Presiding Officer held the petitioner to be entitled to back wages @ 25% only from the date of the demand notice till the date of reinstatement.
Thus, the labour court has clearly taken care and balanced the equities between the parties.
It is not disputed that the respondent herein was appointed for a fixed term.
The workman to the satisfaction of the labour court proved that he had worked more than 240 days and as such was entitled to the protection of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
This is a finding of fact recorded by the learned labour court based upon proper appreciation of evidence.
The labour court specifically held that "Admittedly, the respondent has not produced the controversial service record of the workman for the reasons best known to it and as such it cannot exempt itself from statutory liability to produce the controversial record of employment failing which it has to be assumed that the workman worked with the respondent for the period in question.
Reliance was rightly placed upon BAL KISHAN v. LABOUR COURT, PANIPAT case (supra)."
4.
The above findings of the learned court are in consonance with the provisions of law.
We find no merit to interfere with the impugned award.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.