Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of above mentioned two writ petitions as somewhat similar controversy falls for consideration of the Court in these cases.
2.
It will be appropriate to refer to the facts giving rise to these two petitions independently.
Petition Miss Arti in CWP No. 15949 of 2001 had passed her Intermediate Examination in Science from Awdeh Parshad Inter College, Nedaul, Patna on 3151996.
The said College was stated to be affiliated to and was working under the Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, hereinafter referred to as the Education Council.
Petitioner was desirous of seeking admission to three years "General Nursing and Midwifery Course" conducted by the School of Nursing, Pt. BD Sharma, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak.
She submitted an application to the competent authority.
Last date for receipt of such applications was 25th of July, 2001.
On 2982001 interviews for the said course were conducted by said Institute.
The Institute is affiliated to Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak, for the purposes of awarding of degree.
On 2192001 the result of the interview was declared for admission to the course.
The course was expected to commence on 8102001.
As per terms eligibility condition as stated in the brochure, the candidate should have studied 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes from recognised institute of Haryana and Chandigarh.
4th preference could be given to the candidate for admission to the course who had passed an examination recognised as equivalent thereto by Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak, with the prescribed percentage.
3.
According to the petitioner, she satisfied the eligibility conditions as she had passed her intermediate examination from the Education Council and it was recognised equivalent by the said University to the examination of 12th class conducted by the Haryana Board.
This recognition of equivalence was withdrawn and the certificate issued by the Education Council was derecognised, but that cannot deprive the petitioner of her right to admission as she had already passed the examination much prior to the derecognition from the Education Council.
The petitioner had been denied admission by the respondent-Institute on the ground that she did not possess the basic qualifications prescribed in the brochure i.e. passing of a 10+2 examination, which was considered equivalent to the examination held by the Haryana Board.
In these circumstances, the petitioner prays for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant admission to the petitioner in the above course, which has already commenced on 8102001.
4.
In CWP No. 14124 of 2001 the petitioner had also passed her 10+2 examination from the same Education Council and for the same reason she was denied admission to a Diploma Course in Education.
Here the petitioner has specifically pleaded that on 1541999 the certificate issued from the Education Council was duly recognised by the Haryana Board and consequently by Maharashi Dayanand University on 16.2.1999 to the same effect.
Council of Board of School Education in India had also clarified that intermediate examination from the Education Council is duly recognised vide letter dated 1031999 (Annexure P/3 to the writ petition).
According to this petitioner, vide letter dated 2482000 the Board of School Education, Haryana, communicated its decision dated 782000 withdrawing the recognition of the certificate issued by the Education Council for treating as an examination equivalent to 12th standard.
For this reason, the petitioner was denied admission to the course for which applications were invited by the respondents, thus, compelling the petitioner to file this writ petition.
The petitioner passed her intermediate examination in the year 1995 and had applied for admission to the course in the academic year 2001.
Thus, the derecognition, according to the petitioner, does not affect her admission and the respondents are acting arbitrarily in denying the admission.
5.
Both these writ petitions were contested by the respondents by filing separate written statements in each case.
According to the Institute and the College, the examination held by the Education Council is not recognised by the Haryana Board of School Education, Bhiwani, and Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
Thus, the petitioners are not entitled to admission in the current academic year.
It is stated that the recognition of the said course has been withdrawn with effect from 782000.
The respondents have annexed to the written statement as Annexure R-3, judgment of a Division Bench of this Court dated 15.9.1994 vide which it was found as a matter of fact that the certificates issued by the Education Council are not free from doubt and their genuineness is in question.
As such the Government had the right to take a decision with regard to derecognition of the course in larger public interest.
On different dates letters were written by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, to various institutions informing that the said examination for the purposes of equivalence stands derecognised by the State.
6.
It is, of course, not disputed that the said examination was recognised earlier.
The select list had been displayed on 1192001 and selected candidates have already been given admission in the Nursing Course and the Course has already commenced for quite sometime.
The respondents have mainly given two reasons in support of their stand.
Firstly, derecognition is a policy decision taken by the State and has already been made effective to all students for the current academic session.
Secondly, the judgement of the Division Bench of this Court has already attained finality and the said decision of the Division Bench cannot be impliedly questioned in the present writ petitions.
The petitioners are not entitled to any relief as they do not satisfy the eligibility conditions prescribed in the brochure and as such the writ petitions should be dismissed.
7.
It cannot be disputed that derecognition of examination, degree or certificate held or issued by a Board of University, necessarily must take effect prospectively only.
It is also further equally well settled that if admissions were granted when such recognition was in force and the students who have been granted admission, then they should be permitted to complete their courses.
For this reference can be made to various judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners in this regard i.e. Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027; Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(2) SCT 440 (P&H)(FB) : 1993(1) R.S.J.
327; Ashok Chand Singhvi v. University of Jodhpur and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 823 and Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University and another, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1448.
8.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners upon these judgments would not be of much help to the case of the petitioners, as the facts of the present cases are entirely different.
The petitioner had qualified their intermediate examination from Education Council in the years 1995 and 1996 respectively.
Since then the petitioners did not seek admission in any courses on the basis of the examination passed by them from the State of Bihar.
Now they are seeking admission for the academic year 2001-2002 in the General Nursing Course and Diploma in Education.
Equivalence of the said qualification was derecognised by the Haryana Board as well as the University in August, 2000, and thereafter the letters were even circulated to various institutions.
The admissions to the present courses were conducted on 25th of July, 2001.
In other words, the decision to derecognise the said examination/qualification was taken by the competent authority prior to the admission and even prior to the publication of the brochure.
Even if the decision of the Board or the University has to operate prospective, it would not, in any way, alter the net result thereof.
The decision of derecognition being much prior to the date of admission has to operate in the entire admission to these courses and admissions have to be made strictly in accordance with the eligibility clause stated in the brochure.
9.
Obviously, in the year 1995-96 this qualification/examination was duly recognised and considered to be equivalent to 10+2 examination of the Haryana Board.
If the petitioner would have sought admission in the year 1995-1996 to 1999-2000 in any of the academic session and they were admitted to any course which they were pursuing at the time of the decision taken by the authorities derecognising the said qualifications in terms of equivalence, the petitioners could have a case for grant of some relief in terms of the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court referred supra.
But that is not the situation herein.
The petitioners were never admitted to any course and were neither pursuing any graduation or diploma course at a point of time when the decision by the authorities was taken nor they were pursuing any course thereafter.
They sought admission for the first time in the academic year 2001-2002 and by the time the authorities concerned had taken the decision, which is being challenged in these writ petitions.
10.
Whether a particular qualification is to be treated as equivalent to the examination of 10+2 conducted by the Haryana Board or not, is a question which strictly falls within the domain of the expert academic bodies.
The Court has no expertise to answer this question either way.
The expert bodies of the Universities or the Boards of education can alone discuss such matters in their right perspective and are well capacitated to take decisions in the interests of the larger students welfare.
In the case of Rajendra Prasad Mathur (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court had the occasion to enunciate this principle in great elaboration.
Their Lordships of the Apex Court held as under :-  "It is for each University to decide the question of equivalence of examinations and it would not be right for the Supreme Court to sit in judgment over the decision of the University because it is not a matter on which the Court possesses any expertise.
The University is best fitted to decide whether any examination held by a University outside the State is equivalent to an examination held within the State having regard to the courses, the syllabus, the quality of teaching or instruction and the standard of examination.
It is an academic question in which the Court should not disturb the decision taken by the University."
11.
Once the authorities had taken a conscious decision upon conclusion of a due decision making process which had passed through different expert bodies to derecognise the recognition granted for equivalence to the Education Council examination by the Haryana Board, the Court would have hardly any jurisdiction to interfere in such a decision, more particularly in the light of the judgments of the Apex Court.
12.
At this stage, it may be appropriate for us to refer that these decisions by the competent authorities prima facie regulate the academic standard to be maintained, which the Haryana Board has decided to maintain, and the decisions of derecognition taken in August, 2000, are primarily the decisions of the competent authorities, but are also a follow up consequence to the judgments of a Division Bench of this Court.
In the case of Om Pati and others v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 8642 of 1994, decided on 15.9.1994, the Division Bench of this Court after getting the matters enquired through the Additional Director (Enquiry) and after hearing all the concerned authorities came to the conclusion that the mark-sheets were fake and the examination conducted by the institute like the Education Council, will cause immense injury to the society at large.
The Division Bench held as under :  "In our opinion, this argument is wholly untenable.
The Government had the right to take decision on the question as to what qualification should be prescribed and if by taking an overall picture of the examination conducted by the Bler Intermediate Education Council, it has come to the conclusion that it is in the larger public interest to impose a condition of recognition by the Board of School Education, Haryana, it is not possible to hold the action of the respondents to be unreasonable and unjust."
Still in another matter i.e. CWP No. 18086 of 1998, titled as Karambir Singh and others v. Haryana State etc., decided on 19.7.1999 another Division Bench of this Court dismissed the writ petition as the counsel for the petitioners was unable to show to the Court that the Education Council was a University or anybody authorised and empowered under any law to issue certificates for passing 10+2 examination.
13.
In the case of Pardeep Singh v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 5865 of 2001, decided by still another Division Bench of this Court on 1192001, the writ petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed where the candidature of the petitioner was cancelled on account of his having passed intermediate examination from Education Council alike the present petitioners, though the petitioner in that case had passed the entrance test and figured in the merit list for admission, while observing as under :-  "It is conceded at the bar that the decision in Om Pati and four others's case (supra) has achieved the finality, there is no other option but to follow the settled position in respect of validity of the certificates issued by Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna.
The petitioner, thus, cannot be treated as eligible for seeking admission to the course of Diploma in Education in Haryana and no such directions to the respondents as well can be issued for his admission."
14.
In the present cases, the petitioners had just submitted an application for admission to the courses and in the list of the successful candidates, their names did not appear.
They were informed there and then that they do not satisfy the eligibility condition as they had passed their 10+2 examination from a Board which was not recognised by the Haryana School Education Board.
The petitioners have suffered no great prejudice as they were not given admission to any course and they wee not pursuing and academic course for any length of time, which could introduce the element of prejudice.
On the contrary, they were told at the very outset that they could not be admitted to any of the asked courses as they did not satisfy the eligibility condition of passing 10+2 examination from a Board recognised by the Haryana Education Board or the University.
The concept of prospectivity must be understood in its correct perspective and must not be read and construed in abstract isolated from the facts of the case.
It necessarily must bear reference to the facts and circumstances on record.
The decision of the concerned authorities is certainly prospective in its true sense.
Merely because the petitioners had passed their 12th Examination in 1995 and 1996,per se cannot have the effect of rendering he petitioners eligible when they are apparently ineligible for the current academic year as a result of derecognition of their examination by the Board and the University.
Of course, the matters relating to the employment may fall in different dimensions of law, but in education matters the University or the Board cannot be compelled to act contrary to their calendar, prospectus and decisions taken in accordance with law.
15.
In view of the above detailed discussion, we find no merit in these writ petitions and in our considered view the petitioners are not entitled to the relief prayed for.
16.
However, before parting with these cases, we consider it imperative to make certain observations in regard to publication of certain information relating to Recognition/derecognition of qualifications.
It will be appropriate for the University or authority nominated for holding the examination and publication of brochure, to publish information with regard to derecognition of a recognised qualification or equivalent examination conducted by other Boards or Universities.
Due publication of such information in the brochure would prevent any likely prejudice to the candidates who have passed their examination from such Board or Universities.
The candidates would be put at notice at the very outset that they were not eligible for seeking admission to a particular University or Board as a result of such derecognition and would be free to apply and seek admission in other University or States.
It is practically impossible for the students to go the University or different Boards or Colleges to find out when and which qualification or examination has been derecognised by the Board or University which was earlier recognised.
It will also help the authorities to avoid un- necessary litigation arising from subsequent rejection of the candidature of the candidates on this ground.
Thus, we direct the concerned authorities, who are holding examination for admission and are conducting admission to various professional or other courses in the State of Haryana, to publish in the brochure itself the names the Boards/Universities which have been derecognised by such authorities for admission in the coming academic year.
It will further be appreciated if by such a practice could also be adopted by the States of Punjab as well as Union Territory Administration of Chandigarh.
17.
With the above directions, these writ petitions are dismissed while leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
18.
A copy of this judgment be sent to all the Chief Secretaries of the States of Punjab, Haryana and Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh, by the registry, for necessary action and compliance.
Petitions dismissed.