Swatanter Kumar, J - Ghansham Dass-petitioner had joined the respondent- department as a Beldar on 141993.
His services were terminated by the respondents on 181994.
The petitioner raised industrial disputes, which was referred to the learned Labour Court, Hisar.
Vide award dated 26th October, 1998, the petitioner was reinstated into service with other reliefs.
On 17102001, the petitioner served a legal notice claiming regularisation and other relief from the respondents but the respondents did not take any decision thereupon, constraining the petitioner to file Civil Writ Petition No 16499 of 2001.
In furtherance to the orders passed by the Division Bench in that writ petition, the respondents passed order dated 15112001, rejecting the claim of the petitioner for regularisation and continuity of service.
It was stated that the petitioner was physically absent on 3111996 and as such not entitled to regularise his service.
The petitioner, thus, challenges the order dated 15112001 passed by the Executive Engineer, Provincial Division No. 1, PWD (B&R), Hissar.
2.
In response to the notice to show cause why petition be not admitted, the respondents failed to file reply despite opportunities.
3.
This matter was taken up for hearing along with other matters.
4.
Mr. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, argued that the order dated 15112001 was in consonance with the principle of law and was based upon correct interpretation of the award in the favour of the workman.
5.
In order to examine the merit on the claim of the petitioner, it will be appropriate for us to refer to the relief granted by the learned labour to the petitioner, as the entire controversy revolves around that.
The relief part of the Labour Court reads as under :-  "In the result, this issue is hereby answered accordingly against the respondent and in favour of the workman, to the effect that termination of the service of Ghansham Dass was neither in order, nor justified.
He is entitled for reinstatment, with continuity, with all other consequential service benefits and with 50% backwages, from the date of his demand notice till reinstatement.
15.
RELIEF : Sequel to the finding on above issue, this reference is hereby answered against the respondent and in favour of the workman to the effect that termination of the service of Ghansham Das was neither in order, nor justified.
He is entitled for reinstatement, with back wages, with continuity and with 50% back wages, from the date of his demand notice dated 191994 till reinstatement."
6.
Learned counsel for the State interpreted the relief clause granted by the learned labour court to the workman so as to restrict continuity of service and all other reliefs with effect from 191994.
This interpretation is destructive of the substantive findings recorded by the learned labour and the relief granted.
The labour court has specifically held that the termination of services of the petitioner was neither in order for justified.
The petitioner, thus, was granted reinstatement with continuity with all consequential service benefits and 50% wages.
The period of the demand notice specified is only for the purpose of identifying the date from which 50% back wages would be payable.
It does not curtail any other benefits to the workman.
In any case, the said award has attained finality between the parties and the respondents thus cannot deprive the relief granted to the petitioner by the court on its unreasonable interpretation of the award.
7.
In the impugned order, it has been mentioned that the services of the petitioner could not be regularised as he was physically absent from the work as on 111996.
This plea is equally untenable.
Once an award is passed in favour of the workman and he is granted reinstatement with continuity of service, then the respondents cannot take plea that the workman was physically absent from the work.
Such absence is a result of compulsion and not of choice on the part of the workman.
A Division Bench of this court in the case of Deep Chand v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No 14165 of 2001, decided on 1012000, considered the plea at some length and held as under :-  "It is a deemed fiction of law that the period in face of such award would have to be treated as a period actually spent on duty.
Initially, the services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated by the respondent-State and subsequently the State compelled him to remain out of service for no fault of the workman.
Even after the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was not permitted to join the duty.
In other words, the petitioner was not physically present at the work as a result of action of the respondents and no fault was attributable to the petitioner on any ground whatsoever.
The physical absence of the petitioner from duty was result of compulsion of the petitioner and not his choice.
In these circumstances we are unable to sustain the reasons given in the impugned letter that the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation because he did not physically work during the period in question.
The learned counsel for the State was unable to support his argument by any precedent or documents to show that the petitioner was called upon to join his duties.
Once the Court finds it as a matter of fact that services of the employee were wrongly terminated, who in the eyes of law, would be deemed to be in service, cannot be even deprived of his back wages or arrears of salary subject to just exceptions and the law of limitation.
The consequences of setting aside an order of dismissal or termination gives rise to a consequential relief of reinstatement and payment of back wages a necessary corollary to the setting aside of such order.
As a logical consequence of this declaration (award), it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefits or reliefs which are natural results of such relief.
(In this regard reference can be made to a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) Service Law Reporter 151 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharasthra, 1977(2) SCC 288).
The above admitted facts support the case of the petitioner and are indicative of the fact that the respondent- State has taken this objection only to deny a benefit legally and reasonably due to the petitioner."
8.
Reference can also be made to the judgments of another Division Bench of this court in the cases of Kavita Gandhi v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(4) Recent Service Judgment 760 and Attar Singh v. State of Haryana and other, Civil Writ Petition No 3651 of 2000, decided on 722002.
In view of the above detailed discussion, we have no hesitation in rejecting both the contentions raised on behalf of the State, which we hereby reject.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated this writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 15112001, a copy of which is appended herewith as Annexure P/2 to the petition is hereby quashed.
We direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in accordance with its policy and rules and pass fresh order within a period of three months from today, in the light of the above observations.
Petition allowed.