GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against orders dated 13121996 and 7.4.1997 vide which the learned Single Judge allowed C.W.P.
No. 2200 of 1984 filed by respondents Nos. 1 to 8 and dismissed Review Petition No. 105 of 1997 filed by the appellant.
2.
Before adverting to the facts of the case, we deem it appropriate to mention that by an order dated 1671997, this Court had accepted the prayer made by the appellant in C.M.
No. 874 of 1997 and deleted the name of respondent No. 8-Smt. Prem Lata from the array of the parties.
In view of that order, the appeal will be deemed to have been dismissed qua respondent No. 8.
3.
The facts necessary for deciding the appeal are that after they had served for different periods in the Production Section of the factory of the appellant, services of respondent Nos. 1 to 7 (hereinafter described as the workmen) were discontinued in June, 1980 on the pretext of non-availability of work.
The disputes raised by them were referred by the State Government to Labour Court, Ludhiana under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act').
The Labour Court clubbed all the references and disposed them of by a common award dated 1561983.
4.
The common strain of the claims made by the workmen was that their services were illegally terminated by the employer without holding any enquiry and without giving them notice pay and compensation.
5.
In the written statements filed on behalf of the appellant, it was averred that the Labour Court did not have the jurisdiction to entertain the references because the workmen had voluntarily absented from duty necessitating termination of their services.
It was further averred that the workmen had worked intermittently as daily wagers and they were never in continuous service.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, the Labour Court framed the following issues:-  (i) Whether the reference is not maintainable as per preliminary objection ?
(ii) Whether termination of the services of the workmen is justified and in order ?
(iii) Relief.
7.
In support of their plea that they had worked for more than 240 days in a period of 12 months preceding the termination of their services, all the workmen appeared in the witness box as WW2 to WW9 and also examined Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma, Ex-Technician as WW1.
The appellant examined Shri DL Kaushal as MW1.
8.
After analysing the oral and documentary evidence produced by the parties, the Labour Court held that the workmen had remained continuously employed and the termination of their services was liable to be declared illegal due to non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Act.
He rejected the employer's plea that the workmen had voluntarily absented from duty and that the industry had been closed.
He, however, declined the relief of reinstatement by making an observation that it would complicate the matter and would not be conducive to the industrial peace.
The relevant extracts of the award passed by the Labour Court are reproduced below:-  "Shri R.L.
Gupta argued that the workers had not worked for 240 days and their length of service has been mentioned in an abstract from the attendance register produced in respect of each worker.
The workmen had started absenting from duty of their own accord and they were not in service on the said date of termination and there could not be any demand of reinstatement.
In this regard the statement of Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma, Ex-Technician as WW1 is of vital importance.
He used to mark attendance of the workers.
Whenever there was no work, the workers used to be marked absent although they attended their duty daily.
He produced his order of retrenchment which is Exhibit WW1.
According to him workers used to come daily but no work was given to them for the months together and they used to make complaints to the Manager.
No wages were given to the workers for the days, work was not provided to them.
This clearly shows that the workers were not at fault and they were attending their duties regularly.
This would not relieve the employer of financial liabilities for this period of paying compensation to the workers even when they had not worked for no fault of theirs.
No compensation is proved to have been paid to the workers.
They used to attend the factory, but work was not provided to them.
Shri Charanji Lal Sharma, WW1 further stated that sometimes the names of the workers were struck off.
This would suggest that the management resorted to this method without paying any compensation to the workers.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Shri DL Kansal, MW1, stated in respect of Darbara Singh (reference No. 687/81) that he worked intermittently.
Exhibit R-1 is the chart giving the details of the days for which he had worked with the respondent.
He has stated similar about the other workers, and produced charts with regard to the number of days put in by each worker.
According to him, the factory is lying closed.
These workers raised dispute long after the factory was closed.
It was on the instructions of the head office that factory production section was closed.
Efforts were to be made to first dispose of the stocks of finished goods in hand and then the starting of the factory was to be reconsidered.
This would mean that only one section of the factory was closed and the management was still contemplating to restart the factory if the circumstances so permitted.
The reference in this letter, dated 22nd May 1980, is to "factory production section".
This largely shows that only one Section has been closed.
In M/s. Avon Services Production 1979 AB 1, Lordships held:- In the instant case a painting section of a factory was closed down.
A notice was served on two workmen working in the section stating that they are retrenched and also simultaneously stating that the action is taken under Section 25-FFF.
Held in that facts and circumstances of the case that there was no closure of an undertaking as contemplated by section 25-FFF.
The painting section could not be recognised as a sub-section eligible for being stayed as a part of the undertaking.
If such mini-classification is permitted it would enable the employer to flout Section 25-F with impunity.
An employer may stop certain work which could not be classified as an independent undertaking, the stoppage of work in this context would not amount to closure of the undertaking.
MW1 has stated that the firm has not been closed.
He has admitted that the management did not issue any letter to any worker that he or she was absent.
He used to verify Provident Fund forms of the workers.
He further stated that there was no work in hand and the workers were marked absent in the attendance register.
He admitted it to be correct that in the form Nos. 1 and 10 of the workers sent to the Provident Fund Commissioner, the reason for withholding of the provident fund is given as "No work order in hand for supply of sock woolen to DG and D New Delhi."
He has also admitted that Shri Charanji Lal used to mark attendance of the workers and the significance of the statement made by Shri Charanji Lal has already been referred above.
The statement of Shri Kansal would show that the workers never abandoned employment or absented from duty.
They used to attend the factory, but they were marked absent whensoever no work has provided to them.
In these circumstances, the management cannot capitalise on their own omission.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Shri Rajinder Paul, WW9, produced copies of their PF receipts and ESI cards of these workers.
These are Exhibit MW-9/1 to WW-9/1.
This is an additional proof of the fact that workers were employed regularly to the factory.
The management was deducting their ESI and Provident Fund.
The workers were not to suffer if the management could not provide work to them.
The non-compliance of the provision of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act renders the termination invalid.
The issue is decided against the respondent.
Bhagwan Devi, WW4, stated that the factory was closed on 23rd June, 1980 whereas Shri DL Kansal, MW1 stated that the firm has not been closed.
The instructions from the head office shows that the "factory production section" was to be closed, but was to be started later on.
Since the workmen could not be provided work so their reinstatement would further complicate the matter and would not be conducive to industrial peace."
After recording the aforementioned conclusions, the Labour Court ordered the payment of following compensation to the workmen:-  Reference No. Name Compensation 687/81 Darbara Singh 1200 691/81 Shakuntla Devi 1500 693/81 Banti Rani 2000 696/81 Bhagwan Devi 1200 697/81 Habai Ram 750 704/81 Surjit Kaur 900 705/81 Ladi Bhai 1500 718/81 Prem Lata 500 9.
The workmen challenged the award of the Labour Court to the extent of denial of relief of reinstatement and back wages by contending that the reason assigned by the learned Presiding Officer for refusing reinstatement was perverse and legally unsustainable.
10.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and quashed/modified the award by directing the reinstatement with full back wages from the date of the demand notice.
The relevant extracts of order dated 13121996 passed by the learned Single Judge are reproduced below:-  "In the other three writ petitions, the impugned awards suffer from illegality also.
The labour Court categorically returned the finding that since no compensation of notice pay was given to the workers, their termination was held to be illegal and unjustified.
The material issue was decided against the management and in favour of the workmen.
The reference in these cases to the Labour Court was whether the termination of services of the workmen was justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/amount of compensation were they entitled.
It is erroneous on the part of the management to say that the workers did not press for their reinstatement before the Labour Court.
The entire stress before the Labour Court, on the contrary, on the part of the workers was that their retrenchment as bad for the reason that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not complied with.
Overwhelming evidence was led and thereafter the Labour Court gave the finding on this material issue in favour of the workmen and against the management.
After returning this finding the Labour Court was duty bound to reinstate the workmen with full back wages and with the benefit of continuity of service.
While granting relief, the Labour Court adopted patently illegal reasons by holding that since the production Section of the Management had been stopped and that the workmen could not be provided with any other work, therefore, the reinstatement of these workers would not lead to further industrial peace as the management would not be able to provide them with work.
The reasons advanced by the learned Labour Court, being patently illegal and wrong, cannot be endorsed.
Resultantly, all the four civil writ petitions are hereby allowed.
The impugned award of each of the writ petitions is hereby quashed/modified and directions are given to the management to reinstate each of the petitioners into service with benefits of continuity of service.
The management shall also be duty bound to pay full back wages to the said workmen from the date of the demand notice.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs in all the writ petitions."
11.
The appellant sought review of order dated 13121996 by filing an application under Section 114 read with Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure mainly on the ground that the learned Single Judge had misdirected himself by deciding the writ petition along with C.W.P.
No. 2505, of 1984-Virnarpinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, which had no similarity with the writ petition of the workmen.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the review application vide order dated 731997 by observing that order dated 13121996 did not suffer from any error apparent.
12.
Shri Amit Rawal submitted that the impugned orders should be declared as vitiated by an error of law and set aside because the learned Single judge had mixed up the facts of the writ petition of the workmen with those of C.W.P.
No. 2505 of 1984 by wrongly assuming that the issues raised in the two cases were identical.
He pointed out that the only thing common in the two petitions was that the workmen had sought quashing of the awards passed by the Labour Court declining relief of reinstatement on the ground that after having recorded a finding of fact that the action of the employer was violative of Section 25-F of the Act, the Labour Court did not have the discretion to deny reinstatement with back wages and argued that this was, by itself, not sufficient to warrant their disposal by a common order.
He further argued that the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by ordering reinstatement of the workmen with back wages without considering the appellant's plea that the finding recorded by the Labour Court on the issue of non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Act was perverse.
The learned counsel asserted that the workmen had not produced any evidence to prove that they had worked for 240 days in 12 months preceding the termination of their services and argued that in the absence of concrete evidence showing that the workmen had served the appellant for a continuous period of 240 days in 12 months preceding the termination of their services, the Labour Court could not have recorded a finding that Section 25-F had been violated.
He pointed out that respondent No. 1 had worked for 8 days in April, 1978, 9 days in May, 1978, 3 days in June, 1978, 7 days in May, 1979 and 6 days in June, 1979.
The learned counsel further pointed out that respondent No. 1 had absented from duty after 861979 and, therefore, his service stood automatically terminated w.e.f.
30.6.1979.
In support of this argument, learned counsel relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Allahabad Bank v. Prem Singh, 1996(4) SCT 213 (SC) : JT 1996(7) SC 628.
He then argued that the employment of the workmen was seasonal in nature and, therefore, the learned Single Judge had committed a serious error by ordering their reinstatement ignoring the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Morinda Cooperative Sugar Mills v. Ram Krishan, AIR 1996 SC 332.
The last argument of Shri Rawal is that the Labour Court and the learned Single Judge should have applied the provisions of Section 25-FFF of the Act because the production shop in which the workmen were employed had been closed due to non-availability of business.
13.
Shri BN Sehgal supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that the appellant cannot challenge the findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court on the issue of violation of Section 25-F of the Act because it had not challenged the award by filing a petition under Article 226 or an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution  14.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
The submission of Shri Rawal that the learned Single Judge had misdirected himself by disposing of the writ petition of the workmen along with C.W.P.
No. 2505 of 1984 may sound attractive in the first blush because the employers in the two cases were different, but after having carefully gone through the entire record, we are convinced that the impugned order cannot be set aside on this trivial ground because the view taken by the learned Single Judge on the issue of reinstatement of the workmen is consistent with the law laid down by the Supreme Court.
15.
However, before considering this aspect of the matter in detail, we deem it proper to dispose of the argument of Shri Amit Rawal that the learned Single Judge has erred in approving the finding recorded by the Labour Court on the issue of violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
In our opinion, the appellant cannot challenge the findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court about the total period of service rendered by the workmen and non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F(a) and (b) because it is an admitted position that it had not challenged the award by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
To put it in other words, it can be said that the appellant did not feel aggrieved by the findings recorded by the Labour Court.
Therefore, at this belated stage, it cannot be allowed to challenge those findings directly or indirectly.
16.
We are further of the view that by having refrained from challenging the award of the Labour Court, the appellant will be deemed to have waived its right to question the correctness of the findings of fact recorded therein.
17.
The appellant's plea of voluntary absenteeism by the workmen was rightly rejected by the Labour Court because the evidence produced by the parties clearly established that the workmen had made themselves available for employment on all the days, but they were marked absent due to non- availability of work.
In this situation, they cannot be accused of having voluntarily absented from duty.
In any case, the bald assertion made in the appeal that they had worked for specified days during the particular month cannot be made a ground for overturning the findings recorded by the Labour Court after proper appreciation of evidence.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Allahabad Bank v. Prem Singh (supra) does not have any bearing on the decision of this case.
The facts of that case were that the respondent had been engaged for one day in Lajpat Nagar Branch of the appellant-Bank.
Thereafter, he was appointed at different branches for short intervals.
His total period of service was less than 10 days.
The dispute raised by him challenging the alleged termination of his service was answered in affirmative by the Industrial Tribunal, New Delhi.
The Supreme Court set aside the award by making the following observations:-  "This is not a case where by passing any order the existing services of a workman were terminated.
The respondent was given employment for one day at a time with the issuance of successive letters.
The relationship between the parties being contractual, the term of the contract was that the services stood terminated at the end of the day.
The Tribunal has not given any reason whatsoever as to what was the obligation on the appellant to employ the respondent.
The status of the respondent was, at best, that of a daily wager.
By virtue of his letters of employment he ceased to be employed at the end of each day.
His day's service stood automatically terminated.
This being so the decision of the Tribunal in holding that the respondent shall be deemed to have continued in service from 16th June, 1977 and would also be entitled to usual pay and allowances is clearly untenable.
The respondent could not insist on his being continued to be employed and the appellant was under no legal obligation to employ him."
From the above extracted portion of the judgment of the Supreme Court, it is clear that the case was decided on its own facts and no proposition of law was laid down.
18 In the present case, the workmen had served for a period ranging from 6 to 15 years.
This is borne out from the following particulars which we have extracted from the award of the Labour Court :-  Ref.
No. Name Period of service Wages p.m. Rs.
Date of Termination 687/81 Darbara Singh 7 years 500 3061980 691/81 Shakuntla Devi 8 years 300 2361980 693/81 Banti Rani 12 years 350 2361980 694/81 Bhagwan Devi 15 years 350 2361980 697/81 Habai Ram 6 years 450 2361980 704/81 Surjit Kaur 10 years 350 2361980 705/81 Ladi Bahi 15 years 250 2361980 19.
We are also not impressed with the argument of the learned counsel that the employment of the workmen was seasonal in nature and, therefore, the termination of their services cannot be invalidated by invoking the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
The appellant had never pleaded nor any evidence was produced before the Labour Court to prove that they were engaged as seasonal workers.
On the contrary, the evidence produced by the parties established that they had worked under the appellant continuously.
Even before the learned Single Judge, no such argument had been advanced.
Therefore, the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Morinda Cooperative Sugar Mills v. Ram Kishan (supra) cannot be applied to the facts of this case for setting aside the order of reinstatement.
20.
Turning back to the issue of reinstatement, we are of the opinion that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by modifying the award of the Labour Court.
The solitary reason assigned by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court for declining relief of reinstatement of the workmen, namely, that it would not be conducive to industrial peace, was perverse because no evidence was produced by the appellant to prove this.
The observations of the learned Presiding Officer that reinstatement would further complicate the matter was neither here nor there.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by holding that after having recorded a finding that the termination of the services of the workmen was violative of Section 25-F of the Act, the Labour Court was not justified in declining relief of reinstatement simply by making an observation that it would not be conducive to the industrial peace.
InState of Bombay and others v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1960 SC 610; Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambu Nath, AIR 1978 SC 8; Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219; Surendra Kumar Verma etc. v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi, AIR 1981 SC 422; Mohan Lal v. Management of Bharat Electronics Ltd, AIR 1981 SC 1253; Gammon India Limited v. Niranjan Dass, AIR 1984 SC 500 and Vikramaditya Pandey v. Industrial Tribunal, Lucknow and another, 2001(2) SCC.
423, the Supreme Court held that the termination of the services of the workman brought about in violation of Section 25-F of the Act has to be treated as invalid and inoperative and except in exceptional circumstances, the Labour Court is bound to order reinstatement with full back wages.
21.
In Surendra Kumar Verma's case (supra), a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court gave some illustrations in which a departure can possibly be made from the normal rule of reinstatement with back wages in the cases of unlawful termination of service but, at the same time, warned that the Court should not readily accept the employer's plea to deny the relief of reinstatement to the workman with back wages.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of that judgment, which are quite instructive, are produced below:-  "We do not propose to refer to the cases arising under Ss.
33 and 33A of the Industrial Disputes Act or to cases arising out of references under Ss.
10 and 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Nor do we propose to engage ourselves in the unfruitful task of answering the question whether the termination of the services of a workman in violation of the provisions of S. 25-F is void ab initio or merely invalid and inoperative, even, if it is possible to discover some razor's edge distinction between the Latin void ab initio and the Anglo- Saxon `invalid and inoperative'.
Semantic luxuries are misplaced in the interpretation of bread and butter statues.
Welfare statutes must, of necessity, receive a broad interpretation, Where legislation is designed to give relief against certain kinds of mischief, the etymological excursions.
Void ab initio, invalid and inoperative or call it what you will, the workmen and the employer are primarily concerned with the consequence of striking down the order of termination of services of the workmen.
Plain common sense dictates that the removal of an order terminating the services of workmen must ordinarily lead to the reinstatement of the services of the workmen.
It is as if the order has never been and so it must ordinarily lead to back wages too.
But there may be exceptional circumstances which make it impossible or wholly inequitable vis-a-vis the employer and workmen to direct reinstatement with full back wages.
For instance, the industry might have closed down or might be in severe financial doldrums; the workmen concerned might have secured better or other employment elsewhere and so on.
In such situations, there is a vestige of discretion left in the Court to make appropriate consequential orders.
The Court may deny the relief of reinstatement where reinstatement is impossible because the industry has closed down.
The Court may deny the relief of award to full back wages where that would place an impossible burden on the employer.
In such and other exceptional cases the Court may mould the relief but, ordinarily the relief to be awarded must be reinstatement with full back wages.
That relief must be awarded where no special impediment in the way of awarding the relief is clearly shown.
True, occasional hardship may be caused to an employer but we must remember that, more often than not, comparatively far greater hardship is certain to be caused to the workmen if the relief is denied than to the employer if the relief is granted.
In the cases before us we are unable to see any special impediment in the way of awarding the relief.
The Labour Court appears to have thought that the award of the relief of reinstatement with full back wages would put these workmen on a par with those who had qualified for permanent absorption by passing the prescribed test and that would create dis-satisfaction amongst the latter.
First, they can never be on par since reinstatement would not qualify them of permanent absorption.
They would continue to be temporary, liable to be retrenched.
Second there is not a shred of evidence to suggest that their reinstatement would be a cause for dissatisfaction to anyone.
There is no hint in the record that any undue burden would be placed on the employer if the same relief is granted as was done in Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala (AIR 1980 SC 1219)".
(Emphasis supplied).
22.
However, on the issue of back wages, we find some merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the learned Single Judge should not have awarded full back wages ignoring the fact that the appellant was not to be blamed for delay in the decision of the writ petition.
In our opinion, the appellant as well as the workmen have suffered due to delay in the disposal of the writ petition and the appeal.
Therefore, it would be appropriate to settle the equities by directing that in addition to 50% of the back wages paid in terms of the interim order passed by the Court in the light of Section 17-B of the Act, we feel that ends of justice would be met by directing the appellant to pay another 25% back wages and leave the workmen free to avail remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the Act for balance wages.
This approach is consistent with the decision of the Supreme Court in Managing Director, UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vijay Narayan Vajpayee, AIR 1980 SC 840.
23.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed subject to this modification that in addition to the amount of 50% back wages paid terms of Section 17-B of the Act, the appellant shall pay another 25% back wages to the workmen within a period of two months.
For remaining 25% back wages and other consequential monetary benefits to which the workmen may have become entitled as a results the declaration granted by the Labour Court that the termination of their services were violative of Section 25-F of the Act and the order of the learned Single Judge, they shall be free to avail remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
In such proceedings, the employer shall be entitled to plead and prove that they were gainfully employed during the intervening period and, therefore, they shall not be paid total monetary benefits.
Appeal dismissed.