Bakhshish Kaur, J - This is a petition for quashing order dated 5/14 November, 1998 (Annexure P-15) passed by the Deputy General Manager, Oriental Bank of Commerce-respondent No. 3 with a further prayer to reinstate the petitioner with effect from the date of suspension i.e. 2891984 alongwith all consequential benefits.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the writ petition are that the petitioner was appointed as Cashier-cum-Godown Keeper in January 1980 in Oriental Commercial Bank (hereinafter referred to as `the Bank').
While working as Cashier-cum-Godown Keeper in Sarabha Nagar, Ludhiana branch of the Bank, on the report of the Branch Manager a case under Sections 409/379 IPC was got registered against him at Sarabha Nagar Police Station, Ludhiana, alleging therein that there is shortage of Rs. 2,06,000/- in the cash and the petitioner had been absconding since the day shortage was noticed.
Copy of the FIR is Annexure P-1.
On 2891984, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
3.
The petitioner at the close of the trial under Section 409 IPC was acquitted by the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class on 1891996 vide judgment Annexure P-2.
The respondent-bank did not prefer any appeal against the order of acquittal.
4.
In the wake of acquittal, the petitioner represented/approached the respondents for his reinstatement, but the authorities, rather issued a charge-sheet dated 19121996 (Annexure P-3) whereby fresh disciplinary enquiry was initiated against him under para 195(j) of the Bi-partite Settlement dated 19.10.1966.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner filed a Civil Writ petition No. 4020 of 1997.
It was disposed of on 2051997 with a direction to the respondents to reinstate the petitioner.
It was also directed that he shall face the departmental enquiry which shall be completed within six months.
5.
In pursuance of this Court's order, the petitioner joined the Bank at Lead Bank Office, Ferozepur City and joined the enquiry.
The petitioner's grievance is that he was not permitted to take the assistance of a legally trained person of his own faith despite the fact that the Disciplinary Authority had directed to Enquiry Officer, to allow the petitioner to peruse the documents in the presence of the defence representative.
6.
As a result of the enquiry, the petitioner was dismissed from service on 1121997 vide order Annexure P-10.
The petitioner had preferred appeal before the appellate authority-respondent No. 4 on 211998.
Vide letter dated 1341998 Annexure P-12, the petitioner was informed by the Disciplinary Authority to appear before it.
Thus, on 16.7.1998 respondent No. 3 again passed the order dismissing the petitioner from service.
Copy of the order dated 16.7.1998 is Annexure P-14.
7.
The petitioner again filed appeal against the order dated 16.7.1998.
As per letter dated 5/14.11.1998 issued by the Chief Manager, Personnel Department the petitioner was informed that in place of dismissal from service, his service has been terminated in accordance with para 193(C) of the Bi-partite Settlement (hereinafter referred to as, the Settlement).
8.
In the written statement, the respondents have raised preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the petitioner is a workman, therefore, the only remedy available to him is under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
9.
On merits, it is admitted that a case under section 409 IPC was registered against the petitioner and he was acquitted, but pleaded, inter alia, that he was given the benefit of doubt.
The Bank had no locus standi to prefer appeal against order of acquittal, but the respondents were at liberty to hold departmental proceedings in consonance with the Settlement, which govern the service conditions of the Bank employees and is binding under the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
10.
The respondents have also confronted (contested ?)
the petitioner's claim that he was not permitted to be represented by legally trained person in the departmental enquiry proceedings.
It is averred that the petitioner has got no fundamental right to be defended by a legally trained officer under the provisions of the Settlement, the charge-sheeted employee can be allowed to be represented by a representative of State Federation at the request of the union of which he is not a member and to which such Union is affiliated.
The petitioner was told by the Enquiry Officer that he could be represented by the defence representative of his choice only after adhering to the provisions of the Settlement.
As the petitioner and his defence representative could not obtain the requisite permission of the registered Trade Union of the Bank, the assistance of the defence representative was reasonably and justifiably refused by the Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner was afforded number of opportunities to appear before the Disciplinary Authority, no prejudice has been caused to him.
Despite the opportunity given to him, he did not appear before the Disciplinary Authority for personal hearing.
The petitioner cannot take advantage of his own acts of omission and commission.
11.
I have heard Shri TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sarvashri Jagat Arora and RN Lohan, learned counsel for the respondents.
12.
The undisputed facts of the case are that petitioner was challaned and tried for the offence under Section 409 IPC.
He was acquitted of the charge as per judgment Annexure P-2 dated 1891996 after giving him benefit of doubt.
The main point raised by Shri TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner is that once a person has been acquitted of the offence complained of, then no departmental enquiry can be initiated against him nor he can be held guilty on the same set of circumstances or the allegations.
The charge- sheet dated 19121996 issued to the petitioner contained only the charge - "an act prejudicial to the interest of the Bank".
Since the petitioner already stood acquitted in the criminal case under charge 409 IPC, therefore, no act of the petitioner can be termed as prejudicial to the interest of the Bank.
In this way, the whole process of enquiry is nothing but an illegality.
The departmental proceedings could not be initiated against him because the expressions `acquittal' and `acquitted on a benefit of doubt' has the same result and there is no distinction between these two expressions.
13.
The argument advanced by the learned counsel does not appear to be convincing as even the expression `acquittal from criminal case' would not be sufficient for setting aside the order of termination from service on the same charge.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Govind Das v. State of Bihar, 1980 SCC (L&S) 148, is answer to the argument as it has been observed that the acquittal of the appellant in criminal proceedings was based on the view that the charge was not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Since the standard of proof required to prove a charge of misconduct in departmental proceedings is not the same as that required to prove a criminal charge, the acquittal of the appellant in the criminal case could not be made the basis for setting aside the order of termination of the appellant passed in the disciplinary proceedings on the basis of the evidence passed in the departmental enquiry conducted in the charges levelled against the appellant.
14.
In Senior Superintendent of Post Offices and others v. A Gopalan, AIR 1999 SC 1514 : 1999(2) SCT 295 (SC), it has been held that acquittal of a delinquent officer by a criminal Court does not conclude departmental proceedings in respect of the same charge.
Under para 6, it has been held as under :-  "We have heard Shri V.C.
Mahajan, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants and Shri KMK Nair, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
Shri Nair has submitted that since the respondent has been acquitted of by the Criminal court on the charge of withdrawal of Rs. 8,000/- the Tribunal was right in holding that the finding regarding the first charge could not be sustained.
Shri Nair has placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Nelson Motis v. Union of India, 1992(5) JT (SC) 511 : 1992 AIR SCW 2304 : 1993(1) SCT 133 (SC).
The said decision does not land support to the said submission of Shri Nair.
In that case the Court has rejected the contention that disciplinary proceedings could not be continued in the face of the acquittal in the criminal case and has held that the nature and scope of the criminal case are very different from those of a departmental disciplinary proceedings and an order of acquittal, therefore, cannot conclude the departmental proceedings.
This is so because in a criminal case the charge has to be proved by the standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt while in departmental proceedings the standard of proof for proving the charge is preponderance of probabilities.
The Tribunal was, therefore, in error in holding the view of the acquittal of the respondent by the criminal court on the charge relating to withdrawal of Rs. 8,000/- the finding on the first charge in the departmental proceedings cannot be upheld and must be set aside.
The tribunal was also not right in taking the view that even though the second charge of misappropriation of sum of Rs. 379/- and Rs. 799/- realised the customs duty was established, the punishment of compulsory retirement that was imposed on the respondent could not be sustained.
Having regard to the fact that the second charge related to misappropriation of funds for which the punishment of compulsory retirement could be imposed the Tribunal, in exercise of its jurisdiction could not direct the appellate authority to review the penalty imposed on the respondent."
15.
Thus, the basic fact being that in a criminal case the charge has to be proved by the standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt while in departmental proceedings, the standard of proof for proving the charge is preponderance of probabilities.
The acquittal of the petitioner in criminal case would not stultify the outcome of the departmental proceedings.
16.
The other point raised by the learned counsel is that the petitioner was not afforded the right of representation in the disciplinary proceedings, therefore, the impugned order is bad in the eyes of the law is also not acceptable in view of the decision rendered in Bharat Petroleum Corporation v. Maharashtra General Kamgar Union and others, 1999(81) FLR 358 : 1999(1) SCT 298 (SC), cited by the learned counsel for the respondent.
17.
Certain basic principles of natural justice keeping in view the context of disciplinary enquiry and orders of punishment imposed by the employer upon an employee have been enunciated by the Apex Court in State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, AIR 1996 SC 1669 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC), which are as under :-  "(4)(a) In the case of a procedural provision which is not (of) a mandatory character, the complaint of violation has to be examined from the standpoint of substantial compliance.
Be that as it may, the order passed in violation of such a provision can be set aside only where such violation has occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee.
(b) In the case of violation of a procedural provision, which is of mandatory character, it has to be ascertained whether the provision is conceived in the interest of the person proceeded against or in public interest.
If it is found to be former, then it must be seen whether the delinquent officer has waived the said requirement, either expressly or by his conduct.
If he is found to have waived it, then the order of punishment cannot be set aside on the ground of said violation.
If, on the other hand, it is found that the delinquent officer/employee has not waived it or that the provision could not be waived by him, then the Court or Tribunal should make appropriate directions (include the setting aside of the order of punishment).
The ultimate test is always the same viz. test of prejudice or the test of fair hearing, as it may be called.
(5) Where the enquiry is not governed by any rules/regulations/statutory provisions and the only obligation is to observe the principle of natural justice - or, for the matter, wherever such principles are held to be implied by the very nature and impact of order/action - the Court or the Tribunal should make a distinction between a total violation of natural justice (rule of audi alteram partem) and violation of a facet of the said rule.
In other words, a distinction must be made between "no opportunity" and no adequate opportunity i.e. between "no notice"/"no hearing" and "no fair hearing" (a) In the case of former, the order passed would undoubtedly be invalid (one may call it "void" or a nullity if one chooses to).
In such cases, normally liberty will be reserved for the authority to take proceedings afresh according to law i.e. in accordance with the said rule (audi alteram partem).
(b) in the latter case, the effect of violation (of a facet of the rule of audi alteram partem) has to be examined from the standpoint of prejudice; in other words, what the Court or Tribunal has to see is whether in the totality of the circumstances, the delinquent officer/employee did or did not have a fair hearing and the orders to be made shall depend upon the answer to the said query.
(It is made clear that this principles (No. 5) does not apply in the case of rule against bias, the test in which behalf are laid down elsewhere).
(6) While applying the rule of audi alteram partem (the primary principle of natural justice) the Court/Tribunal/Authority must always bear in mind the ultimate and overriding objective underlying the said rules viz. to ensure a fair hearing and to ensure that there is no failure of justice.
it is this objective which should guide them in applying the rule to varying situations that arise before them.
(7) There may be situations where the interest of State or public interest may call for a curtailing of the rule of audi alteram partem.
In such situations, the Court may have to balance public/State interest with the requirement of natural justice and arrive at an appropriate decision."
18.
In the given case in hand, the petitioner has not been able to make out a case of violation of principles of natural justice or that he was not given a personal hearing which may amount to negation of the rule of audi alteram partem.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been specifically averred that the departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner under para 195(j) of the Settlement and the procedure in consonance with the settlement governing the service conditions of the employees of the Bank.
On the point of representation by a co-employee, he was told by the Enquiry Officer that he could be represented by the defence representative of his choice.
But he was required to take permission of the registered trade union, which he was unable to obtain.
He was also afforded opportunity to appear before the Disciplinary Authority for personal hearing but he preferred not to appear.
Thus, where an employee chooses not to appear for personal hearing for the reasons best known to him and examining the case from the standpoint of prejudice, I am of the considered view that there is no failure of justice.
19.
Thus, from the facts and circumstances of the case and the material brought on the record, it can be safely concluded that the order passed by the punishing authority is not in violation of the rules and conditions of service.
20.
For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition (sic).
Order accordingly.