Dipak Misra, J - Invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner has prayed for issue of a writ of Certiorari for quashing the orders dated 7-10-96 and 6-2-97, Annexure-P-5 and Annexure-P-7, respectively, passed by the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation, Shahdol (hereinafter referred to as `the Commissioner') and has also prayed for other ancillary reliefs.
2.
The facts as have been unfolded are that the respondent No.
I describing himself as the cleaner of the truck bearing registration No. CIJ-8120 owned by the petitioner and driven by respondent No. 2 filed an application under provisions of Workmen Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') for grant of compensation in respect of injuries suffered by him on 18-8-88 due the accident of vehicle in question.
The aforesaid application was registered as case No. 116/98.
As averred no notice of the proceedings was served on the petitioner.
Later on, it was found that notices were published in local Newspaper "Dainik Bharti" published from Katni.
On the basis of the said publication notices were deemed to be served on the petitioner and proceeding was taken up ex parte, and eventually, award was passed on 17-10-92 awarding Rs. 76,556/- with interest at the rate of 12% per annum along with penalty at 50% in favour of respondent No. 1.
The award in question has been brought on record as Annexure-P-2.
According to the writ petitioner the respondent No. 1 did not implead the Insurer though the truck was duly insured.
The award was sent to Tahsildar, Katni for execution of the same.
After coming to know about the award the petitioner on 30-4-96 filed an application under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure before the Commissioner for setting aside the same.
As respondent No. 1 was not traceable notice was published in newspaper but inspire of that he chose not to appear.
Eventually, the matter was taken up ex parte but the Commissioner dismissed the application by order dated 7-1-96 contained in Annexure-P-5.
As per the advice of the counsel the petitioner filed an application before the Commissioner under Sections 47, 114 and 151 read with Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure which was registered as Case No. 45/96 but the said application was dismissed on 6-2-97.
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner preferred an appeal forming the subject-matter of MA No. 448/97 which was not entertained by learned single Judge of this Court on the ground that the appeal was not maintainable.
However, while not admitting the said appeal the learned Single Judge observed that only remedy available to the appellant therein was under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
On the aforesaid observation the present writ petition has been filed.
It has been set forth that the Commissioner has passed the award in gross violation of the mandatory provisions of law and refused to set aside the ex parte award though the petitioner was not properly served.
It is also set forth that the Commissioner has fallen into error by passing a cryptic order justifying the award passed by him.
It has also been pleaded that the respondent No. 1 had not filed a proper application before the Commissioner in the requisite pro forma, and hence award is bad in law.
It has also been pleaded that the respondent No. 1 had not filed a proper application before the Commissioner in the requisite pro forma and hence.
award is bad in law.
It has also been urged that when the vehicle was insured and the insurance was valid on the date of accident, if any award was passed the same was to be satisfied by the insurer and though this aspect was brought to the notice of Commissioner he did not consider the effect of the same and rejected the prayer of the petitioner which vitiates the order passed by him.
It has also been pleaded that the Commissioner has erroneously opined that the petitioner had knowledge of the proceedings prior to 10-4-96 though the petitioner had brought material on record to indicate that he had no knowledge about the proceedings in question.
Quite apart from the above the jurisdiction of the Commissioner to pass the award has also been called in question.
3.
When the writ petition was pending a prayer was made by the learned counsel for the petitioner to implead the National Insurance Company as respondent No. 4.
By order dated 7-1-99 the said prayer was allowed.
As this Court was desirous to know whether the vehicle in question was having valid insurance on the date of accident a direction was issued to the learned counsel for the insurer to file the requisite affidavit by the concerned Branch Manager.
In pursuance of the direction given by this Court a return has been filed by the respondent No. 4 contending, inter alia, that the petitioner was at fault in not appearing before the Commissioner and the quantum of the award determined by the Commissioner is excessive as the same should have been determined at Rs. 33,783/-; that the penalty cannot be saddled on the Insurance Company; and that the petitioner being at fault from many an aspect the Insurance Company is entitled to be exonerated.
It is noteworthy to state here that Mrs. Ruprah, learned counsel for the respondent No. 4, fairly submitted that the vehicle had valid insurance on the date of the accident.
4.
Mr. Harvinder Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 1, raised a preliminary objection that the writ petition is not maintainable and the petitioner could have filed an regular appeal under Section 30 of the Act.
Learned counsel has contended that respondent No. 1 has suffered enough due to callous attitude and conduct of the petitioner and, therefore, this Court should be slow to interfere in exercise of equitable jurisdiction.
5.
I have heard Mrs. Archana Nagariya, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Harvinder Singh, learned counsel for the respondent No. 1, and Mrs. Amrit Ruprah, learned counsel for the respondent No. 4.
6.
To appreciate the rival submissions raised at the Bar I think it apposite to reproduce the order dated 6-5-97 passed In MA No. 448/97.
"Heard Smt. Archana Nagariya, learned counsel for the appellant, on the question of admission.
In view of Rule 41 of the Workmen Compensation Rules.
1924 although, Rules 9 to 13 of Order 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure are applicable, however, Order 43 is not made applicable specifically.
Under such circumstances, this court has already held interpreting the identical Rule No. 240 under the Motor Vehicles Act that such orders are not appealable for the reason that Order 43 of the Code of Civil Procedure was not made applicable to the procedure to be followed by the Motor Vehicles Claims Tribunal (See CR No. 1847/95 decided by this Court on 3101996).
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant, however, argued that permission be granted to the appellant to convert this case into a revision under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
I am afraid, this cannot be done in view of the decision of a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Yashwant Rao v. Sampat, reported in AIR 1979 MP 21 : 1979 Lab IC 176.
It appears the only remedy available to the appellant is under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
The appellant may pursue his remedy if so advised.
4.
With the aforesaid observation, this appeal is hereby dismissed."
In view of the aforesaid, I am not inclined to address myself whether a regular appeal should have been filed or not.
In the case at hand, on the basis of the observation made by the learned single Judge the petitioner has preferred this writ petition and in view of the obtaining factual matrix, I am inclined to address myself to the merits of the case.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn the attention of this Court to the order passed by the Commissioner (Annexure P-5) whereby he has rejected the application preferred under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Commissioner has referred to the paper publication and has come to hold that the petitioner was served and award has been passed on the basis of the material on record.
Later on, when the petitioner filed an application for review of the order questioning the jurisdiction of the Commissioner and also pointing out that the vehicle in question was insured, the Commissioner vide Annexure-P-7 rejected the said application.
It is urged by Mrs. Nagariya that when the petitioner had no knowledge about the proceeding the Commissioner would have done well to set aside the ex parte award.
The learned counsel has submitted that the computation made by the Commissioner being totally unwarranted the circumstances did command for a re-hearing of the matter.
The learned counsel for respondent No. 1 as well as respondent No. 4 have pointed out that when the notices were sent by registered post with acknowledgement due and the same were not received back within 30 days the Commissioner could have drawn the presumption with regard to the service of notice but he by abundant caution directed for publication in paper and in these circumstances the petitioner cannot take advantage of the situation.
8.
In the case at hand two aspects emerge which have weighed with me.
First, the vehicle in question is insured, and hence, the insurer is liable to indemnify the petitioner, of course, subject to other conditions of the policy and second, the Insurance Company has given a calculation in paragraph 3 of the return to show that the respondent No. 1 was entitled to compensation of Rs. 33,783/- on the basis of the formula provided under the schedule.
Judicial notice can be taken note of the fact that the claimants who obtain awards against the vehicle owners and liability is saddled on the owners are sometimes armed with paper tigers.
A vehicle being not insured claimants have to face an arduous task to realize the amount and some times it has occasioned in failure.
In the present case when the vehicle is insured and eventually, if the liability is saddled with the insurer the claimant/respondent No. 1 can realize the money and need not to live in fond hope of realization.
True it is, the Insurance Company may not be liable to pay the penalty as per the dictum of the Apex Court rendered in the case of Ved Prakash Garg v. Premi Devi, AIR 1997 SC 3855 : 1997(4) SCT 541 (SC) and the owner is to be made liable to pay the penalty but that is altogether an another aspect.
With regard to the quantum, I am not inclined to advert to the same as that will be in the domain of the Commissioner to adjudicate keeping in view the data provided by the claimant but whatever the quantum may be the amount of compensation can be realized from the Insurer.
Quite apart from the above the Commissioner should have done well to afford an opportunity to the petitioner to put forth his case, more so, when the vehicle in question is insured The plea of the petitioner is that he was not served with the notice and was not aware about the paper publication cannot be lightly brushed aside in view of the fact that the petitioner's liability was to be indemnified by the insurer in view of the valid policy.
9.
Considering the circumstances in entirety, I am inclined to set aside the orders contained in Annexures-P-5 and P-7 and direct that the matter should be reheard by the Commissioner and disposed of on merits of the case.
While inclining to give an opportunity to the petitioner to put forth his case in view of the obtaining factual matrix, I am also conscious that the claimant has been fighting his litigation to get the compensation.
In view of the remand the claimant has to face another round of litigation, and hence, he should be compensated.
Accordingly, it is directed that the petitioner shall pay a sum of Rs. 2,500/- towards costs to the claimant/respondent No. 1.
On such sum being paid to the claimant within eight weeks before the Commissioner the said authority he shall proceed to adjudicate the claim and shall complete the exercise within a period of three months therefrom.
If the petitioner fails to pay the cost to the respondent No. 1 the award passed by the Commissioner shall be given effect to and the directions passed in this writ petition shall not be worked out.
10.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of without any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.