NS Veerabhadraiah, J - This appeal and the cross objections arise out of the orders passed by the ESI Court dated 5-9-1989 dismissing the application filed under section 75 of E.S.I.
Act as barred by limitation.
2.
The brief facts of the case are as follows :  The E.S.I.
Corporation called upon M/s. Dharak Limited, to pay contribution for the period 1982-1983 by demand letter dated 11.7.1984 to pay Rs. 5,72213.
Since contribution amount was not paid, an order under Section 45(A) was passed dated 28-9-1984.
The management having kept quite for a period of 6 years filed an application under section 75 of the ESI Court.
The ESI Court considering the provisions of the Section 77 held that the application filed is barred by limitation and accordingly dismissed.
It is this order which is now questioned in the present appeal.
At the same time, the ESI Corporation has also filed cross objection.
It appears to be on the safer side.
3.
The main contention of the learned counsel for the Appellant is that section 77 is not applicable.
Therefore, the dismissal of the application filed under section 75 is not suitable.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel Sri.
M Papanna, relying on the provisions of section 77 (1) (A) of the ESI Act contended, to initiate any proceedings before the ESI Court, the period of limitation prescribed is 3 years.
In this case, the proceedings under Section 75 of the ESI Act were initiated nearly after 6 years.
Therefore, the ESI Court has rightly dismissed the application and the impugned order does not suffer from any infirmities.
Accordingly prayed to dismiss the appeal.
5.
The point for consideration that arises is : "Whether the impugned order of the ESI Court dismissing the application filed under Section 75 of the ESI Act does suffer from any infirmities as such ?".
6.
It is not in dispute that an order under Section 45 (A) of E.S.I.
Act came to be passed on 29-9-1984 directing M/s Dharak Ltd, to pay the contribution amount.
Before passing the order under section 45(A) of the ESI Act, correspondence has been taken place and it is after verifying the records, the said order came to be passed.
7.
The contention of the appellant is that dismissal of the petition filed under Section 75 of ESI Act is not sustainable.
8.
Section 77 (1) (A) of the ESI Act, 1948 thus reads :  77.
Commencement of proceedings.
- (1) The proceedings before an Employee's Insurance Court shall be commenced by application.
(IA) Every such application shall be made within a period of three years from the date on which the cause of action arose.
A reading of section 77(1)(A) of the ESI Act that any proceedings initiated before the ESI Court either under Section 77 of the ESI Act or any other provisions after a period of limitation of three years from the date of cause of actions liable to be dismissed.
In the present case, it is not In dispute the cause of action has arisen on the 29-8-1984 on which day an order under Section 45(A) of the Act came to be passed.
Whereas, the appellant being not diligent in the matter approached the ESI Court with an application under section 75 of the ESI Act on 1781990 which is on the face of record is barred by limitation.
9.
The ESI Court after considering the relevant provisions of Section 77(1)(A) of the ESI Act dismissed the application, which in my opinion does not suffer from any infirmities so as to Interfere with.
10.
It is contended by the learned counsel Sri, Papanna that while dismissing the petition, the ESI Court has erred in recording the finding on issue No. 1 that the mining operation is specifically excluded from the purview of the ESI Act and the corporation has no power to levy contribution and therefore prayed to set-aside the said finding by allowing the cross objection.
11.
When ESI Court has recorded the finding that the, application itself is barred by limitation, the court further examining the matter on merits was unnecessary.
12, With the said observation, the cross objection is disposed of.
So also the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.