Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Application is allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Written submissions/comments filed by the petitioner are permitted to be taken on record.
List of dates filed by the Union of India- respondent is also taken on record.
CM stands disposed of.
CM No. 16158 of 1998  2.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner on previous occasion had made a request that the matter may be adjourned as he wanted to argue the matter.
On his request, the matter was adjourned to 2412002 as well as on 28.1.2002 and for today.
However, today no body appears on behalf of the petitioner despite the fact that the matter has been passed over twice.
This matter was heard at length earlier and thereafter written submissions have been filed on behalf of the parties.
Thus, I do not consider it necessary to adjourn the matter further for arguments of the petitioner.
Thus, I proceed to record the judgment.
3.
The petitioner, LP Singh, Deputy Commandant of 107 Battalion of the Boarder Security Force, presently attached to the Station Headquarters BSF Ferozepur, has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction, quashing the charge-sheet and the order directing the General Security Force Court (hereinafter referred to as G.S.F.C.)
proceedings.
The petitioner also prays that the order of attachment dated 2811998, the order constituting the GSFC trial dated 291998 and the charge-sheet which are annexed to the petition as Annexures P6, P.9 and P10 be also quashed.
4.
In order to examine the merits of this petition, it will be proper to refer to the facts :  The petitioner joined the Boarder Security Force and is presently working as Deputy Commandant attached to the Headquarters, as afore-noticed.
On 3171997, the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Second in Commandant came for vigilance clearance.
The petitioner claims that he has 30 years unblemished service record.
However, according to him, a conspiracy was hatched against him on 3171997 by respondent No. 9, the Commandant against whom the petitioner had made allegations many years back with regard to his involvement in theft and misuse of public property.
On August 1, 1997.
Constable Nelson Sangma moved a complaint against the petitioner that the petitioner had committed unnatural offence on him.
Petitioner is 54 years old suffered a heart attack.
Thereafter, a Court of enquiry was ordered on 481997.
In that Court of enquiry, the petitioner was found innocent.
A third Court of enquiry was also ordered where the witnesses were again examined and the petitioner was found not guilty.
The proceedings of the said Court of enquiry are annexed as Annexure P2 to the petition.
Vide letter dated 16.9.1997 and after Court's persuasion, the petitioner was informed about the result of the court of enquiry.
Para 2 of the said court of enquiry proceedings read thus :- "Since no prima facie case has been established against Sh. LP Singh, Deputy Commandant and the case has been disposed of, you may grant leave to the officer as deemed proper....." 5.
Thereafter, the Commandant vide order dated 191998, constituted GSFC wherein the article of charges against the petitioner were framed and it was ordered that the petitioner be tried by the said GSFC.
6.
The thrust of the argument of the petitioner is that the petitioner was found not guilty by different Court of enquiries and, as such, the very constitution of the GSFC is unwarranted and is a wrongful approach of the Commandant of the Batalion.
7.
Upon notice, the respondents have filed a detailed reply.
The Union of India has taken two objections to the very maintainability of the writ petition.
Firstly, that an alternative and efficacious remedy is available to the petitioner within the framework of the Boarder Security Force Act, 1968 and the Rules, framed thereunder.
Secondly, the petitioner had preferred a pre-confirmation petition, which was rejected by the Director General of Boarder Security Force vide order dated 3.11.1998.
The petitioner has a right to make a post-confirmation petition as the punishment has already been imposed upon the petitioner by the competent authority and only promulgation of the punishment remains, which was stayed by this Court on the filing of the present writ petition.
On merits, it is contended that under Rule 47 of the Rules ibid the competent authority cannot direct court of enquiry to be conducted for such unnatural offence and there is a bar for passing such an order.
It is also stated that the Court of enquiries conducted earlier are of no consequence as they were neither directed nor were conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
Court of enquiries being a fact finding enquiry, does not bind the authorities from directing constitution of GSFC, particularly in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The Court of enquiry proceedings in accordance with Rule 175 were not put up.
The matter was referred to the Inspector General, BSF to whom the papers were never put up.
As such, there is no proper culmination of the proceedings taken out on the basis of court of enquiry.
8.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
9.
As far as the contention of the Union of India that the court of enquiry proceedings did not culminate or attain finality, the same appears to be without any merit.
Vide order dated 16.9.1997, the Deputy Inspector General of BSF Headquarters had communicated to the Commandant that no prima facie case had been established against the petitioner and as such, the case has been disposed and leave should be granted to the officer concerned.
Its letter was written in response to the letter written by the Deputy Inspector General, Annexure P.3 where (some) recommendations were made.
The authorities had asked (for) advice and disposed of the matter.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the competent authority did not apply its mind or the papers were not put up to the concerned authority.
In fact, these letters were written in the year 1997 and the petitioner was fully justified in assuming that the court of enquiry had decided in his favour as no prima facie case was established against him.
Resultantly, this question is answered against the Union of India.
10.
The two preliminary objections taken by Union of India, have some substance that special law provides a definite remedy to the petitioner which are equally efficacious and meaningful to the purpose sought to be achieved by implementation of the special law governing the Force.
The Courts should be reluctant to interfere at a stage where finality has not been given to such proceedings by the specified authorities.
The petitioner has participated in the GSFC without any protest during this period.
The GSFC was constituted on 791998 and though the petitioner had filed the present writ petition in the year 1998 itself, the Court had only stayed the promulgation of the order and no stay of proceedings was granted to the petitioner.
During the pendency of the petition.
The GSFC trial was concluded even prior to the filing of the petition.
It is undisputed on record that petitioner had submitted a pre- confirmation petition within the scope of the provisions of section 117(1) of the Act which, as already noticed, was dismissed by the Director General of BSF vide order dated 3111997.
This order neither has been impugned by the petitioner in this petition nor in any other proceedings.
Once the pre- confirmation petition is dismissed, the scheme under the Act clearly postulates that the proceedings of the GSFC should be concluded while protecting the right of the petitioner for post confirmation petition.
The petitioner has also not filed any post-confirmation petition as yet, this remedy was available to the petitioner.
He having participated in the trial before the GSFC, in the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the considered view that the petitioner cannot invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court by means of the present writ petition.
In this regard, reference can usefully be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Major Suresh Chand Mehra v. The Defence Secretary (U.O.I.)
and others, 1991(1) SLR 187 : 1991(1) SCT 129 (SC) where the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "At the said trial, the General Officer Commanding specifically asked the petitioner as to whether he would elect to face the trial by the General Court Martial or would accept the award passed by the General Officer Commanding, 2nd Mountain Division.
The petitioner voluntarily opted to accept the award and it does not lie in his mouth to complain that no summary trial as provided for in the Army Rules was held nor could such a complaint by him be entertained in a writ petition like this.
11.
In the present case, the petitioner was specifically asked whether he would elect to face the trial by the General Court Martial or would accept the award passed by the General Officer Commanding, which he replied in the affirmative.
12.
Coming to the second objection raised by the Union of India that the court of enquiry even if assumed finality by the order of the Deputy Inspector General, BSF, cannot terminate the proceedings finally as the proceedings were initiated under the specific provisions of the rules and are thus in accordance with law.
Under Section 24(1) of the Act, any person who commits or is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind, shall, on conviction by Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as mentioned in the Act.
Under Rule 47 of the BSF Rules, a charge specifically mentioned thereunder includes an offence under Section 24 of the Act.
Such offence cannot be tried and dealt with summarily.
In order words, even if the offence squarely falls within the ambit of Section 24 of the Act, the authorities are prohibited from disposing of such matters in a summary manner.
The authorities are left with the limited option of seeking recourse to any action or the kind of court proceedings, as referred to in Section 64 of the Act.
Once the legislation itself provides a bar, the concerned authorities are expected to abide by the same.
13.
It is a settled rule of law that a matter should be dealt with and things be done in the manner provided in the Act and in no other way.
The bar is not implicit but specific and is obviously mandatory.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that the court of enquiry conducted on earlier occasion would bar recourse by the authorities to the provisions of Section 65 read with Section 24 and Rule 47 of the rules.
The cumulative reading of these provisions indicate that remedies lie in different fields and are not in conflict with each other.
They do not overlap the proceedings and remedies but certainly they must operate in the specified field under the statute.
For these reasons, it is clear that constitution of GSFC by the competent authority cannot be stated to be void in law.
It does not suffer or lacks of inherent jurisdiction.
14.
For the reasons aforesaid, this writ petition is dismissed without any order as to costs.
It is made clear that any observation made in this judgment will not affect the right and contention of the petitioner which he is at liberty to raise upon conclusion of the proceedings, promulgation of the sentence and disposal of his post confirmation petition in accordance with law.
I certainly find it necessary to point out that whatever benefit the petitioner is entitled to on the basis of the court of enquiry conducted against him earlier, shall not be denied to him on the strength of this judgment.
Petition dismissed.