Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners were appointed as Helpers on daily wages in Haryana Roadways, Fatehbad Depot.
They have been working on that post for the last six years.
According to he petitioners, they are working against regular posts and the Haryana Roadways is a permanent department of the Government of State of Haryana.
It is also averred that the petitioner are matriculates and are having ITI Certificates in the concerned trades.
It is further averred by the petitioner that they are discharging the same duties and performing the same functions as their counter parts holding the regular posts of the Helper are discharging.
The petitioners claim to possess same qualifications which the regular appointees are possessing.
In these circumstances the petitioners while relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases of District Collector Chairman v. T Davinder Singh, 1999(2) SCT 292 and Kulbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1999(1) SCT 344 passed by this Hon'ble Court, pray that they are entitled to get pay at par with their counter-parts holding the regular posts.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed the written statement.
It is not disputed in the written statement that the petitioners were appointed and are working as helpers on daily wages.
However, it is stated that some of the petitioners are not working for the last six years, but they have been working for the last 4-5 years.
Reference has been made to the instructions of the State of Haryana dated 151996 and 18.3.1996 where it is stated that the petitioners who have completed three years of service as on 3111996, will be regularised in service, but the petitioners have not completed three years of service, therefore, they are not entitled to any relief.
It is also stated that the petitioners do not possess the qualifications prescribed for that post.
3.
The petitioners have only claimed equal pay for equal work, therefore, we are not concerned with the question whether the services of the petitioners ought or ought not to be regularised in accordance with the policy of the Government.
It is not disputed in the written statement filed that the petitioners are working as Helpers in the Haryana Roadways on daily wages for a considerable period varying from 4-5 years to 6 years.
In other words, all the petitioners have been working for more than three years and were appointed during the year 1993 with the exception of very few petitioners who were appointed in the year 1996.
Even the persons who have been appointed in the year 1996 have completed more than 4 years of service on daily wages as of today.
The respondents themselves have annexed to their written statement Annexure R/1 giving details of appointments and qualifications, which each of the petitioner is possessed of.
Most of the petitioners are 10th pass with I.T.I.
Diploma, which is the basic qualification provided for appointment to the post of Helper.
In paragraph No. 3 of the writ petition, the petitioners have specifically averred that they are discharging the same functions and duties as are being performed by their counter parts working in the regular cadre.
Once the petitioners are performing the same functions and have been working for a considerable period, in that event, they would be entitled to some relief on the principle of equal pay for equal work and particularly keeping in mind afore-noticed judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
4.
The Full Bench of this Court, after considering the various judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, larger as well as smaller Benches, right from 1982 till 2001, in the case of Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 931 (P&H) CWP No. 14050 of 1999, on 13.12.2001 answered the question referred to it, relating to equal pay for equal work while holding as under:-  "Having discussed the general principles controlling the various aspects of these cases, it will be appropriate for us to refer to the view taken by the Hon'ble Apex Court in various judgments, spreading over a period of more than 20 years, sufficiently indicates the essentials which need to be satisfied for entertaining a claim founded on the principle of equal pay for equal work or equality.
Thus, we may concisely state these essentials :- a) The petitioners ought to be employed by the Sate as casual or daily rated workers ; b) The employee ought to have worked as such for a fairly reasonable time satisfying the ingredients of continuity in service ; c) The functions being discharged and work being performed by such employee should be similar, (of course, not by mathematical formula), as that being done by a regular employee of the same department ; d) Work performance of the employees should be satisfactory.
At the cost of repetition, we may refer that there is no dispute to the similarity of work and functions and the fact that the petitioners do not lack essential qualifications.
Even if to some extent it was disputed, it would make no difference in the light of law laid down by the Apex Court.
The stress on payment of minimum of the pay scale i.e. the basic pay and dearness allowance alone was insisted upon the Supreme Court repeatedly.
In the case of Devinder Singh (supra), the petitioners, who were working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger Keepers alike some of the petitioners before us in the same department, had filed a writ claiming parity of pay.
x x x x "The relief to be granted would have to be considered in light of the facts and circumstances of each case.
What we have stated is mere reiteration of the law enunciated by the Apex Court and cannot be stated as a derivative enunciation.
The petitioners have been able to satisfy the fundamentals noticed in this judgment and in fact part of their claim stands on the admission of the respondents.
We have taken into consideration and followed the Larger Benches of the Apex Court as they discussed the rationale and logic at a greater length and have not given undue importance to the time and date on which the decisions were rendered.
The view of the Larger Bench subsequently followed, attaches certainty and uniformity to the law so declared.
Keeping in mind the law enunciated and in light of the facts and circumstances of these cases to assimilate, we feel persuaded to answer the question in favour of the petitioners.
In view of our detailed discussion above, we answer the question formulated in the reference order as under:-  "The petitioners, who are working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger-Keepers, Pump Operators, Mali-cum-Chowkidars, Fitters, Petrol Men and Surveyor etc., and are satisfying the afore-stated essential ingredients, are entitled to the minimum of the pay scale (basic pay and dearness allowance alone) admissible to their counterparts working on regular basis in the same department."
The reference is answered accordingly and matters be listed before the regular Bench for disposal in accordance with law, subject to orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice."
5.
Thus, this case has to be decided in view of the above enunciated principles, which in turn, relies upon the Larger Benches of the Hon'ble Apex Court.
It is not disputed that the petitioners are performing the same functions like their counter-parts in the regular cadre and they have been working for a considerable period to the satisfaction of all concerned.
In this view of the matter, the petitioners would be entitled to the relief, but again not the regular pay scale which their regular counter-parts are receiving.
The petitioners would be entitled to minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance alone.
The petitioners have been working since 1993, but never pressed their claim till 2000 when they filed this writ petitioner that too, without serving any notice of demand upon the respondents.
Therefore, we are of the considered view that the petitioners would be entitled to get this relief only with effect from 142000 i.e. two months later to the institution of this petition.
6.
In view of our above discussion, this writ petition is allowed.
The petitioners would be entitled to the limited relief afore-noticed and from the date indicated above.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.