Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
Learned counsel appearing for the State contends that the impugned award dated 15.11.2000 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat is vitiated on the ground that forged muster rolls were produced by the witness of the department in collusion with the workman.
3.
This contention is self-destructive.
No such plea was ever raised before the Labour Court so as to enable it to look into the matter from a different point of view.
Even after the award was passed and before the same could be published and made enforceable, no application for review was filed.
4.
The learned Labour Court, upon proper appreciation of evidence, particularly keeping in view the statement of the department witness and record produced, has come to a positive finding of fact that the workman had competed 240 days in the previous calendar year in which the services of the workman were terminated.
M.W.1 in fact practically admitted the case of the workman.
5.
We see no reason to interfere in the impugned award and would dismiss this writ petition in limine.
6.
However, before we part with this file, we are constrained to observe that in most of the cases relating to the reference being decided in favour of the workman, where government is the respondent-management, normally the departmental witness in examination-in-chief states something in favour of the department while in cross examination, they concede the claim of the workman and also do not produce relevant record.
The record is such which, in the normal course of business, would be maintained and be in occupation of the Government Officers.
Result of non-production of record before the Labour Court is to draw adverse inference against the management.
Such practice and state of affairs in conducting cases before the Labour Court needs to be deprecated by all concerned.
7.
The present case is one which is a glaring example of what we have observed above.
It comples the Court to emphasis the need of introspection by the concerned authorities of such affairs in larger public interest.
The State is under obligation to prevent improper disbursement of public money.
8.
In the case in hand, the argument on behalf of the State is that the muster rolls, which have been produced before the Labour Court were forged ones and there was definite connivance between the workman and the departmental officials and the labour Court has granted reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service with full back wages on such evidence which has resulted in wastage of public money.
This was not the stand of the department before the labour Court in the pleadings, the evidence or at any time and we cannot permit such a plea to be raised in writ jurisdiction, that too without any cogent evidence to support such a submission.
The department is at liberty to take recorse to such legal remedy as is available to them in law.
In the larger public interest, however, we direct the Financial Commissioner.
Secretary Finance and Engineer-in-Chief, P.S.D.
(B&R), Haryana to hold an appropriate enquiry forth-with into this matter and all such other matters and pass needed necessary directions and orders within a period of six months from today.
They shall also ensure in consultation with the concerned department, issuance of appropriate direction for proper prosecution of cases before the Labour Courts in the States of Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh.
We will also leave it open for the concerned authorities to take appropriate action against the erring officials/officers.
If such officers are found to be guilty after due enquiry and in accordance with law, then the State may also consider the possibility of recovery of the amounts paid to the workman from the salary of such defaulting officers.
9.
This petition is disposed of with the above directions.
10.
Copy of order be given dasti.
Order accordingly.