Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - By this judgment, we propose to dispose of these writ petitions bearing Nos. 3565, 5102 of 2000, 5926, 11460 of 2001, 1797 and 3161 of 2002 which raise the common question of law based on somewhat similar facts.
2.
The basic question is - whether the part-time employees particularly working in the Education Department are entitled for regularisation or not.
If the above question is answered in the affirmative, what would be the terms of their regularisation ?
3.
The petitioners are working as Sweepers/Kahars or against the similarly placed posted persons in different departments of the State.
The petitioners have been working for a considerable period and in any case for more than 7 years and claim that they should be regularised as against the said posts.
According to the petitioners, even the sanctioned posts are available in the State and there is sufficient work for the petitioners to perform, resultantly, they pray for the issuance of a mandamus to the respondents for regularising their services from the date they are qualified to do so.
4.
This claim of the petitioners is contested by the State.
The State has not disputed this fact that there is a policy framed by it for regularising the services of the part-time employees.
However, the conditions for regularisation are to be satisfied before the petitioners can be granted such relief.
Firstly, the scheme was issued by the government in the year 1980, amended from time to time thereinafter referred to as "Scheme").
The said scheme was amended in the year 1998.
As per the scheme of 1998, the services of the part-time employees can be regularised subject to the conditions stated in the policy/letter of December 30, 1998/February 25, 1999.
The conditions contained in the aforesaid letter read as under :-  (1) "Part time employees fulfilling the requisite qualification prescribed of regular class IV employees in the Haryana State Secondary Education Field Officers (Group D).
(2) Those part time candidates who have been recruited through employment exchange should have at least three years experience on their posts.
(3) Those candidates recruited on part-time basis through direct recruitment, they should have at least 6 years experience on their posts."
5.
It is further contended on behalf of the State that there are no vacant posts.
The work of part-time employees is job-oriented and is controlled by limitation of the State in regard to the finance and availability of the work.
There are schools in the remote corner of the State which are very small.
The extent and infrastructure of the schools does not permits the State of create full time post for appointment.
Resultantly, the State is unable to regularise the services of the part-time employees for three reasons, which read as under :-  (a) Petitioners do not satisfy the prescribed qualifications; (b) There are no sanctioned posts; and (c) There is, administratively, no work available for the government to employ so many people on regular basis as it would adversely affect the State exchequer.
6.
We have heard this matter at some length yesterday and thereafter, we had also perused the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court which are practically against the State on all scores including the `non-sanctioned posts' and the aspect of qualification.
7.
During the course of hearing, the learned Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana sought time to seek instructions if the State could work out some via-media within the frame-work of its existing policy for regularising the services of the petitioners and alike situated persons.
8.
We must note with some appreciation that the learned Advocate General, Haryana informed the Court and upon the instructions from the State, Mr. Amol Rattan, Assistant Advocate General made statement in the Court that the State would not strictly enforce the conditions of prescribing qualifications against the petitioners if there are regular sanctioned posts of Sweepers available at any point of time.
It is also stated that the State, in order to accommodate such class, would consider the case of the Sweepers against the posts of Peons.
Of course, again subject to same conditions of availability of posts and the part-time sweepers satisfying the qualification prescribed for the post of Peon.
9.
In view of the statement made on behalf of the State, the controversy in the present case falls in a very narrow compass.
The entire argument is with regard to the applicability of the instructions of 1998 retrospectively or retroactively.
The petitioners have been working for a considerable time and discharging the functions of the part-time employees in the departments of the State of Haryana.
Once the State has given the above relaxation, the only exception for regularising the services of the petitioners is that firstly, there are no posts available and secondly, there is no work.
There is a serious dispute raised before us as to the nature and quantum of the work being available in the schools.
We are of the considered view that while exercising its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is not appropriate forum to determine such matters.
They primarily fall in the domain of the State and its specialised agencies.
What is the prescribed infrastructure of the school; what is the strength of the school and how many employees are needed, is not a matter inviting judicial determination, but at the same time the Courts expect the administration to take a view which will be in consonance with the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and the various Division Benches of this Court.
The petitioners have placed reliance upon the recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Umed Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 2001(1) R.S.J.
752 : 2001(3) SCT 79 (P&H)(DB), wherein it has been held that after 10 years, the petitioners in the case cited above were considered to be eligible for regularisation.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioners are also claiming that the expression `part-time' does not indicate with regard to nature of their work and the time spent by them in the schools.
According to them they are working for the entire day in the school and performing their functions and duties assigned to them by the Administration.
It is specifically disputed that they work only for an hour or two in a day.
It is contended that there are nursery schools where small children were studying.
Thus, the cleaning process of the class rooms etc. is carried out for the hours during which the school is run.
10.
Another factor which the petitioners are unable to answer is unexplained delay on their part in approaching this Court.
The petitioners were, admittedly, appointed during the period from 1979 to 1989 adn since then they have been in service.
The petitioners have approached the Court only in and after the year 2000 for redressal of their grievances.
The delay on the part of the petitioners is obviously unexplained.
Nothing prevented the petitioner from approaching the competent authorities and even the Court of law for deciding their claim for regularisation of their services in furtherance to the Government policy of 1980.
However, this is not the ground and keeping in view the nature of the relief claimed, it would also not be fair to dismiss these petitions on the grounds of delay or laches.
The obligation is also on the part of the State to act timely in furtherance to its instructions and grant to its employees a fair right in employment.
The State is certainly in commanding position while the individuals who were employed to do these jobs are totally dependents and can not dictate the terms contrary to the State desire.
11.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, the statement made on behalf of the State and in order to resolve this prolonged dispute, we would issue direction so as to enable the State to act effectively within the frame-work of its policy and to achieve the ends of justice by granting to the petitioners what is due to them in accordance with law.
Thus, we issue the following directions :-  (i) The case of the petitioners for regularisation as part-time employees would be considered by the State within a period of six months in the light of the policy dated December 30, 1998/February 25, 1999; (ii) The claim of the petitioners would not be declined on the ground that they do not possess the essential qualifications as stipulated in the said policy (as per the statement made in the Court by Mr. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General upon the instructions of the State; (iii) The State shall appoint the Sub-Committee headed by an officer not below the rank of Under Secretary to Government of the State to examine the building, infrastructure, staff and number of children studying in every school of the State of Haryana and in the light of that to recommend how many regular posts can be created in every school depending on the work and the strength of the employees and students.
The committee shall consider the availability of the posts as and when it became available/vacant in a particular school to identify the total number of posts which can be filled up as of now, under the policy of the Government; (iv) We also consider it appropriate that the Committee aforestated shall hear the part-time employees in a representative capacity before determining the criteria to implement this order.
12.
Thereupon services of the petitioners would, thus, be regularised in the above terms.
All these petitions are disposed of in the above terms directing the State to comply with the above directions within a period of six months from today.
It is made clear that no further extension would be allowed for this exercise.
Order accordingly.