Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6075, 13920, 13921, 13919 and 7859 of 1990, as common question of law is involved in all these petitions.
2.
Challenge in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, is to the award dated 14121989, Annexure P9 attached to the petition passed by Labour Court, Bathinda, as being contrary to law and unenforceable.
Punjab State Electricity Board is a body-corporate created under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and has preferred this petition through its Executive Engineer empowered to do so.
According to the case of the petitioner itself, respondent-workman was employed on daily wages as T. Mate for the construction work going on, on 1.11.1982.
Due to completion of work, respondent No. 2 was served with one month retrenchment notice on 171987 in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The workman was allegdly offered the job of Beldar and the same was refused by the workman.
Since the offer was not accepted by the workman, the services were terminated.
A sum of Rs. 1200/- was withdrawn from the Accounts Branch for payment of compensation to the respondent on 181986.
As the workman did not turn upto collect the retrenchment compensation, a registered letter dated 581986 was sent to the respondent at the address available with the department which was also received back by the Board unserved.
3.
Being aggrieved of the order of retrenchment, the workman raised an industrial dispute claiming that his services had been wrongfully terminated by the Board on 181986.
According to the workman, there was no proper retrenchment as neither any notice nor any charge-sheet was served upon him.
The abrupt termination of services was contrary to law.
4.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 14121989, answered the reference in favour of the workman and granted full back wages.
It is this award which is assailed in this writ petition.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-Board has raised mainly two contentions :  a) The workman was employed as a daily wager, having no right to the post and as such, he could not raise any industrial dispute.
b) The retrenchment compensation was allegedly offered to the workman which he did not accept.
Subsequently, a latter was sent to the workman requiring him to collect the compensation payable in compliance to the provision of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
This was sufficient compliance of the requirement of law and, as such, the award was vitiated on this ground.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi & others v. State of Bihar and others, JT 1997(4) SC 560.
This judgment is of no help to the Board.
In that case, it was not proved nor plea raised that the workman had worked for 240 days in the calender year preceding the date of termination.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court primarily only decided the issue that the workman employed on daily wages does not have right to the post.
Iin the present case, it is not a disengagement simplicitor.
The workman had already worked for more than six years with the Board and this fact was not in dispute before the Labour Court.
Once the workman completes the prescribed period of service, certain definite rights flow in favour of the workman under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Thereafter the management is obliged to comply with the requirements of such provisions before retrenching or disengaging the service of the workman, as the case may be.
6.
On the contrary it has been averred in the petition itself that the workman was employed in the year 1982 while his services were dispensed with/retrenched on 181986.
I am of the opinion that this plea in relation to the termination/retrenchment which is a primary question, has to be decided on the basis of the evidence/pleadings of the parties and evidence was not even raised in the written statement filed by the Board before the Labour Court.
No evidence in that behalf has been led.
This plea can hardly be taken as question of law for the first time in a writ petition impugning the award.
7.
The second contention raised by the learned counsel for the Board is equally without any merit.
While giving a finding of fact that retrenchment of the workman was vitiated for non-compliance of the statutory provision so Section 25F of the Act.
The learned Labour Court while relying upon the statement of the witness of the management itself recorded as under :-  "In the instant case, the workmen were retrenched from service on 181986 whereas the respondent management was not in a position to pay the compensation to them on the said date.
The workman were asked to collect compensation on 281986.
Parkash Chand MW/1 has unequivocally admitted in the cross examination that registered letters were sent to the workmen calling upon them to collect compensation amount after their retrenchment from service and that no compensation was paid to them at the time of retrenchment.
The payment of retrenchment compensation is a condition precedent for valid retrenchment u/s 25F of the Act which has not been made in these cases.
That being so, the orders of retrenchment of the workmen are wrong & illegal.
The issue is decided accordingly."
8.
It is interesting to note that contrary documentary evidence to the argument sought to be raised before this Court has been produced by the Board itself.
In the notice for retrenchment, the Board stated that the workman had worked for 240 days and was entitled for retrenchment compensation.
Once such was the pleaded case of the Board itself then it was the requirement of section 25F of the Act that notice could not be served unless the same accompanies the retrenchment compensation payable to the workman.
9.
In view of this, particularly in the specific pleadings that the workman was gainfully employed during that period.
I do not see any reason whatsoever to interfere in the relief granted by the Labour Court in regard to payment of back wages.
10.
In view of the above clinching evidence on the issues, there is no occasion for this Court to interfere with a finding of fact arrived at on proper appreciation of the evidence, in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
11.
For the reasons afore-stated, this petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.