Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the award dated 321999 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Hisar, vide which reference has been answered against the workman.
2.
The petitioner claims that he was employed as a workman in October, 1985.
The services of the petitioner were terminated in the month of January, 1992.
The petitioner served a demand notice dated 31st July, 1996.
The reference was made by the competent government to the Labour Court in terms of the Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The Labour Court pronounced the award dated 321999 rejecting the claim of the workman mainly on the ground of delay.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed written statement, wherein, it is contended that there was unreasonable delay of 4-1/2 years on the part of the workman in invoking the relevant provisions of the Act but other facts were not disputed and it was stated that the petitioner was employed as a daily wager and he had not worked in the Forest Department for a period of more than 240 days in a year.
He had left the job at his own and thus had abandoned the job.
4.
From the above pleadings of the parties, it is clear that various issues arose for consideration before the Labour Court, which squarely fall within the purview and scope of the reference but the Labour Court rejected the claim of the petitioner and answered the reference against the workman only on the ground of inordinate delay.
The relevant part of the impugned award reads as under :-  "...Even in Miss Neelam Kumar's case (supra), it is held that one has to keep in view the peculiar facts and circumstances in moulding the relief i.e. whether the worker has raised the dispute after the lapse of unreasonable long period.
The worker cannot be permitted to take advantage of his own lapse or wrong for sleeping over his rights for in-determinate period.
Otherwise also, the avowed object of the Industrial peace can only be fulfilled by expeditious disposal of the disputes.
5.
In aforesaid rulings, it is inconsistently held that workman is not entitled for reinstatement, if there is un-explained delay beyond the period of three years.
Since, there is un-explained delay of more than three years, in the case in hand, so workman is not entitled for any relief..."  5.
The above findings recorded by the learned Labour Court are contrary to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-opertive Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd. and Anr., JT 1999(3) Supreme Court 38 : 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC), where the Court held as under:-  "The Act was brought on the statute book with the object to ensure social justice to both the employers and employees and advance the progress of industry by bringing about the existence of harmony and cordial relationship between the parties.
The provisions of Article 137 of the Schedule to Limitation Act, 1963 are not applicable to the proceedings under the Act and that the relief under it cannot be denied to the workman merely on the ground of delay.
The plea of delay if raised by the employer is required to be proved as a matter of fact by showing the real prejudice and not as a merely hypothetical defence.
No reference to the labour court can be generally questioned on the ground of delay alone.
Even in a case where the delay is shown to be existing, the tribunal, labour court or board, dealing with the case can appropriately mould the relief by declining to grant back wages to the workman till the date he raised the demand regarding his illegal retrenchment/termination or dismissal.
The Court may also in appropriate cases direct the payment of part of the back wages instead of full back wages.
6.
The learned Labour Court could have moulded the relief and should not have rejected the claim solely on the ground of inordinate delay.
Delay is a relevant factor but is not a determining factor.
The Labour Court should have normally adverted itself to deciding controversy into the merit more particularly in view of the law enunciated in Ajaib Singh's case (supra).
7.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, set aside the award dated 321999 and remand the matter back to the labour court for decision afresh in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.