Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is, Annexures P5 and P6.
The two orders are passed by the respondents vide which benefit of higher grade on the basis of higher qualifications has been withdrawn and the relief has been denied.
2.
In view of the order we propose to pass in this petition, it may not be necessary to spell out the facts of the petition in detail.
Suffice it to say that the petitioner had earlier filed writ petition before this Court being Civil Writ Petition No. 17580 of 1996, Ram Chander Pruthi and others v. State of Haryana.
In this Civil Writ petition, the petitioners claimed that they be granted benefit of higher pay scale in accordance with the qualifications possessed by them and from the dates when they acquired such qualifications during the course of their employment.
The Court directed the respondents to give benefit to the petitioner in terms of para No. 2 of the Government instructions dated 23.7.1957.
The relief was granted to those who acquired the requisite qualifications prior to 931990.
This order was duly implemented by the respondents vide Annexure P4.
However, now vide annexures P5 and P6, the reliefs granted to the petitioner have been withdrawn.
Challenge is to these two impugned orders.
3.
It is not disputed before us that the petitioner had acquired higher qualifications prior to the cut off date of 931990.
The main argument raised on behalf of the State is that now the Hon'ble Apex Court, has in other connected matters, taken a view favourable to the State and as per case reported in Wazir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) RSJ 784 : 1996(1) SCT 431 (P&H), the decision of State to withdraw the benefit as a matter of policy has been up-held.
4.
Be that as it may, the said judgment makes it prospective from 8.3.1990 and that is the view taken by the Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11243 of 1996, Ishwar Singh JBT v. State of Haryana and others.
With respect, we follow the said view but in any case the petitioner would be entitled to the relief as she had acquired qualifications prior to 8.3.1990 and the writ petition has been decided in her favour.
The above-referred decision has not been assailed by the State before the Hon'ble Apex Court and the said judgment inter se the parties has become final.
It was for the State to challenge the said judgment even if the State was of the view that the judgment in another case fully applies to the facts of the present case.
In this regard, the learned counsel for the petitioner places reliance upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Sanjay Gulati v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 331 (P&H) Civil Writ Petition No. 10522 of 1999 wherein this Court has held as under :-  "The short question that arises for consideration before this Court is whether the respondents were justified in directing the recovery after the rights of the parties were fully determined vide judgment of Division Bench dated 12th March, 1997.
There can be no other answer to the question afore- stated than in the negative.
The rights of the parties were determined by the Division Bench of this Court.
The said judgment became final, as it was not assailed by the respondents before the Hon'ble Apex Court by way of filing Special Leave Petition.
Even if the principle enunciated was varied, the settled rights of the parties could not be disturbed except by filing proper review application or taking up the judgment of the Division Bench in appeal before the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Admittedly, none of these remedies was invoked by the State.
Settled right could not be unsettled by the respondents unilaterally and that too without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner."
In view of the above settled principles of law, we are not able to sustain Annexures P5 and P6 as they are contrary to the judgment of the Court given inter se between the parties.
The State is at liberty to take appropriate steps in accordance with law.
The Respondents are also at liberty to pass any order afresh in accordance with law.
5.
This writ petition is accordingly disposed of with the above directions.