JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of CWP No. 392 of 1984, 6171 of 1986, 4440 of 1995, 18861 of 1995 and 1801 of 2001, as the common question of law and facts are involved in all these cases.
However, it shall be apposite to notice part of the facts of each case which are as under :-  CWP No. 392 of 1984  2.
The petitioners are direct recruits to the posts of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
The petitioner No. 1 joined as such on January 17, 1977 and the petitioner No. 2 on June 1, 1976.
During the pendency of this petition, petitioner No. 1 has been promoted as Excise and Taxation Officer and has been regularised with effect from February 1, 1989 and petitioner No. 2 has been regularly appointed as Excise and Taxation Officer with effect from April 9, 1986.
3.
The promotion to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers is governed by the statutory rules called the Punjab Excise and Taxation Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
The referable rules i.e. rule 5(c), 6 and 12 read as under :-  "(5).
Members of the service shall be appointed in the following manner :- xxx xxx xxx (c) In the case of Excise and Taxation Officer :-  (i) by promotion of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer having an experience of working on that post for a minimum period of 3 years; or (ii) by competitive examination, the syllabus for which shall be the same as in the case of competitive examination conducted by the Commission for recruitment to the (Haryana) Civil Service (Executive Branch) and allied services; (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the Service of Government of India or of a State Government.
Rule 6.
50% of the vacancies of Excise and Taxation Officers shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers and 50% by direct recruitment.
Note :- Recruitment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers by transfer or deputation will be counted towards vacancies reserved for direct recruitment.
The seniority will, however, be determined according to the provisions of rule 12 of the said rules."
Rule 12.
- The seniority inter se of members of the service in each cadre shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in that cadre of the service : Provided that in the case of members appointed directly, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority and persons appointed as a result of an early selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection."
4.
It is averred that 50% of the vacancies in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officer are to be filled by promotion and the balance 50% by way of direct recruitment.
The source of promotion is from the rank of Excise and Taxation Officer.
During the period from November 8, 1966 to 1972, 9 new posts of Excise and Taxation Officers were created and that 12 posts fell vacant due to retirement/resignation (three direct recruits and nine- promotees).
Out of these 21 posts, 10 posts were filled by way of promotion and 11 by direct recruitment.
During the period 1973 to 1976, 21 new posts were created and 17 posts fell vacant due to retirement/resignation (14 promotees and 3 direct recruits).
These 38 posts were filled in the ratio of 50:50 from amongst the promotees and direct recruits accordingly.
In the year 1978, 8 promotees retired and the posts which fell vacant in pursuant thereto were again filled in the ratio of 50:50.
In the year 1979, six posts fell vacant on retirement/registration (5 direct and one promotee).
All the six posts were filled from amongst the direct recruits.
5.
However, upto September 1982, 37 new posts of Excise and Taxation Officers were created and that 18 posts fell vacant upto the aforesaid year on account of retirement/promotion.
The total number of posts which came into existence upon creation of new posts or which were already in existence, are 84.
If the aforesaid rule is applied, the promotees are entitled to man 42 posts and 42 posts are to be manned by direct recruits.
The present status is that 22 posts are being manned by the direct recruits on substantive basis.
Resultantly 20 more posts ought to be made available to the direct recruits.
6.
In the year 1982, 15 posts of Excise and Taxation Officers were advertised to be filled by direct recruitment.
It is alleged that the Haryana Public Service Commission has selected 31 candidates and has accordingly recommended their names to the State Government to be appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers.
If all the recommendees of the Haryana Public Service Commission are appointed, the quota of the direct recruits would stand filled upto the extent of 53 posts in the cadre of 84 posts whereas they are entitled only to 20 more posts in the cadre of 84 posts.
Thus, they are entitled only to 20 more posts to maintain parity in accordance with the aforesaid rules i.e. to remain within 50% of the prescribed limit.
It is alleged that all the 31 recommendees have been appointed.
The contention is that the direct recruits have been appointed against the posts which belong to the quota of the promotees.
Thus, the Government is not competent to make appointments of the direct recruits to the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers in contravention of the rules and the dicta enunciated by this Court and the Apex Court.
Resultantly, the appointments of the private respondents No. 3 to 13 have been questioned.
However, CWP No. 6171 of 1986 was partly heard by Sukhdev Singh Kang, J (as his lordship then was) on January 27, 1987.
An interim order was passed that the recruitment from amongst the recommendees by the Haryana Public Service Commission be made subject to the decision of this petition.
The order dated January 27, 1987 passed in CWP No. 6171 reads as under :-  "After hearing learned Counsel for the parties at length and perusing the record of the case, I am of the view that it will not be in the interest of justice to stay the recruitment of the Excise and Taxation Officers in pursuance of Advertisement (Copy Annexure P1) and requisition (copy Annexure P2).
However, any recruitment made shall be subject to the decision of this writ petition.
Keeping in view the interest of the petitioners, the writ petition is ordered to be listed for hearing at an early date."
7.
On the other hand, it has been admitted by the Government that requisition of 15 posts of Excise and Taxation Officers by way of direct recruitment was sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission on February 4, 1980 and that these posts were advertised in October, 1980.
However, later on some more vacancies in respect of the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers became available in the department and that amended requisition for the total 31 posts was sent by the Government to Haryana Public Service Commission on September 7, 1982.
No amended advertisement was made by the Commission.
A list of 31 recommendees was sent to the Government in the month of February/March, 1984.
Accordingly, they were appointed in the month of February/March, 1984.
Their seniority was also fixed vide order dated July 3, 1987 which was issued vide endorsement dated July 6, 1987.
The stand is that the seniority has been fixed in pursuant to the judgment of this Court rendered in LPA No. 206 of 1991 arising from the decision rendered in CWP No. 5699 of 1987.
The direction has been issued by this Court to the Government for fixing the seniority amongst the promotees and the direct recruits in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers in the light of the observation made by the Full Bench in Surinder Kumar and another v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 6549 of 1975, decided on December 15, 1978.
Pursuant thereto the quota rule was applied and the matter was reviewed and revised by the Government and a tentative seniority list of Excise and Taxation Officers was prepared and circulated which is dated July 12, 1994.
The objections had been invited.
The aggrieved persons filed objections and upon advice of Law and Justice Department, the seniority list dated July 6, 1987 was superseded vide order dated February 22, 1995.
As per the stand of the Government, admittedly the total cadre strength of the Excise and Taxation Officers was 84 and that out of the said posts, 42 posts were meant for direct recruits and 42 posts for promotees.
Before the appointment of the aforesaid 31 direct recruits, 21 posts were filled up by the direct recruits and that 21 posts were lying vacant.
Resultantly 21 recommendees out of 31 were appointed against these posts.
One appointee Sh. KK Sharma belonging to Ex-servicemen category was given military service benefits towards seniority.
Thus, 9 direct appointees were in excess of their quota.
8.
It is this appointment which has been made subject-matter of challenge in the petition.
Apart from this, the other relief claimed is that the official respondents be directed to fill the vacancies in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers directly on the basis of the quota provided under rule 6 of the Rules.
It has been further prayed that the orders, copy Annexure P1 dated February 23, 1984 and P2 dated March 2, 1984 and P3 dated March 6, 1984, be quashed vide which respondents No. 3 to 13 have been appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers.
C.W.P.
No. 6171 of 1986  9.
Petitioner No. 1 was working as Excise and Taxation Officers on ad hoc basis at the time of filing of the petition and that petitioners No. 2 and 3 are working as Excise and Taxation Officers.
All the three petitioners were recruited in the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers though Haryana Public Service Commission in the years 1976 and 1977 respectively.
Similar claim has been made by them on the ground that in pursuant to the rules 50% posts of the Excise and Taxation Officers would fall to the lot of the promotees and that against those posts the petitioners have a right of consideration.
The claim is that the direct recruits cannot be allowed to usurp the posts which came within the lot meant for the promotees by applying the rule of 50:50 as envisaged in the rules.
The prayer is that the cases of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers be considered within their quota prescribed for promotion of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers in accordance with the rules.
The petition was admitted vide order dated 13111986 and was directed to be heard along with CWP No. 392 of 1984.
CWP No. 4440 of 1995  10.
The petitioners were appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers through Haryana Public Service Commission after competing in the written statement and interview conducted by the Haryana Public Service Commission in pursuant to advertisement issued during October, 1980.
It is on the recommendation of the Haryana Public Service Commission the petitioners were appointed during February/March, 1984.
Petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3 were placed at serial No. 21, 20 and 13 respectively in the merit list and that their appointment had been made against the reserved category post and resultantly in the seniority list were placed at serial No. 23 to 31.
It is also the case of the petitioners that they are governed by the rules of 1956.
The challenge is to the seniority list dated February 22, 1995, copy Annexure P4.
The claim is that respondents No. 3 to 16 (promotees) have been placed above the petitioners even when they have been regularised in the year 1985.
The other claim is that respondents No. 7 to 17 (direct recruits) belonging to the reserved category have been placed above the petitioners even though the petitioners and the said respondents were appointed on the recommendation of Haryana Public Service Commission despite the fact that the petitioners are higher in merit than the respondents.
Resultantly, it has been prayed that the seniority list dated February 22, 1995 deserves to be quashed and that the seniority of the Excise and Taxation Officers needs to be redetermined/reconsidered in accordance with the rules applicable to the said service.
Pointed reference has been made to rule 6 of the Excise and Taxation Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1956.
The applicability of the rule to Class-III and Class-II has been sought to be compared and applied.
The comparative reading of the said rule reads as under :-  Rule-6 of Class-II (as applicable to Excise and Taxation Officers) Rule 6 of Class-III (as applicable to Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
50% of the vacancies of Excise and Taxation Officers shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers and 50% by direct appointment.
When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the service, Government shall determine in what manner it shall be filled.
Provided that 50% of the vacancies shall be filled by direct appointment, 25% by promotion, of Taxation Inspectors, 12-1/2% by promotion of Excise Inspector and 12-1/2% by transfer of members of the ministerial Excise and Taxation Department."
When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the service, Government shall determine in what manner it shall be filled.
Provided that 33-1/3% of the vacancies shall be filled by direct appointment, 33-1/3% by promotion of Taxation Inspectors and 16-2/3% by promotion of Excise Inspectors and 16-2/3% by transfer of members of ministerial establishment department."
11.
The stand of the Government is that the impugned seniority list has been drawn in pursuant to order dated August 25, 1992, rendered in LPA No. 206 of 1991.
The tentative seniority list of Excise and Taxation Officers was prepared and circulated vide endorsement No. 14/1/92-EI.1.14076 dated July 12, 1994 and that the objections were invited.
None of the petitioners filed any objections but whatever objections had been received against the tentative seniority list were decided accordingly after taking advice of the Law and Justice Department and that the final seniority list dated 22nd February, 1995 was circulated.
The tentative seniority list was also made a subject-matter of challenge in CWP No. 9473 of 1994.
The petition was admitted and stay was declined with the observations that promotions made hereafter will be subject to the decision of the petition.
The said petition is still pending in this Court.
12.
The stand of the Government is that inter se seniority list of Excise and Taxation Officers has been prepared on the basis of the principles which read as under :-  (i) Seniority fixed with reference to date of appointment for direct recruits and promotees; (ii) Seniority fixed with regard to availability of quota for each category.
(iii) Combined merit list of Haryana Public Service Commission not disturbed as long as the recruitment does not exist the available quota for each category.
(iv) Roster points used for determining the number of vacancies in each category and not for determining the inter se seniority.
Thus, respondents No. 3 to 6 and 17 were promoted as Excise and Taxation Officers on ad hoc basis with effect from June 5, 1981 and December 24, 1981.
They have been regularised on August 10, 1981, July 1, 1983, December 1, 1983 and February 28, 1985 respectively against the quota meant for them.
Respondents No. 7 to 14 and 16 belong to reserved category and they have been appointed as Excise and Taxation Officers by way of direct recruitment through Haryana Public Service Commission against February 9, 1979.
It is averred that from February 9, 1979 to March 6, 1984, 29 posts became available for the direct recruits.
Out of these, 19 posts came to the share of the general category and ten to the share of reserved categories (6 of scheduled caste, 3 for backward class and one of Ex-Servicemen).
The seniority of the candidates appointed against the reserved post has been fixed on the basis of the combined merit determined by the Haryana Public Service Commission as per the Government instructions.
The petitioners, who belong to the general category, were not given seniority against the aforesaid 29 posts because no posts were available at that time for them.
13.
An additional affidavit dated August 1, 1995 had been filed by Shri KK Goswami, Excise and Taxation Officer (Vigilance) for himself and for and on behalf of the co-petitioners.
It has been categorically stated that before issuance of the final seniority dated February 22, 1995, copy Annexure P4, no opportunity of hearing whatsoever had been given to the petitioners who were and are otherwise senior to the private respondents in terms of their merit in the select list announced by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
It is also stated that a representation had been submitted by the petitioners to respondent No. 1 on February 16, 1995 but despite the representation having been submitted no opportunity of hearing had been accorded to the petitioners before passing any final order for refixation of seniority.
Copy of the representation submitted has been appended as Annexure P6.
It has also been controverted that any letter dated July 12, 1994 vide which tentative seniority list had been circulated was ever received by the petitioners.
Thus, the petitioners were denied an opportunity of being heard or raising objections against the tentative seniority list allegedly circulated to the persons concerned.
No counter to the affidavit has been filed by the official respondents or by the private respondents.
It is the claim of the Government that the seniority list dated 2221995 has been prepared keeping in view the directions of this Court given in LPA No. 206 of 1991 decided on 2581992.
The direction given is that the Government shall fix the seniority amongst the promotees and direct recruits in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers in the light of the observations made by the Full Bench of this Court in Surinder Kumar and others v. State of Haryana, 1979(2) SLR 301.
It may be noticed that the Government has nowhere stated in its reply that the observations made by the Apex Court in AK Subraman v. Union of India, Service Law Reporter 380, had ever been kept in view.
The Full Bench in Surinder Kumar's case (supra) has categorically observed that the Government will take into consideration the observations made by the Apex Court as aforesaid.
It has been categorically observed by the Apex Court that if the vacancies are filled from or by the persons other than from the quota, such fulfilment would be irregular, that would be outside their quota.
In that event they shall have to be pushed down to later years when their appointment can be regularised as a result of their absorption in their lawful quota for those years.
It has not been stated anywhere nor it is the stand of the Government that the principle as enunciated by the Apex Court in AK Subraman's case (supra) has been categorically and practically noticed while determining the seniority of the Excise and Taxation Officers.
It can also not be elicited from the return filed by the State as to whether the principle as determined by the Full Bench of this Court in Surinder Kumar's case (supra), had been applied in stricto senso.
The Division Bench of this Court while rendering judgment in LPA No. 206 of 1991 categorically explained the decision of the Full Bench in respect of the points raised for consideration.
The observation of the Division Bench reads as under :-  "While upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge on the point decided by him regarding Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers it is directed that the Government shall now fix the seniority amongst the promotees and direct recruits in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers in the light of the observations made by the Full Bench in Surinder Kumar's case (supra).
The writ petition of the appellant is allowed on the point raised by him."
14.
It shall also be apposite to notice the observation of the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Surinder Kumar and another v. State of Haryana and others (supra), whereby the Government has been cautioned to take note of the observations made by the Apex Court in AK Subraman's case, which reads as under :-  "12.
Mr. Kuldip Singh, learned Counsel for the petitioners, in view of the stand taken by the Government had not elaborated the point.
It is not disputed that the final seniority list has not been prepared.
The Government while preparing the seniority list will take into consideration the observations made in AK Subraman's case (supra).
Thus, it is obvious that the application of rota and quota was not accepted by the Full Bench and it has also been held that "vacancy" means a "post".
So far as the promotees, who were working against the post meant for the direct recruits, are concerned were required to be pushed down in seniority to a place where a post in their own quota fell vacant.
In this regard, pointed reference may be made to the dicta of the Apex Court in AK Subraman's case (supra).
CWP No. 18861 of 1995  15.
The petitioners were directly recruited as Excise and Taxation Officers on the recommendation of the Haryana Public Service Commission in May 1988 though the recommendation was made as aforesaid but the appointment was offered vide order dated November 22, 1998.
The claim of the petitioners is that in the tentative seniority list circulated in the year 1994, the names of the petitioners figured at Serial No. 198 and 201 but subsequently at the time of finalising the seniority by an order dated 2221995, petitioner No. 1 Shri Zile Singh has been shown at Serial No. 206 and Anup Singh petitioner No. 2 at Serial No. 222.
In this process, the persons belonging to the reserved category, who were also directly recruited along with the petitioners, but were lower in merit, have been made senior to the petitioners.
Resultantly, respondents No. 3 to 13 who belong to the reserved category have been shown senior to the petitioners.
Apart from this, respondents No. 14 to 21 who belong to the batch of promotees have also become senior to the petitioners.
The grievance is that while determining the final seniority, the dicta of the Full Bench of this Court rendered in Surinder Kumar's case has not been applied and inclusively the dicta of the Apex Court rendered in AK Subraman's case (supra).
16.
The argument is that the policy of reservation as provided by the Government of Haryana vide instructions dated April 27, 1972, copy Annexure P6 provided adequate representation of the reserved categories while recruitment to the posts.
No benefit, such as, seniority above the more meritorious persons could be granted by virtue of these instructions.
Reserved categories have to be granted seniority in accordance with the merit determined by the recruiting agency.
The seniority has to be reckoned as per the merit list determined by the recruiting agency.
If a person belonging to the reserved category is lower in merit then he cannot be termed to steal a march over a person who is higher in merit.
Thus, the Government has violated the principle for fixing the seniority in consonance and in pursuant to the merit list prepared by the recruiting agency, as such, seniority list dated February 22, 1995 is not sustainable.
Further, the claim is that the three persons namely Uma Shankar Saini at serial No. 202, Subhash Chander Kamboj at serial No. 208 and Narinder Kumar Ranga at Serial No. 20 have been shown senior to the petitioners whereas factually they joined in the post of Excise and Taxation Officers in the year 1994.
This appointment was given in pursuant to order passed in CWP No. 13621 of 1989 decided on February 23, 1994.
So far as claim of seniority of the aforesaid three persons is concerned, liberty had been granted to them for agitating their claim of seniority.
Similarly one Vijay Kumar Singh was also given appointment as Excise and Taxation Officer on July 1, 1994 basing the claim on the judgment rendered in respect of the above said three persons.
He has been placed at serial No. 204.
All these four persons have admittedly, joined long after the petitioners, yet they have been shown senior to the petitioners.
17.
The repetitive arguments have been addressed by the learned Counsel representing the petitioners to the effect that the rules do not envisage/prescribe "rota" but admittedly the quota has been prescribed between the direct recruits and the promotees which is in the ratio of 50:50.
The stress has been laid that the rule of quota needs to be applied right from the beginning and resultantly the seniority list derived accordingly.
18.
It has also been argued that if at a given point of time the vacancies which were to be allocated to the respective quotas have been filled in from amongst the promotees or direct recruits, the benefit of service cannot be granted to them and the rule i.e. rule 12 cannot be applied for counting that service mathematically for the purpose of earning future promotion and seniority the application of this rule would mean that the length of service has to be counted from the date when the post in the quota became available for the concerned promotee/recruitee.
Thus, it would mean that even if he has been appointed in the cadre but against a post which was meant for the promotee or the recruitee, as the case may be, such appointee shall not be entitled to take the benefit for rendering such service for the purpose of rule 12.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in Suraj Parkash Gupta and others v. State of J&K and others, 2000(4) SLR 486 : 2000(3) SCT 34 (SC).
The relevant paras of the aforesaid judgment read as under:-  "75.
Summarising the position, we therefore hold that the ad hoc/stop-gap service of the promotees cannot be treated as non-est merely because PSC was not consulted in respect of continuance of the ad hoc/stop-gap service beyond six months.
Such service is capable of being regularised under Rule 23 of the J&K (CCA) Rules, 1956 and rectified with retrospective effect from the date of occurrence of a clear vacancy in the promotion quota, subject to eligibility, fitness and other relevant factors.
There is no `rota' Rule applicable.
The `quota' Rule has not broken down.
Excess promotees occupying direct recruitment posts have to be pushed down and adjudged in later vacancies within their quota, after due regularisation.
Such service outside promotee quota cannot count for seniority.
Service of promotees which is regularised with retrospective effect from the date of vacancies within their quota counts for seniority.
However, any part of such ad hoc/stop-gap or even regular service rendered while occupying the direct recruitment quota cannot be counted.
Seniority of promotees or transferees is to be fixed as per quota and from date of commencement of probation/or regular appointment as stated above.
Seniority of direct recruit is from the date of substantive appointment.
Seniority has to be worked out between direct recruits or promotees for each year.
We decide point 3 accordingly.
Point 1 : direct recruitment cannot claim appointment from date of vacancy in quota before their selection.
76.
We have next to refer to one other contention raised by the respondents direct recruits.
They claimed that the direct recruitment appointment can be ante-dated from the date of occurrence of a vacancy in the direct recruitment quota, even if on that date the said person was not directly recruited.
It was submitted that if the promotees occupied the quota belonging to direct recruits they had to be pushed down, whenever direct recruitment was made.
Once they were so pushed down, even if the direct recruit came later, he should be put in the direct recruit slot from the date on which such a slot was available under direct recruitment quota.
This contention, in our view, cannot be accepted.
The reasons as to why this argument is wrong is that in service jurisprudence, a direct recruit can claim seniority only from the date of his regular appointment.
He cannot claim seniority from a date when he was not born in the service.
This principle is well settled.
In NK Chauhan v. State of Gujarat, 1977(1) SCC 408 (at p. 321) Krishna Iyer, J stated : "later direct recruit cannot claim deemed dates of appointment for seniority with effect from the time when direct recruitment vacancy arose.
Seniority will depend upon length of service."
Again in A Janardhana v. Union of India, 1982(2) SCR 936, it was held that a later direct recruit cannot claim seniority from a date before his birth in the service or when he was in school or college.
Similarly it was pointed out in AN Pathak v. Secretary to the Government, 1987 Suppl.
SCC 763 (at p. 767) that slots cannot be kept reserved for the direct recruits for retrospective appointments."
19.
It has been further argued that in view of the dicta laid by the Apex Court in AK Subraman's case (supra), the persons who were not appointed upon the post falling to their quota, they deserve to be pushed down to later years when their appointment could be regularised as a result of their absorption in their lawful quota in those years.
Thus, by following the aforesaid dictas, the seniority list needs to be re-drawn accordingly.
20.
It is further contended that so far as usage of the word "vacancy" and "post" as used in the rules are concerned, the matter has been dealt with succinctly by the Full Bench of this Court in Surinder Kumar and another v. State of Haryana and others (supra).
It has been categorically observed by the Full Bench that unless rotational system is provided in the rules, it cannot be inter-linked with quota system and it has also been held that vacancy means the "post".
Thus, anyone working in a vacancy i.e. against the post meant for a particular quota shall not be entitled to earn seniority accordingly and would be required to be pushed down to a place where the post in his own quota fell vacant and was available to the concerned officer.
21.
On the other hand, learned State Counsel has laid emphasise on rule 12 and has made pointed reference that the rule was never pointed out before the Full Bench nor the effect of the same has been taken note of by the apex Court in the judgments rendered in the respective cases, which have been noticed above.
It is argued that it shall lead to anomalous situation that a person is appointed to the post and he is allowed to work against the post and yet the said period is not to be counted while commuting length of service.
It is further argued that the rule would be rendered negatory and shall have no meaning so far as the service rendered by the appointee is concerned.
22.
So far as the provision of rota is concerned, it has been virtually conceded by the learned Counsel for the State that no such rule has been provided in the rules for adopting rotational system for filling the post from the source meant for promotees and the direct recruits respectively.
Thus, the post which fell vacant in the respective quotas were not permissible to be rotated accordingly.
23.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the respective counsel.
I am also guided by the dictas laid down by the Apex Court and also by the Full Bench of this Court which has been further followed by a Division Bench of this Court.
Admittedly, the rota rule is neither provided in the rules nor has been stretched by way of any notification or instructions issued by the Government.
Thus, the quota rule has to be applied in stricto senso.
As per the rule, the quota has been provided 50:50 for the promotees and the direct recruits and that the source also has been prescribed accordingly.
It is obvious that the quota rule should have been made applicable by the Government right from the beginning meaning thereby whenever the posts and additional posts were created, they were required to be divided in equal ratio to be filled in from amongst the promotees and the direct recruits.
In a given case, if any posts were lying vacant in the particular quota, the appointment could have been made but not substantively as the service rendered thereon cannot and could not be counted for the purpose of rule 12 of the Rules.
The Apex Court has categorically observed that in the absence of rota rule, the person occupying the post falling other than in their quota shall have to be pushed down to later years when their appointment can be regularised.
However, I am left with a catastrophic situation that if a person is appointed against a post which does not fall within the ambit of his own quota such service rendered can be counted to his credit ?
The answer would be "no".
Such appointee cannot be said to have taken birth in the service as ordinarily he could not have been appointed in the service as no post was available on that date in his own quota.
However, such service rendered may be countable for gaining experience but for the purpose of seniority and for earning higher rank in future by way of promotion, would not be available.
The quota rule cannot be termed to be broken down in the absence of any rota rule, such an appointee cannot be termed to have benefit all around while having usurped the post from other quota.
His appointment would not be defineable as regular appointment, resultantly could not be termed to take any benefit accordingly except for the purpose of earning experience not countable under the rules.
In view of the aforesaid discussion and the dicta of the Apex Court which has been elucidated by the Full Bench of this Court and that it has been noticed by the Division Bench of this Court and resultantly the requisite directions have been given while deciding the said petitions.
The matter seems to have been set at rest by the Apex Court while rendering judgment in Suraj Parkash Gupta's case (supra), as such, the State is required to re-define the seniority of the Excise and Taxation Officers in the State accordingly.
24.
The principle enunciated by the Apex Court in AK Subraman and others v. Union of India and others, 1975(1) SLR 381 is in the following terms :-  26.
The same procedure will have to be followed in the present case.
Whenever it is found that Assistant Engineers were promoted as officiating Executive Engineers, in excess of their quota they would have to be pushed down to later years in order that their promotion may be regularised by being absorbed in their quota for later years.
Several services.
When recruitment is from two or several sources it should be observed that there is no inherent invalidity in introduction of quota system and to work it out by a rule of rotation.
The existence of a quota and rotational rule, by itself, will not violate Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution (Seen Mervyn Coutinho and others v. Collector of Customs, Bombay and others, (6) and Govind Dattaray Kelkar and others v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and others.
(4) It is the unreasonable implementation of the same which may, in a given case, attract the frown of the equality clause.
If the seniority list is now properly prepared in the manner indicated in this judgment, their may be no objection on the score of Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution.
In this view of the matter, it is not necessary to pursue the arguments addressed regarding violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
To summarise the conclusions - (1) When Assistant Engineers (Class-II) are initially appointed in a regular manner in accordance with the rules to officiate as Executive Engineers, their seniority in service in Grade-I will count from the date of their initial officiating appointment in Class-I provided their initial officiating appointment as Executive Engineers was within their quota.
(2) Their seniority will not be reckoned from the date of their future confirmation in Class-I.
The above principle is, however, subject to one reservation, namely, if an Assistant Engineer before his confirmation in Class-II were appointed to officiate in Class-I in the grade of Executive Engineer, although within his quota, his seniority will count only from the date of his confirmation in Class-II as permanent Assistant Engineer notwithstanding his earlier officiating appointment as Executive Engineer.
(3) The quota rule will be enforced at the time of initial recruitment, in an officiating capacity, to the grade of Executive Engineer and not at the time of confirmation.
(4) The quota rule will be enforced with reference to vacancies in all posts, whether permanent or temporary, included in the sanctioned strength of the cadre (except vacancies as are purely of a fortuitous or adventitious nature) and the operation of the quota rule will not depend upon the availability or non-availability of Assistant Executive Engineers for appointment as Executive Engineers.
The non-availability of Assistant Executive Engineers for recruitment to the grade of Executive Engineers will not postpone the regular recruitment of the Assistant Executive Engineers as Executive Engineers within their quota.
(5) Once the Assistant Engineers are regularly appointed to officiate as Executive Engineers within their quota they will be entitled to consideration in their own rights as Class-I Officers to further promotions.
Their "birth marks" in their earlier service will be no relevance once they are regularly officiating in the grade of Executive Engineer within their quota.
(6) If Assistant Engineers are recruited as Executive Engineers in excess of their quota in a particular year they will be pushed down to later years for absorption when due within their quota."
25.
The Division Bench of this Court in PK Goel v. The State of Haryana and others, LPA No. 206 of 1991, has disposed of the similarly situated petitions in the following terms :-  xx xxx xxx xxx In Surinder Kumar's case (supra), on the basis of rules 6 and 13 of the Rules, the following points were raised for consideration before the Full Bench : (i) the seniority be fixed by following rota and quota; (ii) vacancy under rule 6 means a post; and (iii) The promotees who were working against the posts meant for the direct recruits be pushed down in seniority to a place where a post in their own quota fell vacant."
The first contention and the main contention regarding rota and quota was not accepted by the Full Bench and as such the writ petition was dismissed with certain observations.
It was held that `vacancy' means a post.
Their Lordships while dealing with the term `vacancy' as to be read as cadre post to the rule held as follows :- "If, in the present case, the proviso to Rule 6 is read in the light of the Rule, it is evident that the term `vacancies' in the proviso would mean `cadre posts', if the term `cadre post' is substituted for the word `vacancies' then the proviso can be read in conformity with the main rule otherwise not.
The intention of the framers of the Rules is clear from the language of the rule, that they wanted to provide quota in the cadre.
The above view also gets support from a reading of Rule 13, which relates to seniority.
It provides that the inter se seniority of the members of the service in each cadre shall be determined by the length of continuous service on the post in that cadre of the service.
The rule shows that seniority between members of different cadres is to be reckoned from the date of their joining the post.
In other words, the members of the cadre who joined earlier in the vacancies meant for them would be senior to those who joined later.
If rotational system is to be read in quota rule or roster is to be fixed at the time of filling the vacancies, then Rule 13 loses significance.
It is an established principle of interpretation of statutes that different rules should be read harmoniously.
Rules 6 and 13 cannot be read harminously, unless these are read in the above mentioned way.
I am, therefore, of the view that rotational system cannot be read in quota rule as provided in Rule 6."
Since rule 6 of 1956 and 1936 rules and the rule of seniority are couched in the same language, the same meaning has to be assigned, as has been interpreted by this Court in Surinder Kumar's case (supra).
The second contention of the counsel for the appellant is accepted and it is directed that the word `vacancy' has to be read as a `cadre post' in terms of the law laid down in Surinder Kumar's case (supra).
While upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge on the point decided by him regarding AETOs, it is directed that the Government shall now fix the seniority amongst the promotees and direct recruits in the cadre of ETOs in the light of observations made by the Full Bench in Surinder Kumar's case (supra).
The writ petition of the appellant is allowed on the second point raised by him.
The letters patent appeal stands disposed of with the observations indicated above.
No costs."
26.
Thus, the State is guided by the principle evolved by the Apex Court, which has been elucidated further.
Resultantly, the State is required to determine the seniority of the petitioners and the private respondents keeping in mind the aforesaid dictas.
It is abundantly clear that the rota rule is not applicable as it has not been provided under the rules.
Resultantly, the quota has to be adhered to by following the principle to push down those who are in excess of their quota.
The State has to conscientiously determine the seniority in this cadre and while doing so the view points of all who shall be effected, taken into consideration while granting effective opportunity by way of written submissions and oral clarifications and the seniority list be drawn accordingly.
Thus, the impugned seniority list annexure P-5 is quashed.
27.
The aforesaid exercise should be carried out within six months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order by the concerned quarters.
The list so drawn shall supersede all the previous lists accordingly.
It is made clear that during the interregnam period if any promotion is made, the same shall be subject to the settlement of list of seniority and shall be allowed to be effected accordingly by the seniority list so drawn as indicated above.
Resultantly, the writ petition is disposed of with the above directions.
Petition disposed of.