Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - This judgment shall also dispose of Civil Writ Petition No 13721 of 2000 as the relief sought therein depends on the decision of this writ petition i.e. Civil Writ Petition No 4636 of 1998.
2.
The petitioner assails the order dated 1931998 Annexure P-12, of his reversion from the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer to that of Inspector in the same department.
The case of the petitioner is that his late father Sohanjit Singh was working as District Food and Supplies Controller in the Food and Supplies Department.
Unfortunately, he died at a very young age while in service.
The petitioner sought appointment on compassionate ground in the year 1978 on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, a Class III post, on the basis of Government instructions dated 1841973, Annexure P-1, in this behalf.
The petitioner kept on reminding the department that he was entitled for the appointment on compassionate ground on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
However, no action was taken till 1986.
Ultimately, on 1431986 the petitioner was offered the appointment as Inspector in the Food and Supplies Department vide appointment letter, copy of which is Annexure P-2.
The post of Inspector is one step lower than the Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The petitioner had claimed appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer but he was offered class III post one step below and since he had no option but to join, he accepted the appointment as Inspector vide acceptance letter Annexure P-3 but under protest.
The grievance of the petitioner started in the year 1989 when one Sarabjit Singh was appointed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in place of his father who died while in service and was working as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, Jalandhar.
The petitioner felt discriminated in the matter of appointment since Sarabjit Singh was given the appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in place of his father who was working as Additional District Food and Supplies Controller, whereas the petitioner though was qualified for the same post was appointed on the post of Inspector without there being any intelligent differentia to deny the same post to the petitioner.
The petitioner moved representation dated 451990, copy of which is Annexure P-4, and pressed his claim for the appointment on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer highlighting the plea of discrimination in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground.
The respondents realising their mistake issued letter, Annexure P-5, appointing him to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer w.e.f.
121991.
The petitioner joined the new post.
In the year 1995, one Navtej Singh Shergill similarly claimed the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and filed Civil Writ Petition No 16096 of 1995.
He was initially appointed as Inspector on compassionate ground in the year 1974 and in the year 1995 he wanted the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer on the same very ground.
He impleaded the petitioner as respondent No. 4 in the said writ petition to support his case for appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
In the written reply filed by respondent-State, the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was defended.
A copy of the written statement filed by the respondent-State is Annexure P-6.
The said writ petition came up for hearing on 22.7.1996 when the respondents were required to show as to how they justify the appointment of the petitioner.
The respondents instead of justifying the appointment of the petitioner as validly made, the State Government on 3071996 passed the order of reversion of the petitioner.
No notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner before passing the order of reversion.
The petitioner had already served for five years on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The petitioner having no other option had approached this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 11644 of 1996 and impugned the order Annexure P-8.
The said writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this court vide order dated 3121996.
Liberty, however, was given to the respondents to pass appropriate order in accordance with law.
However, before taking any such action notice and opportunity of hearing should be given to the petitioner.
It was further directed that if the petitioner makes representation and raises the plea of discrimination then the State Government should consider the same before passing an order adverse to the petitioner.
The respondents thereafter issued show cause notice Annexure P-9 on 421997 to the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted his reply Annexure P-10 wherein he specifically raised objections that his case is different from others as he had accepted the appointment on the post of Inspector under protest in the year 1986; appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was in the year 1991 while instructions Annexure P-11 dated 4111993 came subsequently and cannot be applied with retrospective effect; the petitioner was appointed Assistant Food and Supplies Officer to remove discrimination as similarly situated were granted the appointment subsequently on a higher post; and that the proposed action of the respondents was against the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Kamla Gaind as well as the decision of this Court in the case of Parveen Kumar and Rajeev Kumar Sharma wherein it has been held that persons cannot be discriminated even in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground.
The respondents, however, without considering any of these objections, have passed the impugned order Annexure P-12 and reverted the petitioner to the post of Inspector.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents did not comply with the orders of this Court in Navtej Singh Shergill's case (supra) and his plea of discrimination was never dealt with in the impugned order Annexure P- 12.
The appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was solely on the ground that one Sarabjit Singh, a similarly situated person, was given the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The respondent did not consider this aspect of the case while reviewing the order of appointment of petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
There are numerous instances wherein the State Government has given compassionate appointments on better post after initially giving compassionate appointment on a lower post.
One Miss Jaswinder Kaur was given appointment as Clerk in the Food and Supplies Department in the first instance.
Thereafter, on her representation she was given appointment as Inspector subsequently.
Similarly, one Gurvinder Singh was also given the appointment as Clerk on compassionate ground but later on was appointed as Inspector Grade II.
One Hari Man was initially appointed as Sub Inspector Grade II on compassionate ground and subsequently appointed as Inspector Grade-I Sukhwant Singh was initially appointed a Patwari.
On his representation, he was appointed as Kanungo.
Even otherwise, the petitioner was duly qualified for appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer as per existing policy which required grant of appointment to the dependents of an employee dying in service keeping in view the qualification and the post of the deceased employee.
The appointment normally was granted on lower post by two levels.
The petitioner's father was working as District Food and Supplies Controller and the petitioner was rightly granted the appointment of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The petitioner further claims discrimination in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground since one Neel Kanth was given appointment as Inspector while his late father Sh. Krishan Lal was working only as a Peon.
A copy of the appointment letter of Neel Kanth is annexed to the petition as Annexure P-13.
Similarly, one Majinder Singh was appointed as Inspector though his father was working as Clerk.
A copy of his appointment letter is Annexure P- 14.
The department appoint people at higher posts than those held by the deceased employees.
One Rajiv Kumar Sharma was appointed as a Clerk in the office of Director Food and Supplies, Haryana whereas after his appointment one another person was appointed as Inspector who were similarly situated.
Rajiv Kumar Sharma approached this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 8933 of 1993.
While allowing the said writ petition, direction was issued for appointment of Rajiv Kumar Sharma on the post of Inspector as done in the other similarly situated persons to remove the discrimination.
A copy of the said judgment is Annexure P-7.
The petitioner also relied upon the decision dated 12.7.1990 of the Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition No. 2517 of 1980, titled Smt. Kamla Gaind v. State of Punjab and others, copy of which is Annexure P-15.
The petitioner claims that the action of the respondents is totally in disregard to Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and deserves to be quashed.
4.
The case of the respondents in the written statement is that the action of reverting the petitioner was mainly on account of the judgment of this Court in Navtej Singh Shergill's case (supra), admitting otherwise the appointment of the petitioner on 431986 on a Class-III post on compassionate ground in accordance with the Government instructions on the point dated 1841973.
Since there was no rule or instruction for offering second appointment, the petitioner somehow was granted the appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
However, the reasons were not available as all records of the department have been burnt in fire in its office on 4.6.1995.
It is further admitted that the petitioner and one Lavkesh Kumar Sharma were reverted on 3071996.
The petitioner challenged the order by filing writ petition which was allowed by this Court and in compliance with the directions of this Court in the said order, the petitioner was issued show cause notice and the impugned order of reversion was passed.
It was further stated that since the petitioner had accepted the appointment on the post of Inspector without protest, he could not seek a fresh appointment to a higher post.
It is not denied that Sarabjit Singh was initially appointed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and his appointment was made after adjudging his suitability.
The petitioner never raised any objection nor filed any case when he was appointed on the post of Inspector.
However, it is admitted that he filed representation after Sarabjit Singh was appointed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The respondents further claimed that the case of Sarabjit Singh cannot be equated with petitioner since Sarabjit Singh was appointed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the first instance whereas the petitioner was given the second appointment on that post.
It is further claimed that the petitioner has been reverted to the original post of Inspector and it is not by way of punishment and as such the petitioner has no case for any relief in his favour.
The petitioner also filed affidavit as a rejoinder to the written statement.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, learned Counsel for the petitioner, has mainly contended that the respondents have failed to comply with the directions of this Court dated 3121996 in Civil Writ Petition No 11644 of 1996; the plea of the petitioner of his discrimination by the respondents with equally situated persons was never considered nor spelled out in the impugned order of reversion; the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was a fresh appointment and not a promotion and as such there was no question of any reversion from that post; government instructions dated 4111993, Annexure P-11, have no application on the case of the petitioner since he was appointed on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer on 121991 and his appointment was in accordance with the existing Government instructions dated 1841973; and, lastly, the impugned order is against the law and settled principles in respect of non-discrimination in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground in various judgments of this Court as well as Apex Court.
The respondents have been making appointments on compassionate ground initially on lower post and thereafter on representation making appointment of the same person on a higher post.
7.
It is not disputed before this Court that after demise of petitioner's father while in service, mother of the petitioner sought appointment for the petitioner, dependent son, on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in accordance with the prevailing government instructions for making appointment on preferential basis in such like cases.
A copy of the Government instructions is Annexure P-1 on the file.
The application seeking appointment on compassionate ground was given on 30111985 and it was only in the year 1986 that vide order Annexure P-2 the petitioner was offered the post of Inspector in Food and Supplies Department.
The mother of petitioner moved an application, Annexure P-3, informing the respondents that, in fact, the application was given for appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer but her son/petitioner was appointed only Inspector in Food and Supplies Department and he submitted his joining report on 2031986 under protest.
It implies that the petitioner asserted his claim to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer on the basis of existing Government instructions.
The petitioner continued working on the post.
However, when he came to know that one Sarabjit Singh was appointed on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in place of his father who died while serving as Additional District Food and Supplies Controller, a representation immediately was filed reasserting his claim to his appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and alleged discrimination in his case.
A copy of the representation is Annexure P-4.
Before appointing the petitioner on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, the Director, Food and Supplies Department, issued Memo dated 2511991, Annexure P-16, intimating the petitioner that his appointment on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was under consideration and before a final decision is taken in this connection, the petitioner is directed to submit an affidavit to the effect that on his appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, he will not raise any claim towards his earlier seniority or salary and his seniority shall be considered in the cadre of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer from the date of issue of order/from the date of his joining.
The petitioner in compliance thereto submitted the requisite affidavit whereafter his appointment on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was made vide order dated 121991, Annexure P-5.
The action of the respondents in giving appointment to the petitioner on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was in the circumstances entirely to remove discrimination in his case as a similarly situated person, namely, Sarabjit Singh son of Additional District Food and Supplies Controller, Jalandhar, was given the appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The petitioner was only appointed on the post of Inspector while his late father was working as District Food and Supplies Controller.
The respondents in the written statement have not denied the other instances referred to in the writ petition that likewise in such other cases as well the respondents have been reappointing the employees on higher post who were initially given lower posts on preferential treatment on the basis of compassionate grounds.
In the reply only ignorance has been shown and it is claimed that such like cases were being looked into.
8.
In order to appreciate the contention of the learned Counsel on the point of discrimination, the operative portion of the order of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 11644 of 1996 decided on 3121996 which has been reproduced in para No. 15 of the writ petition as well as relied upon by the respondents in their written statement is quoted below :-  "In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary for us to decide the plea of discrimination raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioners.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are allowed.
Order dated 3071996 which have been impugned in these writ petitions are quashed.
Liberty is, however, given to the Government to proceed in accordance with law.
At the same time, we make it clear that in case the Government initiates fresh action against the petitioners then action oriented notice and opportunity of hearing should be given to the petitioners.
If the petitioners make representation and any of them raised the plea of discrimination then the Government should consider the same before passing an order adverse to such of the petitioner.
We also expect that the Government, if it comes to the conclusion that appointment cannot be given on compassionate ground more than once, will take appropriate steps against all such beneficiaries and pass orders after compliance with the principles of natural justice."
It is obviously clear that before this Court as well pleas of discrimination was raised.
However, the same was not considered for decision and the plea was relegated to be decided by the respondents if raised by the petitioner in the representation.
The petitioner did raise this plea in his reply annexure P-10 to show cause notice Annexure P-9.
However, the impugned order does not refer to this at any stage and as such the impugned order suffers from non- compliance of the directions of this Court in the writ petition between the same parties.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was qualified for appointment on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and his appointment as such was permissible under the existing instructions, Annexure P-1.
No reason is attributed or intimated to the petitioner as to why he was not given the appointment on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and instead he was appointed on the post of Inspector.
The respondents have not come forward with any guidelines from the Government or criteria adopted in giving appointment on compassionate grounds.
Admittedly, no such applicant is called for interview and the appointments are totally based on the contents of the application as well as the post held by the deceased employee.
It is not disputed that the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer is a Class III post but one step higher than the other Class-III post of Inspector in the same department.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner could have been appointed on the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer at the very initial stage but who adjudged the suitability and on what grounds is not forthcoming from the respondents.
The very fact that the petitioner accepted the appointment under protest means that he kept his claim to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer alive.
The respondents have wrongly mentioned in the written statement that the petitioner accepted the appointment on the post of Inspector without protest.
Annexure P-3 is the joining report of the petitioner.
It is specifically mentioned therein that he submits the joining report under protest.
The appointment of the petitioner subsequent to the appointment of Sarabjit Singh as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was, in fact, in the nature of rectifying its wrong in the case of petitioner by giving the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer to a similarly situated person.
It is no doubt a conscious decision of the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer as it required the petitioner to forego his claim to the seniority or back wages on the basis of his earlier service on the post of Inspector and the petitioner was required to furnish an affidavit in this respect which he did.
In the matter of compassionate appointment, the State cannot discriminate between similarly situated persons.
In a similar case of Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1995(4) SCT 388 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No 179 of 1990 decided on 1471992, where the respondents discriminated in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground by posting the petitioner on the post of Inspector of Police, this Court held the order of the Government arbitrary and unfair.
In the case of Miss Shinder Kaur v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, Civil Writ Petition No 12498 of 1990, a Division Bench of this Court held that when dependents of two deceased Government servants possess similar qualifications, no discrimination can be made by the employer while giving them appointment on compassionate grounds.
Similarly, in the case of Smt. Kamla Gaind v. State of Punjab and others, Special Leave Petition No. 2517 of 1980 decided on 12.7.1990, the Apex Court held that the Government has no power to act discriminately while giving appointment on compassionate grounds.
In that case the petitioner's husband died while working as Additional District Judge.
The son of the petitioner was offered the post of Excise and Taxation Officer while similarly situated persons were given the post of Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch).
The petition was allowed on the ground that the action of the respondent-State was hit by Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The State cannot assume arbitrary powers even in the matter of distribution of largerse.
The preferential treatment in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground is on the basis of recognition of service rendered by the deceased employee and to remove immediate hardship to the dependents because of loss of earning hand of the family.
The Government instructions on the question of compassionate appointments cannot allocate to itself unchecked or unguided discretion.
The action of the State has to be fair towards its citizens and in accordance with the mandate of the provisions as contained in Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In the case of Rachhpal Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1998(3) SCT 445 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No 16853 of 1997 decided on 2211998, a Division Bench of this Court quashed the order of reverting the petitioner from the post of Chief Inspector to that of Inspector solely on the ground of instructions.
Initially, the petitioner in the said case was appointed as Inspector, a Class III post, which he accepted under protest.
He filed civil suit claiming that he was qualified to be appointed as Chief Inspector under the existing Government instructions.
The suit was decreed.
He was appointed on the post of Chief Inspector against his initial appointment as Inspector.
A copy of the judgment is Annexure P-17.
In a similar situation, Supreme Court in the case of Surya Kant Kadam v. State of Karnataka and others, AIR 2001 SC 2415 : 2002(1) SCT 244 (SC), dealt with a case of discrimination under compassionate appointment.
In that case, the appellant, on the death of his father, was given compassionate appointments as Second Division Assistant/Clerk though he had applied for the post of Sub- Inspector of Excise and did possess the requisite qualification for that post.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 whose father also died while in service were appointed similarly as Second Division Assistant/Clerk.
Those respondents 3 and 4 while continuing as Second Division Assistant/Clerk were later on promoted/appointed as Sub Inspector of Excise on 3101987 and 2741988.
The appellant who was earlier appointed was not considered for appointment as Sub Inspector of Excise.
The Apex Court held that it amounts to hostile discrimination and directions were issued to the State Government to consider the appellant for appointment as Sub-Inspector of Excise as well.
From the aforesaid decisions of this Court as well as of Apex Court, it is clear that the State cannot justify discrimination in appointments on compassionate grounds.
Similarly situated persons have to be offered similar posts.
In the impugned order Annexure P-12, the main reliance to revert the petitioner from the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer to that of the Inspector is on the basis of the circular letter date 4111993 wherein it has been stated that request for compassionate appointment to higher post when compassionate appointment has already been accepted against one post shall not be considered and shall invariably be rejected.
It has further been observed in the impugned order that the petitioner was given the benefit of appointment to the post of Inspector on the death of his father.
He has no existing right for second benefit of reappointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
A perusal of the entire impugned order, Annexure P-12, no where refers to the plea of the petitioner that he was given the appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer to remove discrimination vis-a-vis Sarabjit Singh and it was not a second appointment in the sense that he had accepted the first appointment under protest.
Admittedly, the respondents have protected the appointment of Sarabjit Singh till today although he was similarly situated like the petitioner and was given initially the appointment of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
As already discussed above, the respondents could not have discriminated in the matter of appointment on compassionate ground.
If the petitioner was given appointment as Inspector, likewise Sarabjit Singh should have been given the same post and vice versa.
If subsequently Sarabjit Singh was given the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, the respondents rightly rectified their mistake and gave the appointment to the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer and to avoid any financial loss to the State, the respondents made the petitioner to file an affidavit foregoing his all claims towards arrears etc.
The action of the respondents by passing the impugned order was totally in non-compliance of the decision of this Court in the aforesaid writ petition filed by the petitioner when he was earlier reverted from the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer without serving any show cause notice.
9.
Instructions of 4111993, Annexure P-11, are in the nature of things required to operate prospectively.
The petitioner, admittedly, was appointed Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the year 1991 on the basis of earlier instructions dated 1841973, Annexure P-1.
The subsequent instructions dated 4111993 are to operate prospectively as it cannot be allowed to withdraw the benefit or the vested right accruing to an employee on the basis of earlier instructions.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Kulbir Singh and others v. State of Punjab, 2002(1) SCT 615 (P&H) (DB) : Civil Writ Petition No 10605 of 2001 decided on 18102001 has held that the existing instructions are to operate in respect of the service benefits like promotion etc. when the vacancies became available and that subsequent instructions of the Government if it takes away the benefit or vested right of the employee cannot operate retrospectively.
The instructions dated 4111993, Annexure P-11, simply deny consideration of an application for a better appointment than the one already granted under compassionate ground.
As already referred to and is in the writ petition, there are various instances in which the respondent-State had been issuing reappointment on higher posts to the appointees appointed already on the basis of compassionate grounds on lower posts under the existing instructions.
It is only the fresh application, if any, for appointment on a higher post as against the one already offered which is to be rejected under the new instructions Annexure P-11.
Admittedly, when instructions Annexure P-11 came, no such application of petitioner for appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was pending.
As such, the instructions Annexure P-11 were not applicable to the case of the petitioner and have wrongly been applied by the respondents in the impugned order.
10.
The petitioner also claimed that his appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer on 121991 is a fresh appointment and as such there cannot be a question of any reversion in this case.
The fact that the petitioner was made to furnish affidavit to forego his all claims in respect of Inspector although appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was a fresh one.
However, in the light of the facts already discussed above, the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer vide Annexure P-5 was, in fact, in consonance with the appointment given to a similarly situated person, namely, Sarabjit Singh and, in these circumstances, it cannot be considered as a second appointment though the petitioner has given up his claim of any kind in respect of his earlier service.
The petitioner, admittedly, served from 1986 to 1991 on the post of Inspector and from 1991 to 1998 as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
If the impugned order is allowed to stand, the petitioner would be losing about 12 years of his earned service in the process.
11.
Learned State Counsel, no doubt, vehemently argued that in order to seek compassionate appointment there is no vested right to seek appointment on a particular post.
The very purpose of such appointment is to obviate sudden financial hardship of the dependent family of an employee who died during service.
No doubt, consideration of such appointment is solely on such circumstances.
However, in giving such consideration, the State is required to extend such benefit equally in all deserving cases.
It cannot act arbitrarily and discriminate between similarly situated persons for the purpose of appointment on the post under the Government.
The Government instructions, no doubt, are non-statutory and being only of the nature of administrative instructions and are not enforceable in the Court of Law.
However, the grounds on which the petitioner has made his own case for consideration are violation of Article 14 and discriminatory treatment meted out to him and as such reasons already referred to above of not justify the action of the respondents in reverting the petitioner to the post of Inspector from the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
In view of what has been stated above, this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P-12 is quashed.
Civil Writ Petition No 13721 of 2000  12.
In this connected writ petition the relief ought is for issuance of a writ or direction in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer w.e.f.
172000 when the vacancy occurred.
Admittedly, in this case, the case for promotion of the petitioner was duly considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee in its meeting on 1722000 for promotion to the next higher post of Food and Supplies Officer as and when vacancy arises and recommendation could not be given effect to because of the order of reversion dated 1931998 of the petitioner which has since been quashed by this Court today in the main Civil Writ Petition No 4636 of 1998.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed and it is directed that the case of the petitioner shall be considered for promotion to the next higher post in accordance with law.
Needful shall be done within three months from today.
Petition allowed.