Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenges in the petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the award dated 1082000.
Annexure P/1 to the petition, vide which learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda, granted continuity of service to the petitioner but without back wages and left the parties to bear their own costs.
This conclusion of the Tribunal was based on the fact that during the pendency of the reference the management had re-employed the workman.
2.
Admitted facts on record are that the petitioner was employed as Helper on 1.7.1986 on daily wages.
His services were terminated on 3131987.
Upon reference by the competent government the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court vide its award dated 15121992 reinstated the petitioner and he joined his duties in compliance thereof.
Since no post of daily wager was available, notice was given to the workman for retrenchment/termination and the workman had even received the compensation of Rs. 4132/- towards retrenchment compensation.
The learned Labour Court while deciding the second reference in favour of the workman on 1082000 held as under :-  "Developing his submission further, representative of the workman has submitted that workman while appearing as WW/1 has stated on oath that he had worked as helper from 1.7.1986 to 461994 with the Management.
His services were terminated on 461994 without payment of any compensation or service of any notice.
Neelam Rani, junior to him was retained.
He, however, was appointed afresh on 20.6.1999 and was not given benefit of his previous service.
Representative of the workman has further submitted that workman is entitled to get benefit of provisions of Industrial Disputes Act in this case since services of the workman have not been properly terminated.
Finding accordingly on this issue may be recorded in favour of the workman and against the respondent.
In support of his contention he has referred to 1996(3) SCT 482, Mani Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala".
3.
In view of the above findings, the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda, answered the issue of wrongful termination in favour of workman and as the workman was re-employed on 20.6.1999 the Labour Court awarded continuity of service, but declined back wages.
4.
The precise question that requires considerations is whether the learned Presiding Officer could deny back wages to the petitioner after having held that the termination was illegal in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of Full Bench of this Court in the case of Hari Palace v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala and another, 1979 P.L.R.
720 to contend that wherever reinstatement of a workman is directed, back wages would be a consequential relief automatically available to the workman, except to the extent and for the period where he was gainfully employed.
It is clear from the above settled position of law that the relief of back wages would normally be granted to the workman unless there were special circumstances for denying such a relief to the workman.
In the present case the learned Presiding Officer has not recorded any reason, whatsoever, for denying back wages to the workman.
The payment of Rs. 4132/- subsequently given to the workman, which was admittedly not accompanying the notice of termination cannot cause any prejudice to the rights of the workman more particularly when the termination is held to be illegal by the Labour Court.
In these circumstances it was expected that the Labour Court would give some reasons for denying the said relief.
As already noticed, the award does not contain any such reasons.
5.
For the reasons afore-stated we modify the award dated 1082000 to the extent that the petitioner would be entitled to 50% of the back wages from the date of his termination till he rejoined the service i.e. 461999 to 19.6.1999.
We have granted 50% of the back wages to the workman for the reason that he had received the retrenchment compensation and enjoyed that amount for all this period which he ought to have returned in the event of protest.
The amount was also not tendered before the Labour Court.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.