Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 1182000 vide which the petitioner Shri Dhan Raj was denied promotion to the post of Research Assistant by the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana.
The promotion was denied to the petitioner primarily on the ground that Shri Dharam Pal Singh, respondent No. 3 in the petition was having a better service record and merit than the petitioner and as such he was promoted to the post in question taking the criteria of seniority-cum-merit and seniority alone not vesting any right in the candidate.
Before we proceed to examine the merits of the stand taken by the respondents and substance in the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner, it would be appropriate to refer to the necessary facts.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk on 20.9.1971 and was promoted as Assistant in the said department on 11101983.
According to the petitioner, he was always senior to respondent No. 3 and in the last seniority list issued on 2121994, the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 29 while respondent No. 3 has been shown at Serial No. 30.
A vacancy to the post of Research Assistant became available and as per recruitment rules, the vacancy is to be filled by promotion on seniority-cum-merit.
The service record of the petitioner was very good/good and as such he was entitled to be promoted to the post in question.
However, the respondents have arbitrarily and discriminatorily promoted respondent No. 3 to the post of Research Assistant vide order dated 1182000, thus, denying promotion to the petitioner.
The petitioner having left with no alternative was compelled to file the present writ petition.
It is contended by the petitioner that the Government of Haryana had issued instructions on 951985 stating that such officials/officers who have obtained at least 70% or more reports of good or better categories during the last 10 years should be considered eligible for promotion to the higher posts.
In the same instructions it is also stated that the punishment of censure or warning are not so grievous that promotion of an employee be withheld and in fact his case should be considered on overall suitability.
According to the petitioner he satisfies the eligibility conditions and fully covered by the instructions issued by the Government attached as Annexure P/4 to the writ petition.
As such he ought to have been promoted to the post.
Upon notice, separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 on the one hand and respondent No. 3 on the other hand respectively.
Rather than referring to the stand taken by the respective respondents, it will be easier to refer to the relevant paragraph of the counter-affidavit which in a concise form states the entire case put forward by the respondents before the Court.
In reply to paragraph No. 4 of the petition, the respondents have stated as under :-  "That para No. 4 of the writ petition is correct.
The rules 6, 7 and 9 of the Haryana Industrial Training & Vocational Education Department.
Headquarter (Group C), Services Rules, 1998 are not disputed.
As per the 9(2) of the Rules, ibid, the promotions are to be made on seniority cum merit basis and seniority alone shall not confer any right to such promotions.
According to the service record of respondent No. 3, Sh. Dharam Pal Singh, out of the last ten annual confidential reports, seven reports out of ten are "outstanding and remaining three reports are "Very Good".
He has also been awarded "Appreciation Letter" for his outstanding performance during the year 1993-94.
Whereas according to the service record of the petitioner during the last 10 years, (7 reports out of 10 are of "very Good" category), (while the remaining three reports are of "Good" category).
During the last 10 years, the petitioner was chargsheeted twice, once under Rule 8 of the Haryana Civil Service (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1987 vide letter dated 1651991 (Annexure R-2/1) and awarded a punishment of warning vide order dated 21993 (Annexure R-2/2).
The petitioner was again chargesheeted vide memo No. 23147 dated 71299 (Annexure R-2/3) under rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Service (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1987 which was lateron converted into Rule 8 of the Rules, ibid, and consequently a punishment of stoppage of one annual grade increment without cumulative effect was awarded to the petitioner vide order dated 222000 (Annexure R-2/4).
As such respondent No. 3 who has undoubtedly the best meritorious service record amongst the panel of 3 persons i.e. Megh Raj Narang at Sr. No. 1, petitioner at Sr. No. 2 and respondent No. 3 at Sr. No. 3, was promoted against the post of Research Assistant.
Since the petitioners record is much poor as compared to respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 was promoted from the panel though junior to the petitioner in the panel, according to seniority alone."
At the very out-set we will prefer to reproduce Rule 9(2) of the Haryana Industrial Training and vocational Rules, 1998, hereinafter referred to as the Rules, as under :-  9(1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made.
- xx xx xx (2) All Promotions, unless otherwise provided, shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis and seniority alone shall not confer any right to promotions."
Mainly, the contention of the petitioner is that the rule postulates application of seniority-cum-merit and as such the respondents should not have applied the rule of comparative merit and promoted respondent No. 3 to the post in question.
In fact that the principle of seniority-cum-merit can only be defeated and a senior person denied promotion if he was found unsuitable on the basis of his service record.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of BV Sivaiah & Ors. etc., v. K Addanki Babu & Ors. etc., 1998(4) SCT 46 (SC) : JT 1998(5) Supreme Court 96.
The learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously contended that the seniority cannot be ignored unless and until the candidate was found to be unsuitable by the concerned authorities.
The petitioner was suitably eligible for promotion in terms of the instructions issued by the State itself.
As such denial of promotion by the respondents is an act of total arbitrariness and the settled canons of law.
It is further contended that the following observations of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of BV Sivaiah (supra) are squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case :-  "We thus arrive at the conclusion that the criterion of seniority-cum-merit in the matter of promotion postulates that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration the senior, even though less meritorious, shall have priority and a comparative assessment of merit is not required to be made.
For assessing the minimum necessary merit the competent authority can lay down the minimum standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of assessment of merit of the employee who is eligible for consideration for promotion.
Such assessment can be made by assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of performance on the basis of service record and interview and prescribing the minimum marks which would entitled a person to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit."
The applicability of the above enunciated principles would depend on the language of the rules governing the promotion.
If seniority-cum-merit was the sole criteria for making appointment to the post of Research Assistant, then certainly the respondents were not called upon to look into the comparative merit of the candidates.
The plain reading of Rule 9(2) clearly suggests the legislative intent of making appointments to the promotion post not on the basis of the seniority simplicitor.
Firstly, seniority has to be clubbed with merit and secondly, the seniority alone is not to confer any right in the candidate to such promotion.
The expression "seniority alone shall not confer any right" has to be given its due meaning."
It is a settled principle of interpretation of rules that the rule must be read as a whole and every expression in the rule must be given its true meaning and connotation.
Any approach, which would render the substantive expression of the rule redundant or ineffective must be avoided.
Both the conditions stated in Rule 9(2) must operate simultaneously and not alternatively.
Both can operate effectively in the same area only if seniority was not given undue right to an applicant.
The importance to be attached to the expression seniority and its priority in making promotion has been diluted by the rule making authority while it specifically provides that seniority alone shall not confer any right.
This expression would bring the case of the petitioner outside the scope of judgment of the Supreme Court in BV Sivaiah's case (supra).
The ratio decidendi of this judgment, thus, would not squarely help the petitioner.
The language of Rule 9(2) spells out the criteria for promotion, which is somewhat different to the accepted norms of seniority-cum-fitness, seniority-cum-merit and merit-cum-suitability with due regard to seniority.
Seniority-cum-merit postulates the requirement of certain minimum merit or satisfying a bench-mark previously fixed.
We have already noticed that it is not the case here.
The seniority certainly is a guiding factor but is not a determining factor.
The pertinence of seniority has been intentionally diluted by the rule making authority to give due weightage to the merit.
To achieve this object of the rule, the authorities concerned had to make a comparative study of merit of the eligible candidates.
In consonance with the Government instructions, the authorities prepared a panel of three eligible officers and then on comparative study of merit of these candidates, promoted the most suitable officer of meritorious service record.
In other, words, seniority certainly has a role to play, but it is not the determining factor for giving appointment on promotion to the eligible candidates.
It plays somewhat secondary role.
Such approach of the authorities cannot find fault with in view of judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the cases of Union of India v. Mohan Lal Capoor and others, 1974(1) SCR 797 and Union of India and others v. Lt. General Rajendra Singh Kadyan and another, 2000(3) SCT 1037 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 2513.
In any case, the jurisdiction of this Court to interfere in the process of the selection Committee has its own limitation.
The Court does not sit as an appellate authority over the decision of the Selection Committee.
the scope of interference in matters of selection by promotion or otherwise has been spelled out by the Hon'ble Court in the case of Dalpat Abasaheb Sohinke and others v. Dr. BS Mahajan and others, 1990(1) SCC 305, where the Court held as under :-  "It is needless to emphasise that it is not the function the court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularly in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved malafides affecting the selection etc." In the present case, it is not disputed that panel of three names including the petitioner, who were eligible for promotion to the post of Research Assistant, were considered by the Selection Committee.
On the basis of confidential reports and service record of the officers the Committee found respondent No. 3 more suitable being more meritorious than the petitioner.
This is a decision which squarely falls within the domain of the Selection Committee and we are unable to find any illegality or patent material irregularity in the decision or the decision making process.
Learned counsel for the petitioner while referring to the instructions of the Government dated 951985 had argued that the petitioner was fully eligible and, thus, being the senior most, should have been appointed to the post of Research Assistant.
It is not disputed even by the petitioner that he was charge-sheeted twice and awarded punishment of warning on 2111993 and stoppage of one annual grade increment without cumulative effect vide order dated 222000.
The entries in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner were good or very good for the last 10 years, while the respondent No. 3 had very good or outstanding entries in his confidential reports for the relevant period and no punishment was ever inflicted upon him during his service career.
The instructions merely state as to who can be eligible for promotion to a higher post from which promotions are to be made.
The petitioner certainly has 70% or more good or better confidential reports for the last 10 years, but that alone is not sufficient.
To be eligible for consideration is totally a different matter than being fit for appointment to the promotion post.
the eligibility per se does not place the officers in the zone of consideration with an indefeasible right for appointment to the post despite their seniority.
In accordance with the instructions issued by the Government, the Selection Committee has considered the petitioner and taken his entire service record into consideration.
Apparently record of respondent No. 3 reflects better confidential reports and service profile than the petitioner.
For the reasons afore-stated, we see no merit in this petition and the same is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.