JS Khehar, J - The petitioner was originally appointed as a Sub Inspector in the Border Security Force in 1985.
In 1991 he was further promoted to the post of Inspector/Subedar.
In 1995, he was sent on deputation to the Police Department, Haryana.
While on deputation, he was required to discharge duties of the post of Inspector.
Facts narrated in the petition reveal that the period of deputation was originally for two years which was subsequently extended from time to time.
While the petitioner was on deputation, the Inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana, addressed a communication to the Director General of Police, Haryana, dated 22.7.1999, highlighting the importance of the duties and responsibilities vested in the petitioner, namely, of imparting training for VIP Security at Commando Training Centre, Panchkula.
The communication discloses that the petitioner's performance had been outstanding.
Accordingly, it was recommended that the petitioner should be permanently absorbed as instructor for VIP Security Training in the Commando Training Centre at Panchkula.
On receipt of the aforesaid communication from the Inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana, the Director General of Police, Haryana, addressed a letter dated 2791999 to the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, Home Department, highlighting the performance of the petitioner and as such the desirability to permanently absorb him as suggested by the Inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana.
In his communication dated 2791999, the Director General of Police, Haryana, informed the State Government that the Border Security Force authorities had no objection to the permanent absorption of the petitioner in the police department of the State.
In fact the Director General, Border Security Force, to the Director General, Police Department, Haryana, in a letter dated 891999 had communicated `no objection' for the permanent absorption of the petitioner in the Haryana Police Service.
2.
The Minister Incharge, through a confidential memorandum sought approval of the Chief Minister for placing the instant matter concerning the absorption of the petitioner in the Haryana Police Service before the Council of Ministers.
The aforesaid confidential communication which has been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P.5 reveals that there is no provision in the service rules for appointment as Inspector by way of transfers.
Since the rules would have to be relaxed for induction of the petitioner as Inspector in the State Police Service, it was pointed out that the approval of the Council of Ministers would be required.
3.
In the process of consideration of the claim of the petitioner, the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government.
Haryana, Home Department, addressed a letter to the Director General of Police, Haryana, in respect of the appointment of the petitioner as Inspector in the State Police Service wherein reference was made about the decision of the Government to absorb the petitioner in the Haryana Police Service against a post to be filed by way of direct recruitment.
The communication reveals that one post of Inspector of Police had been taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Commission for the absorption of the petitioner.
A notification published in the Haryana Government Gazette (extra-ordinary) dated 2412000 affirms the veracity of the aforesaid letter addressed by the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, Home Department, to the Director General of Police, Haryana referred to above.
By the aforesaid notification issued in exercise of powers conferred by Article 309 of the Constitution of India, one post in the rank of the Inspector was excluded from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Commission for absorbing the petitioner.
4.
Despite the fact that a decision for absorbing the petitioner into the Haryana Police Service had been taken at the highest level.
And, despite the fact that the Border Security Force had "no objection" in the permanent absorption of the petitioner in the service of the Police Department, Haryana, the petitioner was ordered to be repatriated to the Border Security Force vide order dated 2062001.
The order dated 2062001 has been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
5.
While issuing notice of motion, a Division Bench of this Court on 21.6.2001 stayed the operation of the impugned order dated 2062001.
6.
A common written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1 to 3.
Primarily two contentions have been raised to controvert the claim of the petitioner.
Firstly, it is submitted that the petitioner is a substantive employee of the Border Security Force and as such he has no vested right to claim permanent absorption in the State Police Service, specially in view of the fact that the rules laying down the methods of appointment/recruitment to the post of Inspector do not provide for appointment by way of transfer/absorption and as such the petitioner has no vested right to be absorbed in the State Police Service.
In this behalf, reliance has been placed by the respondents on a decision rendered by the Apex Court in Kunal Nanda v. Union of India & another, 2000(4) SLR 609 : 2000(2) SCT 809 (SC).
Pointed attention of this Court has been invited to the following conclusions drawn by the Apex Court while deciding the aforesaid case :-  ".......It is well settled that unless the claim of the deputationist for permanent absorption in the department where he works on deputation is based upon any statutory Rule, Regulation or Order having the force of law, a deputationist cannot assert and succeed in any such claim for absorption.
The basic principle under-lying deputation itself is that the person concerned can always and at any time be repatriated to his parent department to serve in his substantive position therein at the instance of either of the departments and there is no vested right in such a person to continue for long on deputation or get absorbed in the department to which he had gone on deputation."
The second contention advanced on behalf of the respondents is that none of the communications relied upon by the petitioner in projecting his case for permanent absorption were addressed to him.
All the aforesaid communications were inter-departmental communications.
In this behalf, it is submitted that no vested right can flow to the petitioner on the basis of the said inter- departmental communications.
In this behalf, reliance of the Apex Court in Puranjit Singh v. Union Territory of Chandigarh and others, 1994(5) SLR 280 : 1995(1) SCT 65 (SC).
The relevant observations of the Apex Court in the said case are reproduced hereunder :-  "For the purpose, he is relying upon certain notings either of the Chief Engineer or the Home Secretary of the Chandigarh Administration.
Although it is not known how he came in possession of the said notings, it was improper on his part to produce these notings in the Court proceedings, assuming that he had come in possession of them authorisedly.
As a responsible officer he ought to know that notings in the departmental files did not create any rights in his favour.
It is the orders issued by the competent authorities and received by him which alone can create rights in his favour."
In fact, it is expressly the case of the respondents in the written statement that all earlier recommendations, details of which have been referred to above, were ultimately withdrawn.
In this behalf, it is pointed out that the Deputy Inspector of Police, CID, Haryana, scrutinised the case of the petitioner for permanent absorption in the Police Department and proposed the withdrawal of the earlier recommendations through an office memorandum dated 2822001.
On the basis of the afore-said office memorandum dated 2822001, the Director General of Police, Haryana, addressed a letter to the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, Home Department, affirming the suggestion made by the Deputy Inspector General of Police CID, Haryana.
In this communication dated 2822001, it was suggested that earlier recommendations regarding the permanent absorption of the petitioner in the Haryana Police Service be withdrawn.
The matter was then re-considered and reviewed by the State Government and it was decided not to absorb the petitioner in the State Police Service.
The Cabinet also reviewed its earlier decision dated 2112000 in a full Cabinet meeting held on 1462001, wherein, it was further decided to repatriate the petitioner to his parent department.
It is, therefore, that the petitioner was repatriated to his parent department vide order dated 2062001.
The original file dealing with the case of the petitioner has been perused by us.
It endorses the facts narrated in the written statement which have been referred to hereinabove.
7.
The first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner despite the factual position disclosed in the written statement is that before passing an order adversely affecting the rights of the petitioner, he was liable to be afforded an opportunity of hearing.
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the rules of the natural justice were not followed by the authorities before passing the impugned order dated 2062001.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in this behalf, placed reliance on a decision rendered by this Court in Sanjay Kumar Sabherwal v. Food Corporation of India, 2001(3) SCT 1092.
In the aforesaid case, the petitioners who were inducted into the service of the Food Corporation of India in the Depot/General Cadre opted for transfer in the Technical cadre.
Their options were accepted, whereupon they were permanently absorbed in the Technical cadre.
By aforesaid action of the Food Corporation of India, they severed all their rights with the Depot/General Cadre to which they were originally appointed.
The petitioners in the aforesaid case impugned the order repatriating them to the original cadre by asserting that the said order which affected their civil rights had been passed without affording them an opportunity of hearing.
The aforesaid plea was accepted and the order of repatriation was set aside.
We find no merit in the aforesaid claim of the petitioner.
The petitioner being merely a deputationist in the service of the Haryana Police Department had no vested right to continue in the said department.
He being a permanent/substantive employee of the Border Security Force could only be aggrieved of an action which adversely affected his rights as are available to him in terms of the conditions of services prescribed by his parent employer.
The petitioner has not expressed any grievance in respect of any rights flowing to him from his employment under the Border Security Force.
We are of the view that the impugned order dated 2062001 by which the petitioner has been repatriated to serve under his parent employer did not in any manner affect his civil rights and, therefore, there was no question of affording him any opportunity of hearing before passing the impugned order of repatriation.
The decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is totally irrelevant to the present controversy.
In the instant case, no order of absorption of the petitioner into the service of the State Police Department had ever been issued.
Therefore, there is no parity in the case relied upon where vested right had been created in the petitioners, after their options had been accepted, and orders had been issued permanently transferring them to the Technical cadre.
8.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the recommendations made by the Inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana, as well as the Director General of Police, Haryana, through their communications dated 22.7.1999 and 2791999, respectively, followed by the acceptance thereof by the State Government, after the approval of the said recommendations by the cabinet, vested an indefeasible right in the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, the conscious decision taken by the State Government, as is evident from the confidential memorandum issued by the Minister Incharge (already referred to above) as also the memorandum dated 2012000 (already referred to above) could not be annulled by an inferior authority i.e. by respondent No. 3, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana (who had issued the impugned order dated 2062001) by ordering the repatriation of the petitioner.
The aforesaid contention is also misconceived.
The various communications relied upon by the petitioner were all inter-departmental communications.
None of the communications vested any right in the petitioner.
In the aforesaid ongoing administrative process, the matter was re-considered on the recommendations made by the Deputy inspector General of Police, CID, Haryana, as well as by the Director General of Police, Haryana, through memoranda dated 2822001 and 1632001, respectively.
The matter was re-examined in a meeting of the full cabinet held on 1462001 wherein it was decided to repatriate the petitioner to his parent department.
It was only thereupon that the impugned order dated 2062001, was issued.
It is, therefore, wholly incorrect for the petitioner to suggest that an authority inferior to the authority which had taken the final decision in the first instance had passed an order contrary to the order passed by the higher authorities.
It is also misconceived for the petitioner to rely upon various inter-departmental communications appended to the writ petition.
None of the communications relied upon by the petitioner was addressed to him.
Such inter-departmental communications rest on the same plank as nothings on official files.
Such inter-departmental communications create no vested rights.
In view of the decisions rendered by the Apex Court in Puranjit Singh's case (supra), the reliance on the aforesaid inter-departmental communications is wholly misconceived.
Moreover, the communications, referred to and relied upon by the petitioner, were subsequently rescinded as is evident from the facts narrated hereinabove.
The second contention raised on behalf of the petitioner must also fail on account of position expressed above.
9.
In the totality of the factual position of the instant case, the claim of the petitioner to be absorbed permanently against the post of the Inspector in the Police Department of the State of Haryana is clearly misconceived in view of the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Kunal Nanda's case (supra).
In the absence of any statutory rules enabling appointment by transfer/absorption to the post of Inspector in the State Police Service, the claim of the petitioner for absorption in the State Police Service is clearly misconceived.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this petition.
The same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.