SS Sudhalkar, J - By this writ petition, the employer is challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 17111997, copy annexure P/1, vide which respondent No. 2 was found entitled to the payment of Rs. 43,913/- and interest at the rate of 12% from the date of application till 791990.
2.
The Labour Court had passed the award on the application of the respondent under Section 33-C(2) claiming the amount of Rs. 43,913/- being difference of wages and other dues and adjustment due to the deceased husband of the respondent.
3.
The son of the respondent i.e. Anil Kumar was appointed as Helper on 1891986.
The husband of respondent No. 2 i.e. Mool Chand was working as Establishment Assistant in the office of the petitioner and on the request of Mool Chand, Anil Kumar was given job on daily wages and posted in the Ledger Section.
Anil Kumar died on 12.3.1990.
Respondent No. 2 made claim under Section 33-C(2) of the Act and claimed wages for equal pay for equal work which, according to her, should have been given to the deceased.
The matter was taken up in the Lok Adalat and it was compromised vide compromise/settlement dated 2711996, copy of which has been produced at Annexure P/4.
The text of the compromise is under :-  "File be taken upon in Lok Adalat.
Joint Statement of the parties has been recorded.
The management has argued to pay Rs. 20,000/- to the workman.
In view of the statement made by both the parties, the application is disposed of as settled, file be consigned to the record."
It is contended by the petitioner that petitioner No. 3 sent a letter dated 2931996, Annexure P/5, to respondent No. 2 that she may collect the draft from him on any working day but she did not turn up to receive the draft but had filed an application on 3011996 before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court.
The Labour Court held as under :-  "15.
It is true that this statement is signed by Shri Ashok Sangwan, General Manager on behalf of the respondent and shri GS Choudhary, authorised representative for Smt. Kailash Devi, claimant but the fact remains that both the parties were legally at liberty to absolve themselves from the terms and condition of the settlement.
An attempt was made on behalf of the respondent Haryana Roadways to act upon the terms and conditions on this settlement when a draft was sent of Rs. 20,000/- through the registered letter but this amount was never received by the claimant and as a corollary thereto, the claimant shall be deemed to have the resiled from the terms and conditions of settlement.
Needless to mention that the claimant had not signed the alleged settlement and it is doubtful if she was bound by terms and conditions of such settlement."
The question to be decided is whether in view of the fact that the amount was not paid, the respondent could absolve herself of the terms and conditions of the settlement and proceed with the legal action for recovering the amount.
4.
Learned State Counsel argued that the amount being settled in the Lok Adalat, no further amount can be claimed by the respondent and she is not entitled to interest also.
It can be seen from the compromise arrived at before the Lok Adalat that the amount was a fixed amount without interest and it was not mentioned as to when the amount was to be paid and party had a right to rescind the compromise.
5.
After hearing learned State counsel, I find that this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
It was agreed that the amount was to be paid though it was not paid on the spot at the Lok Adalat.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent No. 2, Mr. GS Chaudhary was present.
In the objections raised by the respondent No. 2, copy of which has been produced at Annexure P/6, it is not in dispute that Shri Chaudhary who represented the respondent No. 2 in the Lok Adalat was the counsel.
She had appointed another counsel subsequently.
This can be found from paragraph No. 5 of the objections, Annexure P/6.
It is only when she raised the objections, she produced a Vakalatanama of the new counsel.
It is not known how the Labour Court came to the conclusion that parties were legally entitled to absolve themselves from the terms of compromise.
7.
In view of the above reasons, the Labour Court has erred in allowing the application by the impugned award ignoring the compromise.
As a result, this petition is allowed.
The award of the Labour Court is set- aside.
Petition allowed.