BJ Shethna, J - The appellant-original petitioner has challenged in the special appeal the judgment and order dated 10102000 passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court dismissing the writ petition No. 3147/2000 filed by him.
2.
The appellant was appointed on the post of constable by a common order of appointment at Annex.
1.
His services were straight away terminated by the impugned order dated 15.10.1984 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ajmer on the ground that by producing forged caste certificate, he obtained service in the Police Department for which Criminal Case No. 90/84 was registered against him with the Civil Lines Police Station, Ajmer for the offence punishable under Sections 420, 467, 466 and 471 IPC.
The said case was tried as Criminal Case No. 1672/86 by the learned Civil Judge and Judicial Magistrate, Ajmer Court No. 3 who, by his judgment and order dated 2011997, acquitted the appellant-accused by giving him benefit of doubt.
3.
After the order of acquittal dated 2011997 passed by the learned Magistrate, the appellant-petitioner sent notice to the respondent to take him on duty but the certified copy of the judgment was not sent, therefore, he was told that no action can be taken in the matter.
Thereupon, the Photostat copy of the judgment was sent to the Superintendent of Police, Ajmer with a request to reinstate him in the service as Constable.
However, no action was taken in the matter, therefore, the appellant-petitioner filed a writ petition before this Court on 2172000 i.e. after a period of more than three and half years of the order of acquittal and after a period of more than 16 years from the date of his termination without offering any explanation for such a gross delay in filing the petition late.
4.
The learned Single Judge without going into the merits of the case dismissed the writ petition only on the ground of delay of 16 years in challenging the impugned order of termination which was passed in 1984.
This order is challenged in this special appeal.
5.
Learned counsel Shri Ranjeet Joshi for the appellant submitted that because of the pendency of the Criminal case, the appellant-petitioner did not challenge the impugned order of termination passed in 1984 early.
He submitted that as soon as he was acquitted by the competent criminal court in January, 1997, before approaching this Court, he approached the authority with a request to take him back in service but no heed was given, therefore, he had filed this petition in 2000.
He, therefore, submits that on the ground of delay, the petition should not have been dismissed by the learned Single Judge.
He submitted that the impugned order of termination is ex facie bad and illegal, therefore, on a technical ground like delay the learned Single Judge should not have dismissed his writ petition.
He submitted that the back-wages could have been denied on the ground of delay but reinstatement could not have been denied when the impugned order was ex facie bad and illegal.
6.
We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the learned Single Judge for dismissing the writ petition on the ground of gross delay and laches of as many as 16 years.
The learned Single Judge was fully justified in observing that mere pendency of a criminal case would not be a ground for the petitioner-appellant not to challenge his termination order if according to him it was ex facie bad and illegal.
It is true that the appellant-petitioner came to be acquitted by the competent criminal court on 2011997 but that was an order of acquittal by giving benefit of doubt to the accused and it was not a clear cut acquittal.
That apart if the respondents had not given any heed after the order of acquittal served upon them in 1997 then the appellant- petitioner should not have waited for three more years.
The explanation for approaching this Court by way of a writ petition late in July, 2000 offered by Mr. Joshi that he was poor man is also unacceptable.
If a poor man can afford to file petition and appeal in 2000 before this Court, then he could have certainly file petition in 1997 itself.
In our considered opinion, this is nothing but lame excuse for filing the petition late.
7.
Before parting, we must make it clear that this Court has discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution and when on peculiar facts of the case the learned Single Judge has refused to exercise discretion in favour of the appellant-petitioner on the ground of gross delay and laches of 16 years in challenging the termination order then certainly this Court would not interfere with such discretionary orders in special appeal.
8.
In view of the above discussion, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.