JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of CWPs Nos. 7342, 11180, 13068 and 17992 of 2000, as common questions of law and facts are involved in all these cases.
Facts are being taken from CWP No. 11180 of 2000.
2.
It is admitted case of the petitioners in all the cases that they had not acquired the qualifications of B.Ed.
(Bachelor of Education) on the date fixed for submission of applications for recruitment as teachers in various categories in the subjects mentioned in the advertisement which was published on January 12, 1996.
The last date of receiving the applications was extended from 1521996 to 30.10.1996.
Though the petitioners had appeared in the B.Ed.
course examination held by Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra but their result was not declared before the extended date as aforesaid.
Admittedly the result was declared on November 29, 1996.
However, it is alleged that the copy of the result was issued by the University authorities on 18111996 and sent to the Coordinator before the interview could be held which was fixed for November 21, 1996.
3.
It has been argued that the result having been received before the interview, petitioners had interviewed and, therefore, are entitled to be considered for appointment.
4.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in Jatinder Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Appeal No. 6752 of 1999 decided on May 1, 1999.
The question which arose for the kind consideration of their lordships has been noticed which reads as under :-  xxx xxx xxx xxx All the appeals and the writ petitions have been which up for hearing analogously.
The only question arising for decision in the case is by reference to which date the eligibility of the several candidates is to be judged and the consequences flowing from failure to satisfy the eligibility test in the facts and circumstances of the case.
"xxx, xxx, xxx, xxx, xx."
5.
It was the admitted case of the appellant before the Apex Court that baring stray case of one or two, all the appellants had acquired the eligibility qualifications by October 30, 1996, the extended date for making the applications.
The confusions had prevailed and resultantly number of candidates had been issued letters of appointment but were not allowed to join on account of the rigmarole that as to whether the last date for testing the educational qualifications would be taken as 1521996 or October 30, 1996, the extended date.
It is obvious that the State itself was not very clear and, therefore, the confusion was caused.
6.
It was conceded before the Apex Court that the appellants comprised of various categories and that the candidates belonging to category No. 1 had acquired the eligibility qualifications by the extended date.
So far as category No. 3 is concerned, it was conceded that the candidates had given Punjabi examination before the cut off date and that the results were not declared but their answer books were evaluated before October 30, 1996, the results were declared normally after the cut off date and they had passed the requisite examination in Punjabi.
In view of their lordships, since the letters of appointment had been issued, the selection and appointment of such candidates should not be disturbed and, therefore, their lordships passed an order under Article 142 of the Constitution of India in the facts and circumstances of those cases before their lordships.
7.
So far as the present cases are concerned admittedly no letters of appointment had been issued but the prayer is that since they had appeared in the examination of B.Ed.
before the extended date and admittedly their results had been communicated before the interview but admittedly they are shown to have passed the requisite qualifications after the extended date.
8.
It is averred by the petitioners that they had appeared in the interview along with similarly situated other candidates and that they are declared selected for the posts of Masters/Mistresses in the Department of Education.
9.
On the other hand learned counsel appearing for the State has argued that the petitioners are not entitled to any relief because as per their own admission, they acquired qualifications by passing the examination of B.Ed after the extended date for receiving the applicants i.e. October 30, 1996.
It has been further argued that the judgment of the Apex Court is not applicable to the case of the petitioners as the said order has been passed under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
The cases of the petitioners rather stand covered by the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in Vinod Kumar and another v. State of Punjab and others, Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 19318 of 2000, decided on February 2, 2001.
The order of the Apex Court reads as under :-  On 20th November, 2000, this Court directed a limited notice as under to be issued to the respondent State.
"Issue notice for the condonation of delay.
Issue notice also in the Special Leave Petition.
The notice shall indicate that the respondent may show cause why the petition be not disposed of in terms of the judgment in Civil Appeal No. 6750 of 1999, decided on Ist May 2000."
There is a delay of 630 days on filing this special leave petition.
It appears that the Petitioners felt amboldened into filing this special leave petition in view of the judgment of this Court in C.A.
No. 6750 of 1999 delivered on 152000.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we find that the petitioners herein are not identically situated as those candidates which were allowed just and equitable relief in exercise of our jurisdiction under Articles 142 of the Constitution of India by our judgment dated 152000.
It is not disputed that the petitioners herein were not even interviewed, and certainly not selected, appointed and then joined in response to appointment letters issued by the State Government to them as was the case with the appellants in Civil Appeal No. 6750 of 1999.
In our opinion, the petitioners are not entitled to the relief which was allowed under Articles 142 of the Constitution by this Court in judgment dated 152000.
This petition is, therefore, dismissed both on merits as also on the ground of delay."
10.
The relief had been granted to the appellants before the Apex Court by way of invocation of jurisdiction under Articles 142 of the Constitution of India rendering judgment in the aforesaid Civil Appeal on May 1, 2000.
In the present case, though the petitioners had been interviewed and the result had been declared but no letter of appointment had been issued much less joining in response to any appointment letter.
Thus, no relief can be claimed by the petitioners.
11.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the petitioners having notacquired the requisite qualifications on the extended date i.e. October 30, 1996 though having been interviewed are not entitled to be appointed in pursuant to the advertisement dated January 12, 1996.
Resultantly, all the writ petitions are dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.