Swatanter Kumar, J - The principle grievance of the petitioners in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is that inspite of the vacancies being available, the respondents are not making promotions to the post of Superintending Engineer from the feeding cadre of Executive Engineers in accordance with existing rules and policies and are acting arbitrarily to deny the chances of consideration and promotion to the petitioners.
2.
All the petitioners are degree holders and petitioners No. 2 to 4 even hold Master's degree in Engineering.
they were appointed to the Civil Service of Engineers, Class-I PWD, Punjab, which are controlled by the Punjab Services of Engineers, Class-I, PWD (Buildings and Road Branch) Rules, 1960, hereinafter referred to as the Rules.
They were promoted as Executive Engineers with effect from 111986 vide order dated 1351991 issued by the competent authority.
On 29122000 respondents issued instructions containing the policy of the Government in regard to promotions in this service, copy whereof is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/3.
These instructions were in supersession to the instructions issued earlier on 1101999.
These policy instructions specify as to how the merit is to be determined and promotion to be granted to the various posts.
Under this policy, promotions were made to various posts, lower as well as higher in hierarchy in the department, only to the post of Superintending Engineer, the feeding cadre for which is Executive Engineers.
These instructions were in operation and the DPC made these promotions on the basis of the said instructions.
On 1532001 the Department of Personnel, Punjab Government, issued instructions to all the departments of the State requiring them to made regular promotions and not to give current duty charge.
The relevant part of the said instructions reads as under :-  "3.
It is, therefore, requested that no officer/official should be given C.D.C.
of higher post and instead of this, for uninterrupted and urgent disposal of Government work efforts may be made to decide promotion cases according to Service Rules against vacant posts well in advance.
In case C.D.C.
is required to be given in any case, that case may be sent to his Deptt.
through Administrative Deptt.
for prior approval.
4.
These instructions should be meticulously complied with."
3.
However, vide order dated 1972001 the Department of Personnel informed all departments that the instructions dated 29122000 (Annexure P/3) be kept in abeyance till further directions are issued.
This added to the grievance of the petitioners as according to them the authorities concerned intentionally did not promote the petitioners to the post of Superintending Engineer as no DPC was constituted to consider the cases of eligible candidates including the petitioners.
On the other hand, the Government intentionally directed the instructions to be kept in abeyance and, thus, again un-necessarily delaying the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the higher posts.
being aggrieved from this inaction on the part of the respondents, the petitioners approached this Court by means of this petition.
4.
Upon notice the respondents filed reply and it was stated that in the interest of the administration, the instructions Annexure P/3 were kept in abeyance though it was not disputed that promotions to other posts were made by the respondents.
It was stated that in accordance with Annexure P/3 the bench marked for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer was based on marks assigned to each A.C.R.
for the year varying from average to out- standing.
For promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer, the grading to be achieved was very good.
According to the respondents this criteria resulting in ignoring number of eligible candidates and consequent supersession of such persons.
Therefore, the Government issued Annexure P/6.
After issuance of Annexure P/6, on 6.9.2001 the Government has issued further instructions copy whereof is annexed as Annexure R/1 to the reply, vide which ACRs for the last five years are to be taken into consideration for promotion.
The minimum bench-mark for promotion to posts was very good and minimum marks provided were 15 and this criteria varied for Group A and Group-B posts.
5.
From the record before the Court, the facts hardly appear to be in dispute.
There is no dispute to the fact that no promotion were made to the post of Superintending Engineer from the feeding cadre of Executive Engineers after the instructions dated 29122000 came into force though promotions were made to all other promotional posts.
Promotions to the post of Chief Engineer as well as from Sub-Division Engineer to the post of Executive Engineer promotions were made by the Government in accordance with the said policy instructions.
No specific reason has been pleaded in the written statement as to why the DPC was not constituted for promoting the Executive Engineers to the post of Superintending Engineer in accordance with the said policy.
The instructions dated 29122000 were kept in abeyance vide letter dated 1972001.
Considerable period had elapsed and the respondents were obliged to follow the instructions issued by the Department of Personnel of State of Punjab dated 1532001, wherein definite directions were given for deciding the promotion cases in accordance with service rules against the vacant posts.
It was stated in the said instructions that posts should be filled in well in advance and giving of current duty charge should be avoided.
6.
During the course of arguments, it was also conceded before us that there were five vacancies of Superintending Engineers in existence at all relevant times and much prior to the issuance of the letter dated 1972001, keeping the instructions Annexure P/3 in abeyance.
The entire case put up by the State in reply to the petitioners claim has been summed up in paragraph no. 8 of the written statement.
The said paragraph reads as under :-  "that the contents of this para are admitted.
It is further submitted that promotion from Superintending Engineer to the post of Chief Engineer and that from Sub-Divisional Engineer to the post of Executive Engineer have been made on the basis of recommendations of DPC held on 26.3.2001 and 29.5.2001 respectively as per provisions of P.S.E.
Class-I Rules, 1960 and instruction dated 29122000 (Annexure P/3) prevailing at that time."
7.
The only reason that emerges from the record is that the DPC was to recommend the panel of the candidates on the principle of merit-cum- suitability and as the DPC did not meet, the cases for promotion including the petitioners could not be considered.
this can hardly be a justifiable ground.
We are of the considered view that there was no hindrance or impediment in the way of the respondents in considering the cases of eligible Executive Engineers for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer, more particularly when promotions to all other cadres were admittedly made by the respondents during the same period.
8.
The necessary corollary of the above discussion is as to what rules, instructions would govern the promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer from that of Executive Engineer in face of the fact that Government has issued new instructions dated 6.9.2001 in supersession of the instructions dated 29122000.
9.
It is a settled proposition of law that the rules or instructions controlling the promotion in service are to be given effect to prospectively.
The amended instructions would be applicable to the vacancies which became available to the department on and after the such amendment in the instructions was carried out.
The old existing vacancies will have to be filled in accordance with the earlier instructions specially when appointment and promotion to other cadres were made on the basis of the old instructions.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Guneeta Chadha and others v. Union of India and others, 2001(1) SCT 1026 (P&H)(FB) : 2001(1) S.L.R.
9 while dealing with a somewhat similar subject held as under :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties we are of the view that merely because process of selection and recruitment in case of Lecturers mentioned in Annexure P-7 and Madhurima Sharma had started prior to February 21, 1991 (the date of promulgation of 1990 Rules), according to us, would not make any difference.
The appointments in both the cases were made after the promulgation of the Rules.
In our view the sine qua non is the date of the vacancy.
As per the judgments of the apex Court referred to in appoint No. (i), the posts which are vacant prior to the amendment of the Rules have to be filled by the unamended Ruels.
In these circumstances as to when did the process of recruitment start pales into insignificance."
10.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 Supreme Court 852 held as under :-  "The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub- Registrar Grade II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and not on the statewide basis and, therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
But the question is of filling the vacancies that occurred prior to the amended rules.
We have not the slightest doubt that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules."
Reference can also be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. SS Uppal and another, 1998(1) SCT 384 (SC) : JT 1996(1) Supreme Court 258 : 1996(2) SCC 168 : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 2340, where the Court held as under :-  "The seniority of an officer appointed into the IAS is determined according to the seniority rules applicable on the date of appointment to the IAS Weightage in seniority cannot be given retrospective effect unless it was specifically provided in the rule in force at the material time.
In the case of Shankarasan Dash v. Union of India, JT 1991(2) SC 380, it was pointed out by this Court that the existence of vacancies did not give any legal right to a selected candidate."
"We are of the view, in the facts of this case and also having regard to the relevant rules, it cannot be said that seniority of Uppal will have to be decided in accordance with the seniority rules which were in force before the amendments were made on 3rd February, 1989.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed."
11.
The Government had issued the letter dated 1972001 keeping the instructions of 29122000 in abeyance.
The authority of the Government to amend its earlier instructions can hardly be challenged.
The competent authority could or could not have issued such instructions, need not be gone into by us in this petition as it is neither necessary nor called for.
The promotion of the petitioners and all other eligible candidates to the post of Superintending Engineer has to be per the vacant positions existing prior to 1972001 till which date the instructions/policy dated 29122000 was in force.
Admittedly, the vacancies were available and no DPC was constituted for finalising the promotions to the post of Superintending Engineer.
The case of the petitioners would be squarely covered by the judgments afore-referred.
The eligible candidates have a legitimate expectancy for promotion to the higher posts in accordance with the service rules/instructions in force at the relevant time.
Depriving of such right to the eligible persons by the respondents is certainly unjust and unfair.
12.
For the reasons afore-discussed, we are of the considered view that the petitioners are entitled to a limited relief in this writ petition.
Therefore, we direct the respondents to constitute a Departmental Promotion Committed in accordance with service rules/instructions in force prior to 1672001 and consider the cases of all the eligible candidates including the petitioners in accordance therewith for the vacancies which were available and governed by the instructions dated 29122000, within two months from today.
The writ petition is allowed to the limited extent afore-stated.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.