Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner-Darshan Singh in this petition was appointed as Mathematics Master on adhoc basis on 31st March, 1975.
His services were regularised on 141977.
The employees of the Government of Punjab under the banner of Punjab Subordinate Services Federation (hereinafter referred to as Federation) had raised certain demands including the appointment of Pay Commission etc.
The government did not accede to the request of the Federation and, as such, the Federation gave an ultimatum to government for mass strike on 8th February, 1978, in the event of their demands were not met by that.
On 6th February, 1978, the government declared that it will take strong action against the employees who will prticipate in the strike.
The Punjab Government also decided to give one special increment to the persons, who had not participated in the strike.
These instructions were issued by the government on 16th June, 1978, vide Circular dated 6.1.1979.
The State Government further clarified that only regular employees would be entitled to increment in furtherance to earlier policy.
According to the petitioner, he did not participate in the strike and was present on duty on that date and thus, claims grant of special premature increment for non- participating in the strike on 821978.
Despite notice dated 831998, the petitioner was not granted relief by the respondents, thus, compelling the petitioner to file the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, the facts are not disputed.
However, it is stated in paragraph 2 of the preliminary objections "but in the case of the petitioner no such entry of being physically present in the school has been recorded in the service book by the concerned Drawing and Disbursing Officer", therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the relief prayed for.
3.
The petitioner has specifically averred in his petition that he was present on duty in Government Senior Secondary School, Slabatpura, on 821978.
If the Drawing and Disbursing Officer has not recorded the presence of the petitioner, the fault cannot be attributed to the petitioner.
The petitioner had served a notice upon the respondents through his counsel, copy of which is Annexure P/3 to this petition.
A specific averment was made in regard to the presence of the petitioner in the School.
The said notice was not even replied to by the respondent-State.
In other words, the averments made in the notice remained unrebutted.
The State cannot derive any advantage thereof and inference, if any, would have to be drawn against the State.
The respondents could have produced the record of the said school, if maintained by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer, as the best evidence thereof is in possession of the State.
In fact, the averments made in the reply do not deny the facts specifically.
Non-production of the record despite opportunity being granted by the court, cannot be of any benefit to the State and the petitioner cannot be denied relief on this count.
4.
Reference can be made to the judgment of this court in the case of Amarjit Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 7532 of 2001, decided on the same date, wherein the court held as under :-  "The essential ingredients stated by the Full Bench in the above case for sustaining such a claim are firstly, that the employee should be regular or whose services were subsequently regularised on or before the cut off date of strike and secondly that the employee should not have participated in the strike.
The following observations of the Full Bench in Saroj Kumar's case (supra) would be relevant to refer at this stage.
"That was not a case of grant of a particular incentive.
With respect to the learned Judge, we are of the view that the ratio of Rajinder Kumari's case could not be extended to a case where only incentive is given to a particular class of employees.
In State of Punjab and others v. Om Parkash Kaushal, 1996(4) SCT 302 (SC) : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 2584 : 1996(4) SLR 496 (SC), while discussing Punjab Privately Managed Recognised School Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, it was held by the apex Court that the pay scale and the dearness allowance of Teachers of private Aided Schools had been brought at par by the State Government with the Teachers of same status in the Government service.
However, they could not claim advance increments as were given to regular employees who fulfilled certain conditions on the ground that this was a form of an incentive which could not be claimed by the Teachers of the Private State Aided Schools.
In State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh, 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC) : JT 1996(3) SC 876 : 1997(1) SLR 143 (SC), the apex court while discussing the theory of equal pay for equal work held that a daily wage employee though may be doing the same work is not entitled to the same pay as of a regular employee as he cannot be treated on par with the person in regular service of the State.
It was observed that such employees are not selected in the manner in whcih regular employees are selected.
The requirement for slection is not as rigorous as of a regular employee.
Other provisions relating to regular service are not applicable to such daily wage employees and they are not subjected to any disciplinary control.
According to us, these observations are fully applicable even to ad hoc employees.
Those ad hoc employees who were liable to be regularised on or before February 8, 1978, but for no fault of theirs no orders had been passed were held entitled to the benefit by the Government as if in fact they were regular employees as on February 8, 1978.
In other words, the benefit has only been given of premature increment to regular or virtually regular employees who were there as such on February 8, 1978."
The ingredients laid down by the Full Bench are satisfied in the present case inasmuch as the services of all the three petitioners were regularised with effect from 141977.
In regard to second ingredient whether they were present on the relevant date i.e. 821978, the petitioners have filed on record certificates issued by the Head Master of the concerned school with regard to their presence as on 821978.
Apparently, the Head Master is the Drawing and Disbursing Officer of the School and he has specifically stated that the petitioners were present in the school on 821978.
The correctness of these certificates have not been disputed in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
In face of these documents, we are unable to hold that the impugned order is factually correct in holding that the petitioners were not present on the relevant date and had not participated in the strike.
In somewhat similar circumstances, two different Division Benches of this court in the cases of Rattan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 711 (P&H) : 1995(1) S.L.R.
401 and Narinder Pal Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 17568 of 1996 decided on 941997, had granted relief to the petitioners therein.
The judgment of the Division Bench of this court in Narender Pal Singh's case (supra) was assailed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and the same was dismissed in limine, vide order dated 26th July, 1999 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 22124 of 1997, titled State of Punjab and others.
v. Narinder Pal Singh and others decided on 2671999.
5.
In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in allowing this writ petition to the extent that the respondents shall consider the case of the petitioner for grant of one special increment for non-participation in the strike, in accordance with law.
6.
The writ petition is, thus, allowed in the above terms, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.