JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of C.W.P.
No. 14998 of 1994 and C.W.P.
No. 8484 of 1995 as common question of law and relief are claimed.
The facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 14998 of 1994.
2.
In pursuant to an advertisement published in the `Tribune' dated 871987 issued by the Punjab State Federation of Cooperative Sugar Mills Limited (SUGARFED), the petitioners applied for the posts of Trainee Manufacturing Chemist.
It was in the year 1986, the Administrative Committee of Sugarfed resolved in the meeting held on 10.12.1986 that the persons holding a degree in BSc degree in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics should be given necessary training so as to enable them to perform the duties of Manufacturing Chemist.
It was further resolved to off set the qualifications of Associate Membership of National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or Associate Membership of the Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or M.Sc (Sugar Technology).
It was also decided that on completion of training of two years (extendable by one more year, the successful candidates shall be appointed as Manufacturing Chemists in regular pay scale of Rs. 605-1680 as revised from time to time.
The scheme for Trainee Manufacturing Chemists was duly approved and adopted to be incorporated in the Punjab State Cooperative Sugar Mills Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
3.
The petitioners were duly selected after having been interviewed by the Selection Committee.
In pursuant thereto, the petitioners were given letters of appointment and the conditions applicable thereto were spelt out accordingly.
A sample copy of such letters has been appended as Annexure P-5.
The condition No. 5 specifically provided that on completion of successful training of two years in the first instance, extendable to further one year the candidate shall be appointed as Manufacturing Chemist in the regular pay scale of Rs. 605-35-780/50-1680 plus other allowances as admissible from time to time under Sugar Wage Board.
Inter alia, the services of the petitioners were also to be governed by the rules inforce and as amended from time to time.
It shall be apposite to notice the aforesaid condition which reads as under :-  "5.
On completion of successful training of 2 years in the first instance extendable to further one year, you shall be appointed as Manufacturing Chemist in the regular pay scale of Rs. 650-35-780/50-1680 plus other allowances as admissible from time to time under Sugar Wage Board.
6.
That in respect of other matters you will be governed by the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961/Rules framed thereunder and the Punjab Cooperative Sugar Mills Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1981 and such other rules of the mills as are/may be enforced and as amended from time to time."
4.
It was in the year 1988, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar introduced a new course of MSc (Sugar Technology).
The grade of Manufacturing Chemist stood revised to Rs. 800-1700 with effect from 611988.
The rules were subsequently amended and the amended rules were circulated to the Sugar Mills vide communication dated 28/29-1-1999.
The qualification for the post of Trainee Manufacturing Chemist as mentioned in Annexure-I, have been re-defined :-  "A Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering or Technology.
Chemistry or Technology or Degree in Science.
Degree in Science (Mathematics, Physics & Chemistry) with not less than 50% marks in the aggregate.
Note No. (iii) is also appended thereto whereby it has been made condition precedent that a Trainee Manufacturing Chemist shall have to obtain admission to the course in Sugar Technology at the National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or the Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar during the first year of training and to complete the course satisfactorily during the period of training, failing which their services shall stand terminated."
5.
It shall be apposite to notice the qualifications prescribed for trainee Manufacturing Chemist under the old rules and also under the amended rules which read as under :  Old Rule 14.
Trainee Manufacturing Chemist., (Training Scheme) Three in each Mill.
i) For BE/BSc.
(Chemical Engg.)
stipend of Rs. 1200/- P.M. consolidated.
b) For BSc Rs. 800/- PA consolidated.
Graduate in Chemical Engineering from a recognised University OR Science Graduate in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics from a recognised University  ii) Bonus, Production incentive as per rule or Rs. 200/- P.M. as compensatory allowance in lieu of bonus incentive where no such facilities exist.
Duration of training : 2 years in the first instance extendable to further one year.
Every trainee shall have to execute a bond for serving Pb.
Coop.
Sugar Mills atleast 3 years after the successful completion of the training.
iii) Bachelor Accommodation if available in the mills or Rs. 150/- PM HRA.
New Rule 17.
Trainee Manufacturing Chemist (Three) Stipend of Rs. 1800/2000 per month in the first/second and third years Bachelor's Degree is Chemical Engineering or Technology.
Stipend of Rs. 1200/1500 per month in the first/second and third years.
Graduate in Science (Mathematics, Physics Chemistry) with not less than 50% marks in the aggregate.
Bonus/production incentive as per rules or Rs. 250/- per month as compensatory allowance in lieu of bonus/incentive in the new sugar mills.
NOTE : (i) Duration of training in all the above cases shall not be less than 1 year/2 years in the case of Engineering and Technology graduates/Graduates in Science and not more than 3 years in any case.
(ii) Every trainee shall have to execute a bond to continue in the service of the Punjab State Federation of Cooperative Sugar Mills Limited for a minimum period of 3 years after successful completion of training.
(iii) Graduates in Science appointed as trainee Manufacturing Chemist shall have too obtain admission to the course in Sugar Technology at the National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or the Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar during the first year of training and to complete the course satisfactorily during the period of training, failing which their services shall stand terminated.
So far as qualifications for Manufacturing Chemists are concerned, they were also re-defined, which read as under :  Old Rule "11. a) Manufacturing chemist (Four) 800-40-1200/50-Chemist (Four) 1400/60- 1700 DA as per Pb.
Govt. pattern.
a) As per Wage Board.
For Promotion:,b) Pan incharge or equivalent post with sugar boiling course having 5 years service in the Punjab Coop.
Sugar Mills."
New Rule "13.
Manufacturing Chemist (Four) 800-40-1200/50) 1400/60-1700 Degree is Science (Mathematics, Physics & Chemistry with not less than 50% marks in the aggregate and Associate Membership of the National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or equivalent qualification from the Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
One year's apprenticeship in a sugar factory."
6.
The petitioners had successfully completed their training in the year 1990 and vide letter dated 10/2551991, their services were regularised with retrospective effect.
However, while passing this order, a new condition was imposed upon the petitioners to the effect that the petitioners shall be entitled to the revised scale of Rs. 800-1700 only after successfully completed course of MSc in Sugar Technology from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, copy of the letter has been appended as Annexure P.8.
Another fact which needs to be noticed is that a similarly situated selected candidate namely, Harish Grover, who is shown to be at serial No. 23 in the select list was appointed subsequently and till then, the pay scale of Manufacturing Chemist stood revised, resultantly in the letter of appointment issued to him on 1411988, it has been clearly mentioned that on successful completion of the training he shall be appointed as Manufacturing Chemist in the Regular Pay Scale of Rs. 800-40-1200/50-1400/60-1700 plus other allowances etc.  7.
The petitioners were aggrieved of the conditions so imposed therefore, made a representation to the official respondents, representing that such condition could not have been imposed upon petitioners and the service conditions cannot be changed retrospectively and the rules so amended cannot be applied retrospectively.
The representations submitted by the petitioners were rejected by the Managing Director, SUGAREFED.
The said decision was challenged by way of petition filed under Section 69 read with Rule 28 and Rule 45 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 and the rules framed thereunder.
The petition was dismissed vide order dated 1971994.
Copies of the orders of rejection of representation and the rejection of the petition have been annexed as Annexure P-12 (in one case) and Annexure P-14.
8.
Aggrieved of the aforesaid orders, the present petition has been filed and the aforesaid impugned orders have been made the subject matter of challenge.
9.
On the other hand, the stand of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents and a written statement has been filed by the respondent No. 3, ie, Sugarfed.
The stand is that the petitioners were given an option to acquire qualification of MSc in Sugar Technology so as to absorb them in the cadre post on completion of their training but they have failed to acquire the qualification prescribed under the rules and therefore are not entitled to claim parity with the persons who had acquired qualifications and have been granted the said revised pay scale.
10.
Further the stand is that in view of the disturbed conditions in the State of Punjab, when no body was willing to join the Cooperative Sugar Mills in the State of Punjab, a scheme had been promulgated and the grade for the Trainee Manufacturing Chemist was promulgated thereunder.
The plea is that the qualifications prescribed for the cadre post under the rules are applicable, as such, the petitioners were given an opportunity to pass/acquire the qualification but they have failed to do so.
However, keeping in view the promise made to the petitioners under the Scheme, their services were regularised in the grade mentioned in the scheme and further the option has been given to them to seek the grade of Rs. 800-1700 upon acquisition of the qualification meant for the cadre post.
So far as the case of Harish Grover is concerned, the plea is that he was appointed after the amendment of the rules and resultantly he passed first year examination in MSc in Sugar Technology in December 1991 and the second year in May, 1993, resultantly, became entitled to the grade of Rs. 800-1700.
Thus, his case is not comparable with the petitioners, as the petitioners still have not acquired the qualification for earning the aforesaid scale.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the service conditions of the petitioners could not have been revised by way of amending the rules subsequently and with an effort to apply them retrospectively.
The comparable perusal of the rules shows that the qualifications for the Training Manufacturing Chemist and the Manufacturing Chemist stood revised and under the new rules, the note has been added which clearly shows that it could be applied prospectively and not retrospectively.
It is the condition that during the first year of training, the trainee is required to obtain admission to the course in Sugar Technology in the Institution referred to in the Note.
It has been categorically provided that if they fail to obtain admission in the said course, their services shall stand terminated.
The petitioners were in the process of completing training in the first year and no requirement was provided in the rules or in the letter of appointment that they shall be required to get admission in the aforesaid institution and that failing which their services were to be terminated.
12.
It is further argued that it is the settled law that the service conditions cannot be changed retrospectively, if the amendment is carried out subsequent to the appointment.
The admitted case is that the petitioners had been appointed and had joined as Trainee Manufacturing Chemist much before the amendment which was brought forth in the rules.
It is specifically stated in the letter of appointment that upon successful completion of training, they shall be entitled to appointment as Manufacturing Chemist in the scale which was applicable at that time.
It is provided nowhere in the rules that upon acquisition of a qualification, such as MSc in Sugar Technology, such appointee shall be entitled to a higher pay scale.
13.
It has been further argued that the two pay scales cannot be made applicable to one post.
The principle of equal pay for equal work has to be made applicable.
It is nowhere the case of the respondents that higher scale is being paid on account of higher qualifications.
To the contrary, the case has been set up that higher scale has been provided on account of higher qualification, but from perusal of the rules, no such case is maintainable.
The higher qualification has been provided under the new rules which admittedly cannot be made applicable retrospectively.
Those persons who were equally appointed alongwith the petitioners even if they acquired higher qualification, which is not statutorily required under the rules to be obtained, such persons cannot be placed in higher scales while being on the same post performing similar duties.
14.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgments rendered by the Apex Court and also by this Court which are noticed as under :-  i) Ex.Capt.
KC Arora and another v. State of haryana and others, 1984(2) SLR 97 and in paras 15, 22 and 23, the apex Court held as under : "15.
It may be pointed out at the very outset that the Parliament as also the State Legislature have plenary powers to legislate within the field of legislation committed to them and subject to certain constitutional restrictions they can legislate prospectively as well as retrospectively.
It is, however, a cardinal principle of construction that every statute is prima facie prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication made to have retrospective effect.
But the rule in general is applicable where the subject of the statute is to effect the vested rights or to impose new burden or to impair existing obligations.
Unless there are words in the statute sufficient to show that intention of the legislature to effect existing rights, it is deemed to be prospective only.
Provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of the statute are not to be applied retrospectively in the absence of express enactment or necessary intendment.
The Governor can also exercise the same powers under Art. 309 of the Constitution and there is not the slightest doubt that the impugned amendment brought in has been made retrospective.
The impugned amendment in the instant case by necessary implication have undoubtedly a retrospective effect.
22.
The question, however, has been pointedly considered recently by a Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Gujarat v. Raman Lal Keshra Lal Soni (7).
In that case the Gujarat Panchayats Service was initially constituted soon after the passing of the Gujarat Panchayats Act.
There were three cadres: the district cadre, the taluqa cadre and the local cadre.
Secretaries, Officers and servants of the old village Panchayats under the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 became secretaries, officers and servants of the new gram panchayats under S. 325(2)(x) of the Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961.
Talatis and Kotwals, who were government servants were secretaries and officers of the old village Panchayats under the Bombay Village Panchayats Act and so they became Secretaries and Officers of the new Gram Panchayats under the Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961.
Some municipalities constituted for municipal districts and municipal boroughs under the Bombay District Municipal Act and the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, as applied to areas in the State of Gujarat, were converted into Gram and Nagar Panchayats under Section 307 of the Gujarat Panchayats Act and all officers and servants in the employ of such municipalities became officers and servants of interim Panchayats and allocated to the Panchayat service.
Thus, secretaries and officers of dissolved municipalities also became secretaries and officers of Gram and Nagar Panchayats.
District Local Boards constituted under the Bombay Local Boards Act stood dissolved on the passing of the Gujarat Panchayats Act and all officers and servants in the employment of the Board were deemed to be transferred to the service of the successor District Panchayat under Section 326 of the Gujarat Panchayats Act.
Also allocated to the panchayat service were those government servants who are transferred to the panchayat under Section 157 and such other officers and servants employed in the state service as were necessary.
All these secretaries, officers and servants became members of a service under the State as soon as they were allocated to the panchayat service.
But by the Amending Act, secretaries, officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats, who were allocated to the Panchayat service from the ranks of the ex-municipal employees were sought to be meted out differential treatment from the other members of the Panchayat service, more particularly the secretaries, officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats who were drawn from the ranks of secretaries, officers and servants of old village Panchayats, that is the Talatis and Kotwals.
Their status as members of a service under the State was to go with no option to them.
Retrospectivety was sought to be given to the Amending Act so that they could not claim that they were ever government servants and so could not be made to cease to be government servants and so that they could not claim that they were singled out for differential treatment, for, if they were never in the Panchayat service, they could not complain of being taken out of the panchayat service.
Brother O Chinnappa Reddy speaking for the Court emphatically observed :- "Now, in 1978 before the Amending Act was passed, thanks to the provisions of the principal Act of 1961, the ex-municipal employees who had been allocated to the panchayat service as Secretaries, Officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats, had achieved the status of government servants.
Their status as government servants could not be extinguished, so long as the posts were not abolished and their services were not terminated in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Nor was it permissible to single them out for differential treatment.
That would offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
An attempt was made to justify the purported differentiation on the basis of history and ancestry, as it were.
It was said that Talatis and Kotwals who became secretaries, officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats were government servants, even to start with, while municipal employees who became such secretaries, officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats, were not.
Each carried the mark of the `brand' of his origin and a classification on the basis of the source from which they came into the service, it was claimed, was permissible.
We are clear that it is not.
Once they had joined the common stream of service to perform the same duties, it is clearly not permissible to make any classification on the basis of their origin.
Such a classification would be unreasonable and entirely irrelevant to the object sought to be achieved.
It is to navigate around these two obstacles of Article 311 and Article 14 that the Amending Act is sought to be made retrospective, to bring about an artificial situation as if the erstwhile municipal employees never became members of a service under this State.
Can a law be made to destroy today's accrued constitutional rights by artificially reverting to a situation which existed 17 years ago ?
No.
The legislation is pure and simple, self-deceptive, if we may use such an expression with reference to a legislature made law.
The legislature is undoubtedly competent to legislate with retrospective effect to take away or impair any vested right acquired under existing laws but since the laws are made under a written Constitution, and have to conform to the dos and don'ts of the Constitution, neither prospective nor retrospective laws can be made so as to contravene fundamental rights.
The law must satisfy the requirements of the Constitution today taken into account the accrued or acquired rights of the parties today.
The law cannot say, 20 years ago the parties had no rights, therefore, the requirements of the Constitution will be satisfied if the law is dated back by 20 years.
We are concerned with today's rights and not yesterday's.
A legislature cannot legislate today with reference to a situation that obtained 20 years ago and ignore the march of events and the constitutional rights accrued in the course of the 20 years.
That would be most arbitrary unreasonable and a negation of history..........Today's equals cannot be made unequal by saying that they were unequal 20 years ago and we will restore that position by making a law today and making it retrospective.
Constitutional rights, constitutional obligations and constitutional consequences cannot be tampered with that way.
A law which if made today would be plainly invalid as offending constitutional provisions in the context of the existing situation cannot become valid by being made retrospective.
Past virtue (constitutional) cannot be made to wipe out present vice (constitutional) by making retrospective laws.
We are, therefore, firmly of the view that the Gujarat Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 1978 is unconstitutional, as it offends Article 311 and 14 and is arbitrary and unreasonable."
23.
In view of this latest pronouncement by the Constitution Bench of this Court, the law appears to be well settled and the Haryana Government cannot take away the accrued rights of the petitioners and the appellants by making amendment of the rules with retrospective effect."
ii) Bhagwan Das and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 2049.
In Head Note B of this judgment it is held as under : "Once the nature and functions and the work of two persons are not shown to be dissimilar the fact that the recruitment was made in one way or the other would hardly be relevant from the point of view of "equal pay for equal work" doctrine.
Thus, where the supervisors in Education Department who are temporary Govt. servants selected from the cluster of a few villages only and the supervisors who are selected by the Subordinate Service Board after competing with candidates from any part of the country and absorbed as regular Govt. servants perform similar kind of work, the temporary supervisors cannot be discriminated against in regard to pay scales.
Whether equal work is put in by a candidate, selected by a process whereat candidates from all parts of the country could have competed or whether they are selected by a process where candidates from only a cluster of a few villages could have compared is altogether irrelevant and immaterial, for the purposes of the applicability of "equal work for equal pay" doctrine."
Similarly, in BL Bansal v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCT 1, their Lordships of the apex Court in paras 15, 17 and 18 held as under :  "15.
It has not been disputed before us that the seniority is a term of the conditions of service of a civil servant and cannot be altered to his disadvantage without adopting due course of law.
The Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shardul Singh, 1970(3) SCR 302 and IN Subba Reddy v. Andhra University, 1976(3) SC 1013 held that the expression," condition of Service" means all those conditions which regulate the holding of post by a person right from the time of his appointment till his retirement and even beyond it, in the matters like pension etc. 17.
It is also established position of law that the Government has no power to alter or modify the conditions of service with retrospective effect to the prejudice of the Government servant.
In NC Singhal's case (supra), it was held that, conditions of service were not liable to be altered or modified to the prejudice of the appellant therein by a subsequent administrative instruction which was sought to be given retrospective effect.
18.
In Ex. Capt KC Arora v. State of Haryana, 1984(2) SLR 97, the Supreme Court held :- "It may be pointed out at the very outset that the Parliament as also the State Legislature have plenary powers to legislate within the field of legislation committed to them and subject to certain constitutional restrictions they can legislate prospectively as well as retrospectively.
It is, however, a cardinal principle of construction that every statute is prima facie prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication made to have retrospective effect.
But the rule in general is applicable where the object of the statute is to effect the vested rights or to impose new burden or to impair existing obligations.
Unless there are words in the statute sufficient to show that intention of the legislature to effect existing rights, it is deemed to be prospective only.
Provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of the statute are not to be applied retrospectively in the absence of express enactment or necessary intendment............. After referring to the judgments delivered in State of Gujarat v. Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni, (1983) SCC 33 and BS Vadera v. Union of India, (1968) 3 SCR 575, it was held by the Supreme Court that "the law appears to be well settled that the wrongs cannot take away the accrued right of the petitioners and the appellants by making amendment in the rules with retrospective effect."
15.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the service conditions of the petitioners have not been changed at all, the qualifications prescribed for Trainee Manufacturing Chemist have remained the same and so also that of Manufacturing Chemist.
It is argued that the condition of acquisition of qualifications of Associate Member of National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or Associate Member of Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or MSc in Sugar Technology was off set in view of the scheme promulgated by the Administrative Committee of Sugarfed but this would not mean that the petitioners were not required to acquire the said qualification for all times to come.
Condition has been correctly imposed at the time of regularisation of service and placing the petitioners in the higher pay scale.
The employer is well within its rights to impose such a condition at the time of regularisation of the service of its employee and additionally as per the note, the services of the petitioners have not been terminated but they have been allowed to retain the pay scale meant for the Manufacturing Chemist without acquisition of the aforesaid qualification.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon a judgment of the apex Court in re : National Federation of State NFC (Physical Education) Teachers' Associations & Ors. v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 196 (SC) : JT 1992 (Suppl.)
SC 674 and in the headnote it is described as under :  "Equal pay for Equal Work.
Equal pay for equal work - Junior grade NDS instructors claiming parity of pay scale with the Physical Education Teachers of Secondary Schools where they were doing the duties-Plea rejected on the ground of difference in educational qualifications, responsibilities and nature of work - Petition dismissed."
I am afraid the authority cited by learned counsel for the respondents is not at all applicable as the point at issue before the apex Court was entirely different than the point at issue involved in the present case.
16.
I have heard rival contentions of learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the considered opinion that the counsel for the petitioners has successfully established his case that the conditions which have been waived of, cannot be made a condition precedent for regularisation and placing the petitioner in the scales meant for the posts in which the regularisation is being granted.
It is the admitted case that the Administrative Committee of Sugarfed had resolved to off set the qualifications of Associate Members of National Sugar Institute, Kanpur and Associate Membership of Deccan Sugar Institute, Pune or MSc.
in Sugar Technology.
It is specifically mentioned in letter of appointment that upon successful completion of training including the extension period of one year, they shall be appointed as Manufacturing Chemists in the pay scale which were applicable at that time and the said appointment was also made subject to the rules amended from time to time.
Thus any revision of pay scale which took place or which was made applicable in the rules was to be made available to the petitioners.
I am afraid, learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to make out a case that the higher pay scale/revised pay scale was to be given only to those persons who have acquired the higher qualification as prescribed under the rules.
A perusal of the note added in the amended rules shows that the Trainee Manufacturing Chemists would be thrown out of the job if they failed to obtain admission in the Msc Course or the course equivalent thereto in the first year of the training.
It is nowhere provided in the rule that a trainee who had completed the first year shall also be required to obtain admission accordingly.
It is obvious that by virtue of this note, the condition was to be made applicable to the fresh appointees as Trainee Manufacturing Chemist.
The plain reading of the amended rule itself shows that possibly it could not have been made applicable to the appointees who were appointed in the year 1987 and their training had commenced much prior to the imposition of conditions as contained under Note III of the amended rules.
The effort to impose the condition retrospectively has been unsuccessfully made.
17.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to show that the framers of the rule have provided any where specifically the application of the amended rules retrospectively, as such, by ipso dixit such effect cannot be read into the said rules.
A right which has been conferred, and or acquired by virtue of an instruction or rule or by way of granting a concession, the same cannot be withdrawn to the prejudice of an employee.
The rights protected under the iron umbrella (Constitution) cannot be allowed to be pierced by the sharp or blunt nails through the back door entry.
18.
In view of the aforesaid discussion and the observations, petition is allowed and the condition imposed for obtainment of the qualification of MSc in Sugar Technology by the petitioners from the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar imposed vide such like orders (Copy Annexure P-8) are quashed and such like orders dated 22111993 and 1971994 (Copy Annexure P-12 and P-14) are also quashed.
The respondents are directed to grant the scale of Rs. 800-1700 (unrevised) and also if the said grade has been revised subsequently to the petitioners.
The petitioners be placed in the said revised grade accordingly with the resultant effect that they shall be entitled to the arrears accordingly.
The respondents are also directed to carry out the aforesaid directions within three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this judgment.
No costs.
Petition allowed.