Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners who are working as Senior Architects in the State of Punjab pray in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for quashing of an order dated 2742001 vide which Shri PR Luthra, Chief Architect, Punjab, was permitted to continue in service.
They further pray that the respondent-State of Punjab be directed to consider the cases of the petitioners along with other senior eligible officers in the Department of Architecture, Punjab, for appointment to the posts of Chief Architect/Additional Chief Architect.
At the very out-set it will be appropriate to refer to the impugned order dated 2742001 as under :-  Government of Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads-I Branch) Order Sh. PR Luthra, Chief Architect, Punjab, Architecture Department, who is going to retire on 3042001 (AN), is allowed to continue in service till the meeting of the Cabinet.
2.
This order is issued in view of approval given by personnel Department (PP-1 Branch) Punjab, vide internal Department Letter No. 16/3/2000-4PP1/, dated 2642001.
Dated Chandigarh 27th April, 2001.,  Mohinder Singh, Secretary, Punjab Government  Public Works Department, (B&M)" 2.
According to the respondents, the above order had merged into the order of re-employment dated 2962001, Annexure R-1 to the reply of the respondents, which reads as under :-  Government of Punjab Department of Public Works  (Building 7 Roads-I BR.)
Order The Governor of Punjab is pleased to re-employ Sh. PR Luthra, Chief Architect (Retd.
), Architecture Department, Punjab after his retirement on 3042001, for one year from 152001 to 3042002 on the following conditions :-  1.
Sh. PR Luthra, Chief Architect, Punjab after his retirement on 3042001 (AN) is re-employed for a period of one year with effect from 152001 to 3042002.
2.
During the period of re-employment, Sh. PR Luthra will draw the same pay which he was drawing the last pay which were admissible to him prior to his retirement, he will be entitled to the same facilities during the period of re-employment.
3.
During the period of re-employment, the services of Sh. PR Luthra will be governed under the Punjab Civil Services Rules and the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
4.
Sh. PR Luthra will be required to give one month's notice, if he wants to quit the services during the re-employment period Government will also give one months notice to him to terminate his services.
2.
The orders issued with the concurrence of the Personnel Department and Finance Department conveyed vide their ID No. 16/3/2000-4ppl/dated 232001 and ID No. 2(6)7/2001-2FF4/2303, dated 1642001 respectively.
Dated, Chandigarh the 29th June, 2001.
Mohinder Singh Secretary to Govt. Punjab, Deptt.
of Public Works (B&R).
3.
Before we notice the grounds of challenge to the above orders, it will be appropriate to refer the facts giving rise to this petition.
According to the petitioners, they are working as Senior Architects in the State of Punjab, while respondent No. 3 Amrit Gupta is working as Additional Chief Architect in the State.
They have a good service record.
Under the promotion rules, the post of chief Architect is to be filled up by promotion alone, the criteria for which is seniority-cum-merit.
The respondent-State has firstly granted continuity in service beyond the age of superannuation to respondent No. 2 Mr. PR Luthra and thereafter the Government has taken a decision to re-employ him for a period of one year.
The decision of the Government is stated to be contrary to rules and instructions issued by the Government itself.
The respondent No. 2 had to superannuate on 3042001, but on 2742001 the order of continuation in service beyond superannuation was issued.
The petitioner and other eligible candidates are to retire between the period of 30112001 to 3132003.
All of them were/are eligible for being promoted to the post of Chief Architect in accordance with the rules.
The extension/re-employment of respondent No. 2 has marred the chances of their promotion and even for consideration of promotion to the post of Chief Architect Thus, the appointment of respondent No. 3 is contrary to the Rules, violative of the conditions of service of the petitioners and is not even in public interest.
According to the petitioners the conditions precedent to re-employment as prescribed under the Rules and instructions issued by the Government itself have not been satisfied.
As such the said appointment is liable to be quashed.
4.
Upon notice, the respondent-State filed the reply.
According to the State, the appointment of respondent No. 3 has been made in accordance with Rule 717 of the Rules and the instructions issued by the Government.
The facts averred by the petitioners are hardly in dispute but it is stated that the re-employment of respondent No. 2 is in the public interest as he had been incharge of various prestigious projects i.e. multi-storeyed projects for about 5 years and his continuation in service was considered to be in the interest of Government and public as well.
The re-employment was ordered in consultation with Finance Department and Department of Personnel, of the State of Punjab.
It was stated that there was no arbitrariness in the order passed by the Government in regard to re-employment of respondent No. 3.
The Government has exercised the power vested in it.
However, it was admitted that the State had not considered cases of any other eligible person including that of Additional Chief Architect for promotion to the post of Chief Architect.
5.
Though it was neither specifically pleaded in the written statement nor any details in that behalf were given, yet learned counsel appearing for the State contended on the basis of the record that the move for re-employment of respondent No. 2 started in January, 2001 and concerned Minister had granted his approval in accordance with the rules.
The Department of Personnel was consulted on 3112001.
The Department of Finance was consulted on 1642001.
The Chief Minister passed an order on 2642001 while the cabinet approved this proposal on 24.5.2001 and then the order of re-employment, Annexure R/1, was issued on 2962001.
According to the State, Annexure P/3 dated 2742001 was a mere continuation and has been issued by the competent authority.
Thus, there is no question of any arbitrariness in appointing respondent No. 2 as his services were needed by the State.
6.
The respondent No. 2 filed independent written statement where the stand taken by the Government was re-iterated with emphasis on the power of the Government to pass the impugned orders on the strength of Rules 326 and 717.
It was also stated that the order granting re-employment of respondent No. 2 was not specifically challenged, as such the petitioners could not succeed in the writ petition.
7.
The petitioners filed replication to the written statement filed by the State where the facts averred in the petition were reiterated and it was stated that the respondent No. 3 had not done any extra ordinary commendable work which would justify passing of the impugned orders of his re-employment.
It has been specifically stated that the petitioners and other senior officers were equally involved, if not better than respondent No. 2, in all the similar projects and even letter of appreciation was issued to them by the respondents in relation to the works, copy whereof has been placed on record as Annexure P/6.
8.
On the afore-mentioned factual premises the petitioners raise three-fold challenge to the impugned orders afore-noticed :-  i) The orders of retention in service and re-employment in Government service in favour of respondent No. 2 are contrary and in fact offend the rules and the instructions issued by the Government in that behalf.
The appointment is totally arbitrary and violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
ii) No effort was made by the State to consider other available eligible persons for promotion to the post of Chief Architect, at the relevant time, as postulated under the instructions dated 1721967. iii) The work contributed by the respondent No. 2 was in no way of such extra ordinary nature and content that could justify his re-employment at the cost of marring the service career of various senior Architects and even the Additional Chief Architect.
9.
In order to appreciate the merits of these contentions, reference to the rules would be necessary.
Under the Punjab Architect (Class-I) Service Rules, 1999, there is no provision for granting extension/re-employment or even continuance of an employee upon superannuation.
However, under Rule 7 of these Rules, the Punjab Civil Services (General and Common Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994, hereinafter referred to as the Rules, are to govern the matters which are not specifically provided under the rules relating to Architect Department.
Rule 326 of the Public Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I and Rule 717 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, are the Rules which have been relied upon by the parties in addition to the instructions, copy where-of has been annexed by the respondents as Annexure R/2.
Rules 326 and 717 read as under :-  "326 (a).
Except as provided in other clauses of this rule, the date of retirement of a Government employee other than a Class IV Government employee, is the date of which he attains the age of 58 years (For premature retirement see Premature Retirement Rules, 1975).
He must not be retained in Service after the age of retirement, except in exceptional circumstances with the sanction of competent authority on public grounds, which must be recorded in writing."
"717.
A government employee who is in receipt of a superannuation or retiring pension shall not be re-employed or continue to be employed in service paid from the government revenues or from a Local Fund, except on public grounds and in a purely temporary capacity with the sanction of the competent authority."
10.
The bare reading of the above Rules clearly show that the State Government is vested with the power of retention in service beyond 58 years as well as for re-employing a person.
The concept of retention and re-employment would operate in different fields.
Where retention in service could be of an employee in service, there the re-employment has to be of a person who has retired upon superannuation.
That is how Rule 717 mentions of a Government employee who is in receipt of a superannuation or retiring pension, is eligible to be considered for re-employment.
In contrast thereto Rule 326 mentions about retention.
Both the rules are worded as negative covenants i.e. the rules which prohibit re-employment or retention of a Government employee beyond 58 years except for the exception carved out therein.
This exception can be resorted to by the Government only in exceptional circumstances and in public interest/public ground, that too for a short term.
11.
It is a settled rule of interpretation that the rules containing negative language must be construed strictly as a liberal interpretation of such rules may lead to frustration of the very object sought to be achieved under such rules.
The Government, therefore, must be confronted with the situation where, exceptional circumstances exist and the competent authority considered it in public interest to retain or re-employ a government employee.
Existence of such a situation necessarily has to be a matter of fact and not one that of inference.
The record must speak for itself in this behalf.
The reasons or grounds for arriving at such a conclusion must be apparent on the face of the records.
12.
Every government decision which affects the rights of its employees should normally be a decision arrived at by due process of thinking and reasoning, and decision taken there-upon should be in conformity with the law or rules regulating such condition of service of the employees.
To avoid rigours of a rule worded negatively, greater burden is casted upon the State to take a conscious and reasoned decision and that too in the larger public interest.
A decision offending the above principles would be open to judicial review or scrutiny.
13.
The importance of the above ingredients inbuilt in the said rules was accepted by the State intentionally while it issued the instructions/circular letter No. 727-SII(4)-67/4841, dated 1721967 providing definite guide-lines for re-employment/extension in service to the Government employees or after their attaining the age of superannuation.
This attempt on the part of the State was to clearly declare the policy of the Government in regard to extension/re-employment of Government employees and to put the matter beyond disarray.
The instructions intended to spell out the spirit and ingredients of the above two rules in certain terms.
The guide-lines deal and provide with various considerations which has to be taken note of by the authorities and must weigh with them at the time of granting extension/re-employment to a Government employee.
It will be appropriate to refer and re-produce the relevant extracts of the said instructions as under :-  "3.
The following conditions must be fulfilled before the competent authority sanctions re-employment to a Government employee on or after his attaining the age of superannuation :- i) No employee shall be offered re-employment beyond the date of his superannuation except when it is clearly on overriding grounds of public interest and where it is evident that other employees is service are not ripe enough to take up the appointment.
However, exceptional the calibre of the retiring employee may be and however, meritorious his services, these by themselves shall not constitute sufficient grounds for offering him re- employment.
Re-employment shall not, therefore, be considered a reward for outstanding merit.
ii) When the post on which the retiring employee is proposed to be re- employed is one to which recruitment is to be made through the Punjab Public Service Commission, a non-availability certificate to the effect that persons with suitable qualifications and experience are not available in the open market or that it has not been possible for the Commission to arrange a substitute with the requisite qualifications and/or experience should be obtained from the Commission.
With a view to ensuring that bona fide efforts are made to find a suitable substitute for the person due to retire, the Commission shall be approached at least four months before the vacancy is scheduled to occur."
xx xx xx viii) No particular employee shall be singled out for preferential treatment in the matter of re-employment.
When a Department is facing a shortage of experienced hands and there is no alternative but to resort to re-employment, every one who attains the age of superannuation, except those who are physically or mentally unfit or possess a bad service record, shall be considered for re-employment.
A policy of `pick and choose' shall be avoided."
"4.
The competent authority, before sanctioning re-employment in a particular case shall satisfy itself about the fulfilment of the conditions mentioned in the foregoing paragraph and shall also record a certificate to this effect in the order of sanction.
The reasons for resorting to re- employment shall also be reduced to writing as required by rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I."
14.
The cumulative effect of the above provisions and instructions issued by the Government, in furtherance thereto, is that :-  i) No Government employee can be retained upon his attaining the age of 58 years (except Class-IV employees) and no Government employee can be re- employed unless - a) Exceptional circumstances exist and it is in public interest/public grounds that such employee is retained, continued or re- employed in Government service.
b) The Government must take such decision in accordance with and upon following the procedure prescribed in the Government instructions.
15.
It is a settled principle of law that the act must be done in the prescribed manner and no other way.
The conditions of a rule and prescribed procedure must be satisfied and there must be application of mind.
Reference in that regard can be made to the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Singhara Singh and others, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 358; Hukam Chand Shyam Lal v. Union of India and others, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 789 and Chandra Kishore Jha v Mahavir Prasad and others, JR 1999(7) SC 256.
16.
Now we proceed to discuss the facts of the present case in the light of the settled law as afore-noticed.
We have already noticed that facts of the present case are hardly in dispute.
It is also not disputed that under the rules the post of Chief Architect is hundred percent a promotion post.
The feeding cadre to the same post is that of Additional Chief Architect, to which the Senior Architect is the feeding cadre in turn.
Respondent No. 3 at all relevant times and even of today is holding the post of Additional Chief Architect while the petitioners are holding the posts of Senior Architects in various wings of the Department of Architecture in the State of Punjab.
The post of Chief Architect being a promotional post, does give specific and definite right of legitimate expectancy to the petitioners and all other eligible candidates who are holding the posts in the respective feeding cadres.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that no Government employee has a right to be promoted, but still right for promotion is a condition of service though mere chances of promotion are not.
Reference in this regard can be made to the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of The State of Mysore and another (In both the appeals) v. Syed Mahmood and others, AIR 1968 Supreme Court 1113 and Mohammad Shujat Ali and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1631.
17.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents not much of reasons and circumstances have been stated which persuaded the State to pass the impugned orders granting re-employment to respondent No. 2.
It is stated that the service record of the said respondent was very good or outstanding.
He had participated in various projects carried out by the Department of Architecture in the State of Punjab.
He had made a serious contribution to the said department.
It was lastly stated that his presence in the department would help the administration to complete the ongoing projects effectively.
As such his re-employment was in public interest and in the interest of the department.
18.
These averments were refuted by the petitioners stating that their service record was also very good or outstanding.
They had sufficient period left for superannuation of their Government service and their contribution to the Department was equally good if not more than that of respondent No. 2.
It has been stated on record that in fact certificates of commendation were issued to the petitioners as well as other officers including the respondents for development of Anandpur Sahib etc.
The ongoing projects were stated to be progressing under the supervision of an Israeli Architect Mr. Moshe Saifoi and all the Senior Architects/Additional Chief Architect/Chief Architect had participated in different projects under the guidance of that Israeli Architect.
As such the contribution of the said respondent No. 2 was no way different or distinct than the other officers.
19.
From the pleadings of the parties and the records before us, the only ground for granting of extension appears to be that respondent No. 2 has a good service record and was incharge of various projects which were about to complete in a short period.
The petitioners have specifically pleaded that in Anandpur Sahib project, respondent No. 2 had not done any extra-ordinary work and the contribution of various other Architects was more or less similar to him.
20.
During the course of hearing learned counsel appearing for the State of Punjab had placed before the Court the analysis of the service record of various officers.
Service profile of respondent No. 2 Mr. Luthra, shows that his ACRs were good, very good and out-standing for different years.
Similarly, record of Mr. Amit Gupta - respondent No. 3 who is Additional Chief Architect, carries for different years entries of only good, very good and outstanding.
The service record of Mr. Sarabjit Singh Sandhu, an officer though not party to the present proceedings, was very good and outstanding right from 1981 to 2000-2001.
Service record of the petitioners also contain good and very good entries for the same period.
This service profile of the various eligible persons shows that none of them could be considered ineligible for promotion on the basis of the service record.
Specially, the candidates who have good and outstanding record including that of Mr. Amit Gupta, who is working as Additional Chief Architect, would be the persons entitled for due consideration in accordance with rules for promotion to the post in question.
The post being a promotional post, due consideration has to be given by the competent authority to the fact that there are other eligible candidates available who expect to be promoted to that post.
21.
In addition to existence of extra-ordinary circumstances, the re- employment could be only for public grounds.
The public grounds would be a term quite synonymous to the expression "public interest".
The State has to consider the need for re-employment in the larger interest of public as well as the department and its decision ought not to be sponsored by private or political interests.
The Government is obliged to balance the need for re- employment in public interest on the one hand and its obligation to consider the cases of other eligible candidates or their non-availability on the other.
This approach alone would be in accordance with the specific instructions issued by the Government itself.
The decision of the Government in re- employing a Government servant, thus, must stand to the acidic test of duel criteria afore referred.
22.
The Government is the final authority to take such a decision.
The decision is subjective but ought to be data based, bonafide and in public interest and as well in the interest of administration of service of the State.
The implied prohibition in the negatively languaged rules is indicative enough of the necessity on the part of the State not to resort to the provisions of re-employment.
Ordinarily the burden of showing the exceptional circumstances and public grounds is on the State and it must be so reflected from the record.
A Full Bench of this Court in the case of Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 423 (P&H)(FB) : 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments page 55 while construing the instructions of the Government in face of Rule 326 and examining the ambit of public interest held that it is only an exception that for reasons to be recorded and in exceptional circumstances that extension in service is to be allowed.
The phraseology used in Rule 326(d) is entirely different, though the element of public interest is prominent therein also.
23.
In the present case the sole ground for extension/re-employment of respondent No. 2 is that works are going on and are about to be completed, of which the respondent No. 2 was incharge as Chief Architect of the State.
This sole ground even seen in the light of the service profile of the said respondent could hardly be stated to be in larger public interest.
It cannot be said to be a public ground as elucidated in the rules and more particularly the instructions issued by the Government.
The respondent-State has admittedly not considered the cases of the eligible candidates.
The concerned authorities admittedly did not advert their attention to the question whether other eligible officers are available in the department or not.
In fact they granted extension/re-employment to respondent No. 2 on his mere asking.
This attitude of the State certainly tilts the balance of equality and administrative exigencies towards private/individual interest rather than public interest.
24.
In fact, the impugned orders are totally silent in regard to basic ingredients postulated under the terms and conditions of the Rules and the instructions.
The order of extension, which was issued even prior to the approval of the proposal by the Cabinet, as well as the order of re- employment, which was issued after approval on 2962001 i.e. nearly two months after the date on which the said respondent No. 2 ought to have been retired on superannuation, even remotely does not suggests much less uses the expression "public interest or public ground".
25.
Administrative orders of the present kind must serve a greater public interest.
It must be passed on public grounds.
The said expression is of wide magnitude and cannot have such a limited meaning that because merely a person is In-charge of few works, thus, he must continue till completion of those works.
There appears to be no justifiable nexus between the reasons recorded on the file and the object sought to be achieved under the rules and the instructions.
Shortly, we would proceed to discuss the manner in which extension/re-employment has been granted on the file produced before us, though the written statement is devoid of any such reasonable grounds.
26.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the State conceded that amongst other officers including the petitioners and respondent No. 3, there were other competent officers involved and directly handling all the works where respondent No. 2 was involved.
It is also not disputed that the officers satisfied the eligibility conditions for promotion to the post of Chief Architect.
In the light of the above, we find definite merit in the contention of the petitioners that the Government has specifically violated Clause 3(i) of its instructions dated 1721967.
27.
Normally, the power of the Government in this regard is absolute but is subject to the conditions and limitations provided in the rules or instructions.
Once the Government forms the opinion that it is in public interest to do so, then correctness of such opinion can normally be not challenged before the Courts.
However, if such decision is based on collateral grounds, is arbitrary, or offends the rules of instructions, it will be open for the Court to interfere in such matters.
In other words, bonafides of the State and compliance of its rules and instructions are the very foundations for the State to claim exclusion from judicial scrutiny.
Once the order is silent then the State must produce such record and show that order is bonafide, is in consonance with the instructions and is in public interest.
In this regard reference can be made to the cases of Union of India v. JN Sinha and another, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 40 and State of Madhya Pradesh and others v. Indra Sen Jain, 1998(1) SCT 143 (SC) : 1998(1) Recent Services Judgments 70.
28.
The State again has complete freedom to issue instructions or guide-lines for giving proper effect to the rules of the present kind.
But once it issues instructions and guide-lines, the State is duty bound to strictly adhere to such instructions.
It must substantially comply with such instructions if strict adherence thereto is not possible for unavoidable circumstances.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Chander Bhan Arya v. Secretary to Government, Haryana, 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 626, held as under :-  "There could hardly be any dispute to the legal proposition of law that a Government servant cannot as a matter of right claim continuity in service upon attaining the age of 55 years.
The Government has a discretion to take appropriate decision at this stage whether a government servant should be permitted to continue in service or should be retired prematurely in public interest.
But such decision must meet its ultimate object on permissible basis the object being public interest and basis being service record of the employee, considered in its right perspective in a just and fair manner so as to avoid arbitrariness or mala fide in its decision and ensuring as well that such action is not termed as a colourable exercise of power.
When government issues instructions then such instructions have to be treated as guide-lines for the competent authorities and which must be kept in mind and adhered to while taking such decisions.
Reference in this regard can be made to the judgment of Full Bench of this Court in the case of Daya Nand v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) SLR 57".
29.
Since the records were produced before the Court to justify the passing of the orders of extension/re-employment, which contain no reason or ground, not even reference to public grounds, we consider it appropriate to refer to the said record which further indicates element of arbitrariness in the action of the State.
On 1612001 the respondent No. 2 submitted the following note :-  "Very many prestigious buildings as shown in Annexure `A' are being designed and detailed by my department under my control as Chief Architect to the great satisfaction of the Government.
I am due to retire on 3042001.
In the interest of the continuity of these prestigious projects and the style of architecture which I am following i.e.
Traditional Punjab Architecture, I will have no objection if I am asked to continue for another year as Chief Architect.
Sd/- (PR Luthra)  Chief Architect Punjab,  Dept of Architecture, Punjab."
30.
On this note, matter was put up to the concerned Minister on 2512001.
It is stated on the file that the Department of Personnel and Finance were consulted and on 2042001 the concerned Minister, in turn, sent the file to the Chief Minister, who ordered on 2442001 that matter be placed before the Cabinet and the respondent No. 2 be continued in service till that date.
In furtherance thereto, the order of extension was issued on 2742001 and after meeting of the Cabinet, order of re-employment dated 2962001 was issued.
31.
There is no doubt that concerned departments have been consulted and the competent authority had passed the order for continuation/re-employment of the respondent No. 2.
The material question is whether any of these records indicate application of mind by the competent authority in regard to public grounds, exceptional circumstances and need for re-employment of the said officer in the face of the instructions.
We must notice that the record produced before us is neither data based nor is it satisfying any of the above ingredients.
In fact it appears that extension and re-employment has been granted on the mere asking of the said respondent whose own note is devoid of any substance and merit.
(emphasis applied by us)  32.
Learned counsel for the petitioners further contended that service record of the respondent No. 2 was not outstanding inasmuch as he was denied promotion in the earlier years of his service because a criminal case was pending against him.
This was not disputed by learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2, but it was stated that the denial of promotion related to the year 1977 which has practically become ineffective for all purpose and intents as of today.
In the facts of the case, we would merely note this fact as we do not find the need to discuss this matter in any further elaboration of this submission.
33.
Another limb of the submissions made on behalf of the petitioners which deserves consideration with some emphasis on its concepts is in regard to the apparent consequences resulting from the action of the State in violating Clause 3(i) of the instructions under reference.
Once eligible candidates were available, who also had a good/outstanding record, it was obligatory on the part of the State to consider this aspect in relation to their to the post of Chief Architect.
As already noticed, the rule specifically prohibits re- employment except for the conditions stated therein.
In addition thereto, the Government has worded the instructions negatively.
On the plain reading of the instructions it is clear that the Government must satisfy itself that other employees in service are not ripe enough to take up the appointment.
The exceptional calibre and meritorious service record of the retiring employee would not be sufficient to give him as according to the Government instructions itself, re-employment shall not, therefore, be considered a reward for outstanding merit.
The other employees have a reasonable expectancy on the strength of their conditions of service, who hope that they would be promoted as Chief Architect/Additional Chief Architect in due course of service, on their turn.
The principle of seniority-cum-merit being the basis for promotion, it is very difficult for this Court to hold that this aspect of the matter did not deserve consideration or not even mentioning by the competent authority.
Arbitrariness in State action is to be adjudged on the basis of the record and attendant circumstances.
No administrative exigencies and need of the Government has been stated on the record which compelled the State to take decision for re-employment of respondent No. 2 on public grounds.
34.
At this stage we may make a reference to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of PC Dogra v. Sarabjit Singh and others, CWP No. 1488 of 1999, decided on 1621999, where the Division Bench was considering somewhat similar rules and conditions and held as under :-  "In view of this, communication dated 1131998 was sent by the Central Government to the State Government.
It was expected of the State Government to undertake an exercise to identify a suitable officer who could take over from the petitioner.
For this purpose, more than six months time was available to it.
However, what to say of doing such exercise by evaluating the record of eligible officers, the State Government did not even bother to make an attempt in this direction.
In the letter dated 12.5.1998 written by the Chief Minister to the Union Home Minister no indication of such exercise was given.
The Union Home Secretary too, in his second note dated 2661998, did not consider the record of senior officers like respondent Nos. 1 to 3, but referred to two other officers who could not have, in view of their postings taken over from the petitioner.
It was not brought to the notice of the Home Minister that his predecessor had directed the State Government to undertake exercise to identify suitable officer for replacing the petitioner.
This shows that the entire exercise was directed with one purpose in mind, namely, the grant of extension to the petitioner by projecting a picture that no other suitable officer is available.
Neither the Tribunal has done so nor we intend to make any comment on the comparative merit of the petitioner and respondent Nos. 1 to 3, but, at the same time, we have no hesitation to record our agreement with the Tribunal that failure of the State Government to take action in accordance with the letter dated 1131998 has resulted in depriving respondent Nos. 1 to 3 of their valuable right to be considered for promotion.
An exercise on this score would have been quite in consonance with the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, we endorse the views expressed by the Tribunal that the extension granted in the petitioner's service from 1101998 to 31.3.1999 is vitiated by arbitrariness and violation of the doctrine of equality in the matter of employment."
With respect, we would adopt the reasoning given by the Division Bench in PC Dogra's case (supra) in support of our conclusions in the present case.
35.
Extension in service or re-employment of a Government employee is an exception to the rules afore-stated.
Rudiments of such exception are existence of exceptional circumstances, public grounds and compliance to the instructions issued by the State.
Ideal would be the situation, where these ingredients are satisfied on data based study and service profile of a Government employee so as to provide greater transparency in the State action.
Such compliance would obviously eliminate element of arbitrariness in such action.
Arbitrariness in State action, particularly where it denies the right of consideration to other eligible officers for promotional posts thereby undermining the principle of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, would vitiate the State action in law.
In the present case, except for the note initiated by respondent No. 2 himself in this regard, the basic elements like the need of the State, the public grounds, existence of exceptional circumstances and non-availibility of other eligible officers for promotion for justifying an order of re-employment, are conspicuously absent in the record produced by the respondent-State before the Court.
The competent authority has failed to discernly decipher the public grounds or public interest to the individual interests of respondent No. 2.
36.
For the reasons recorded above and after perusing the records produced before the Court, we are of the considered view that neither exceptional circumstances existed, nor were there any public grounds, before the competent authority while passing the order of re-employment of respondent No. 2 to the post of Chief Architect, Punjab.
In fact the impugned orders violate and offend the rules and the instructions issued by the Government dated 1721967.
The orders suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and are opposed to the accepted canons of service jurisprudence, more particularly, in relation to legitimate expectancy of a Government employee in matters relating to promotion to higher posts in the existing heirarcy of the department.
Thus, we have no hesitation in quashing the impugned orders dated 2742001 and dated 2962001, which we do hereby quash and set aside.
The State is directed to take appropriate steps forthwith in accordance with law.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.