Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - Respondent-plaintiff was appointed as constable in the Punjab Police in the year 1973.
He was served with a charge sheet.
Exhibit D-3 alleging that he had been repeatedly absent from duty during the period from 1091986 to 2711987.
Respondent contested the charges and took a defence that he was ill during the aforesaid period.
Decision to hold a departmental inquiry was taken and departmental inquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer held that the charges alleged against the respondent were duly proved.
On this, a show cause notice, Exhibit D-5 was given to the respondent along with a copy of the inquiry report, with a view to give him an opportunity of making his submissions against the findings in the inquiry report.
The respondent was also given opportunity of being heard in person.
Finally, vide order Exhibit D-8, the respondent was dismissed from service, with effect from 25111988.
The disciplinary authority observed that the respondent had not taken any leave nor given any intimation of his alleged illness and, therefore, his defence was not valid.
The respondent preferred appeal which was dismissed and the revision petition was also dismissed by the revisional authority.
2.
Respondent plaintiff filed a suit on 10.9.1990, for declaration that the order of dismissal passed against him was void.
It was submitted that the punishing authority failed to comply with the mandatory provisions of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short "the Rules") and the Standing Instructions and, therefore, the order of punishment was vitiated.
Suit was contested and it was submitted that the plaintiff had remained absent from duty for about 46 days and the departmental inquiry was held in accordance with law wherein the plaintiff had full opportunity to defend himself; reply of the plaintiff to the show cause notice was duly considered and the order of dismissal from service was valid; appeal and the revision filed by the plaintiff were also dismissed in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the relevant rules.
Plaintiff appeared as his own witness as PW-1 and closed his evidence while the defendants tendered documents Exhibits D-1 to D-9 in evidence.
3.
Trial Court decreed the suit and declared the punishing order to be void.
Trail court further declared that the plaintiff shall be deemed to have continued in service as if the dismissal order was never passed; plaintiff was entitled to salary, emoluments and the benefits attached to his post with 12% interest from the date of decree till the date of payment.
It was observed that the order of punishment did not show that the punishing authority was alive to rule 162 of the Rules which provided the punishment of dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or when cumulative effect of continued misconduct proved incorrigibility and unfitness for police service; regard shall be had to length of service of the officer and his claim to pension.
It was further observed that there was no evidence that the act of the plaintiff amounted to gravest act of misconduct or that the cumulative effect of continued misconduct of the plaintiff proved incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service; the punishing authority had not taken into consideration the length of service of the plaintiff and his claim to pension, before passing the dismissal order; there was nothing to show as per the past record of the plaintiff that he was absent from duty on earlier occasions.
Apart from these aspects of the matter, trial Court found certain infirmities in the inquiry, such as - in the list of allegations, only four witnesses were cited while two more witnesses were examined without informing the plaintiff; the appellate and revisional orders also suffered from the same infirmities as the original order.
The appellate court affirmed the decree of the trial court.
It was held that since the order of punishment stated that the period of plaintiff's absence from service be considered as period without pay, absence will be deemed to have been regularised; absence on the part of the plaintiff could not be held to be a gravest act of misconduct proving incorrigibility or unfitness for police service and the punishing authority had not complied with the requirements of rules 162 of the Rules as held by the trial court.
4.
State of Punjab has filed this appeal against the decree of the courts below decreeing the suit of the respondent-plaintiff.
Notice of motion was issued and on 1131997, the Court noticed that the medical certificate which the respondent had produced during inquiry was issued by Dr. JS Thakur which mentioned that the respondent was suffering from "anxiety of nervous disease" for which certain pain killers had been prescribed which was not the normal treatment given to a person suffering from anxiety neurosis and, therefore the Court was prima facie of the opinion that such a Doctor should not be allowed to practice.
A notice was given to Dr. JS Thakur to show cause as to why the concerned authority be not directed to cancel his licence and though the matter was adjourned several times, no final order could be passed and it has now been reported that Dr. JS Thakur has since died.
On 371998 the appeal was admitted and on 672001, execution proceedings were stayed till the decision of the appeal.
5.
At the time of filing of appeal, no substantial question of law was framed and as per the decision of a Full Bench of this Court, procedure of amended section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure (for short "Code") was not required to be followed in view of the provisions in the Punjab Courts Act but the said decision has been over-ruled by the Supreme Court in Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann, 2001(2) RCR(Civil) 277 (SC) : 2001(5) SCC 262.
I, therefore, proceed under the proviso to Section 100(5) of the Code and find that the following questions of law appear to be arising in this appeal :  (i) Whether the inquiry held against the respondent was vitiated as held by the courts below ?
(ii) Whether the order of dismissal passed against the respondent violates rule 162 of the Rules as held by the courts below ?
(iii) Whether the decree of courts below setting aside the order of dismissal holding the respondent-plaintiff to be entitled to all benefits with 12% interest is justified ?
6.
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that inquiry cannot be held to be vitiated as the charge of absence from duty was practically admitted and merely because apart from the witnesses cited in the list of witnesses, two more witnesses were examined, the inquiry could not be held to be vitiated.
He further submitted that when after passing the order of punishment, the punishing authority observed that the period of absence be treated as leave, it was not to condone the absence but with a view to maintain correct record.
Counsel relied upon the decision in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Hari Har Gopal, 1969 S.L.R.
274 and Union of India and others v. Ram Pal, AIR 1996 SC 1500 and submitted that rule 162 cannot be held to be violated as in view of the provisions in the Punjab Police rules, absence from duty could be treated as gravest act of misconduct and merely because, reference to length of service was not made, the dismissal order could not be held to be void.
Counsel relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in State of UP v. Ashok Kumar Singh, AIR 1996 SC 736 : 1996(2) SCT 139 (SC), State of Punjab v. Sukhwinder Singh, 1999 Supreme Court Cases (L & S) 1234  7.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent supported the findings of the courts below and cited a number of decisions which are summarised below :-  1) Kulwant Kaur and others v. Gurdial Singh Mann, 2001(2) All Instant Judgments (SC) 138 : 2001(5) SCC 262 to submit that second appeal could only be entertained on substantial question of law.
There is no dispute with this proposition.
2) State of Punjab v. Charanjit Singh, 2000(4) A.I.J.
410 : 2001(1) SCT 481 (P&H) to submit that inquiry could not be conducted by the Inspector who was not an officer.
On a perusal of the judgment it is seen that no such ratio has been laid down therein.
3) Hans Raj Gupta v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) Recent Service Judgments 463 : 1992(1) SCT 258 (P&H) to submit that examining the witnesses beyond the list of witnesses prejudices the employee.
In the present case, the plaintiff cannot be held to be prejudiced merely from examining two more witnesses when the substance of the charge of absence from duty was fully proved and even if the evidence of the said witnesses is ignored, it makes no difference.
4) The State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) S.L.R.
174 : 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H); State of Punjab v. Darshan Singh, 1989 A.I.J.
191; State of Punjab v. Chanan Singh, 1988(2) CLJ (C Cr.
& Rev.)
21 and Constable Om Parkash v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 170 to submit that absence without leave did not amount to gravest act of misconduct under rule 162 of the Rules.
In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Singh's case (supra), these judgments will stand impliedly over-ruled by the Supreme Court.
Further, the judgment in Chanan Singh's case (supra) has been expressly over- ruled by a Division Bench of this Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(4) R.S.J.
448 : 1993(4) SCT 770 (P&H)(DB), following the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Ram Singh, AIR 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC), wherein it has been held that a single act can also warrant dismissal and the expression "acts" did not necessarily mean plural and also includes a single act, which itself may justify dismissal.
The judgment in Parkash Chand's case (supra) was also distinguished in a subsequent Division Bench judgment of this Court in Constable Jagmal Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(1) R.S.J.
151, the absence of 59 days was held to be enough to justify dismissal.
The same view was taken in State of Punjab v. Balkar Singh, 2000(2) R.S.J.
264 : 2000(2) SCT 565 (P&H), and the same view was also taken in a recent Division Bench judgment in Bishan Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 2000(1) R.S.J.
58 : 2000(1) SCT 172 (P&H)(DB) following a number of other judgments, including the Supreme Court judgment in Sukhwinder Singh's case (supra).
5) The State of Punjab and others v. Bakshish Singh, 1998(5) S.L.R.
625 : 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC); Punjab State and another v. Rur Singh, 2000(2) SCT 60 (P&H) : 2000(1) R.S.J.
100 and Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, (sic) 2001(3) SCT 492 in support of the submission that when period of absence is duly regularised, charge of absence from duty did not survive.
There is no dispute with this proposition, but regularisation of absence period and entry in the service record of the employee for maintaining correct record have to be differentiated as held by three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Hari Har Gopal's case (supra).
Order granting leave after recording order of dismissal has to be treated as an order only for the purpose of maintaining correct record of service and not for regularisation of absence period.
6) Abdul Wajeed v. State of Karnataka and others, 1981(1) S.L.R.
454 in support of submission that the inquiry officer should not cross-examine the defence witnesses.
This judgment has no relevance to the present case as no such issue is involved here.
7) Rabindra Nath Sen and others v. First Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal and others, AIR, 1963 Calcutta 310 in support of the submission that sick leave falls in exceptional category.
This judgment does not apply as no evidence of genuine sickness of the respondent-plaintiff has been shown.
8) Dr. Prem Behari Lal Saxena v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another, AIR 1965 Allahabad 406 in support of the submission that leave was required to be granted if relevant conditions were fulfilled.
This judgment has no relevance to the present case.
9) Narinder Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) SCT 221 to contend that past service should be considered as laid down under rule 162 of the rules.
This judgment also does not apply in view of the finding that act of absence from duty of a police officer can be treated as gravest act of misconduct.
10) Ganga Bishan v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) S.L.R.
59 : 1994(3) SCT 154 (P&H) in support of the submission that when an employee is entitled to pension and gratuity, he will be entitled to the same even if he has not completed twenty years service.
11) Ex. Constable Ranbir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1992(2) SCT 58 in support of the submission that order of dismissal be converted into the order of compulsory retirement.
No doubt, in the said judgment, order of dismissal was converted into the order of compulsory retirement, no inflexible rule appears to have been laid down that in every case of absence from duty, order of dismissal was required to be converted into the order of compulsory retirement.
On the other hand, it has been held by the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Bakshish Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2696 that the punishment imposed by the punishing authority cannot be lightly interfered with by the civil court/Tribunal on the ground that the punishment was excessive, unless the punishment was shockingly disproportionate or grossly arbitrary.
The same view was taken in Union of India v. Ganayuthan, AIR 1997 SC 3387.
12) Rameshwar Dayal v. State of Haryana, 1999(4) SCC.
79 : 1999(4) SCT 79 (P&H); Ex. HC Mohinder Singh v. State of Haryana; State of Punjab v. Aman Kumar, 1997(1) SCT 256 and Bharat Singh v. State of Haryana, 2000(2) SCT 159 to contend that length of service had to be specifically taken into account and it has to be specifically stated why a person was being deprived of his right to pension.
In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Bakhshish Singh's case (supra), contention of the counsel for the counsel for the respondent- plaintiff cannot be accepted.
13) Radha Kishan Rajpal v. Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana, 1994(1) SCT 603 to contend that absence of Presenting Officer vitiates the inquiry.
This judgment does not apply as no such issue is involved in the present case.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondent also contended that medical certificate issued by Dr. JS Thakur (DW-1 in the inquiry proceedings) should have been accepted.
Apart from the fact that civil court could not appreciate the evidence led before the departmental authorities (except to find out, whether the finding was based on no evidence), this Court has already found dubious nature of the medical certificate issued by Dr. JS Thakur.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the case law cited, I am of the view that no interference is called for with the order of dismissal preceded by departmental inquiry wherein misconduct of absence from duty was fully proved.
In the context of the Punjab Police Rules, absence from duty could be treated as gravest act of misconduct as held by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Singh's case (supra), and no doubt, it is expected and is desirable that the punishing authority expressly records a finding of this nature and also consider the past record, and also record reasons for depriving an employee of pension and reasons for imposing punishment even where the past record may be clean, the order passed by the punishing authority is not open to interference unless it can be held that the charge was not proved or the order was vitiated by mala fides or arbitrariness.
The observations in the order about treating the period of absence to be leave cannot be taken to be condoning the absence but only with a view to maintain correct record.
Even absence of express mention of consideration of the past record and reasons for depriving the employee of pension will not always vitiate the order nor warrant substitution of lesser punishment such as, compulsory retirement etc. by the civil Court, the scope of interference by the civil court being limited to see that the order of punishment was not passed in denial of reasonable opportunity, was not without evidence and was not mala fide or arbitrary.
Where the charge was fully proved, as in the present case, order of dismissal was justified as per the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Singh's case (supra), there was no scope for interference.
This being the position answer to the questions arising in this appeal have to be in favour of the appellant-State, and interference by the courts below with the order of dismissal cannot be held to be legal and valid.
10.
In Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1992(3) R.S.J.
502 : 1994(3) SCT 335 (SC), it was observed that since the punishment of forfeiture of pension and other benefits has not been inflicted, such benefits ought to be given to the concerned employee.
Following the said judgment, a Single bench of this Court in Krishan Lal v. State of Punjab, 1997(1) R.S.J.
535 observed that claim of the appellant in that case deserved to be considered sympathetically.
I find that the observations made in the said case apply to the present case also.
11.
For the above reasons, this appeal is allowed, decree of the courts below is set aside and the suit filed by the respondent-plaintiff is dismissed.
However, having regard to the fact that the plaintiff had rendered service of about fifteen years, he should not be deprived of pensionary and other benefits earned by him for rendering service.
If the plaintiff makes a representation in this regard, the authorities will consider to grant such benefits to him and the representation, if any, made by the plaintiff will be decided within a period of three months, and benefits, if any held admissible to him shall be paid to him within three months of the disposal of the representation.
Appeal allowed.