GS Singhvi, J - It is a settled proposition of law that unless the employer pleads and proves the existence of exceptional circumstances, a workman is entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages in the case of unlawful termination of service by way of retrenchment - State of Bombay and others v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1960 SC 610; Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhu Nath, AIR 1978 SC 8; Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219; SK Verma v. Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi, AIR 1981 SC 422; Mohan Lal v. Management of Bharat Electronics Ltd, AIR 1981 SC 1253; Gammon India Limited v. Niranjan Dass, AIR 1984 SC 500; Ajaib Singh v. Sirihind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd., 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : 1999(6) SCC.
82; Vikramditya Pandey v. Industrial Tribunal, Lucknow and another, 2001(1) SCT 782 (SC) : 2001(2) SCC.
423 and Hari Palace, Ambala City v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak and another, 1979(3) S.L.R.
223.
2.
In State of Bombay v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha and others (supra), a three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court considered the nature of Section 25- F(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act') and held as under :-  "Having regard to the fact that the words used in Section 25-F(b) are mandatory and their effect in plain and unambiguous it seems to us that the court of appeal was right in holding that Section 25-I covered cases of recovery of monies other than those specified in Section 25-F(b), and it is obvious that there are several other cases in which monies become due from the employers to the employees under Ch.
V; it is for the recovery of these monies that Section 25-I had been enacted.
Therefore, we see no substance in the argument that the Court of Appeal has misconstrued Section 25-F(b).
That being so, failure to comply with the said provision renders the impugned orders invalid and inoperative."
(Emphasis added) 3.
In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhu Nath (supra), a three- Judges Bench of the Supreme Court held that the provisions of Section 25-F(a) and (b) are mandatory and an order of retrenchment made in violation of these pre-emptory conditions precedent is liable to be treated as invalid and the workman is entitled to reinstatement with back wages.
4.
In Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala (supra) a two-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court held that termination of the services of a person employed on probation without complying with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F was invalid and she was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages.
5.
In SK Verma v. Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi (supra), a three-Judges Bench considered the effect of violation of Section 25-F and gave some illustrations in which a departure can possibly be made from the normal rule of reinstatement with back wages.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the judgment, which are quite instructive are produced below :  "We do not propose to refer to the cases arising under Section 33 and 33A of the Industrial Disputes Act or to cases arising out of references under Sections 10 and 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Nor do we propose to engage ourselves in the unfruitful task of answering the question whether the termination of the services of a workman in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F is void ab initio or merely invalid and inoperative, even if it is possible to discover some razor's edge distinction between the Latin void ab initio and the Anglo-Saxon `invalid and inoperative'.
Semantic luxuries are misplaced in the interpretation of bread and butter statutes.
Welfare statutes must, of necessity, receive a broad interpretation.
Where legislation is designed to give relief against certain kinds of mischief, the etymological excursions.
`Void ab initio' `invalid and inoperative' or call it what you will, the workmen and the employer are primarily concerned with the consequence of striking down the order of termination of services of the workmen.
Plain common sense dictates that the removal of an order terminating the services of workmen must ordinarily lead to the reinstatement of the services of the workmen.
It is as if the order has never been and so it must ordinarily lead to back wages too.
But there may be exceptional circumstances which make it impossible or wholly inequitable vis-a-vis the employer and workmen to direct reinstatement with full back wages.
For instance, the industry might have closed down or might be in severe financial doldrums; the workmen concerned might have secured better or other employment elsewhere and so on.
In such situations, there is a vestige of discretion left in the Court to make appropriate consequential orders.
The Court may deny the relief of reinstatement where reinstatement is impossible because the industry has closed down.
The court may deny the relief of award of full back wages where that would place an impossible burden on the employer.
In such and other exceptional cases the Court may mould the relief but, ordinarily the relief to be awarded must be reinstatement with full back wages.
That relief must be awarded where no special impediment in the way of awarding the relief is clearly shown.
True, occasional hardship may be caused to an employer but we must remember that, more often than not, comparatively far greater hardship is certain to be caused to the workmen if the relief is denied than to the employer if the relief is granted.
In the cases before us we are unable to see any special impediment in the way of awarding the relief.
The Labour Court appears to have thought that the award of the relief of reinstatement with full back wages would put these workmen on a par with those who had qualified for permanent absorption by passing the prescribed test and that would create dis-satisfaction amongst the latter.
First, they can never be on par since reinstatement would not qualify them for permanent absorption.
They would continue to be temporary, liable to be retrenched.
Second, there is not a shred of evidence to suggest that their reinstatement would be a cause for dissatisfaction to anyone.
There is no hint in the record that any undue burden would be placed on the employer if the same relief is granted as was done in Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala (supra).
(Emphasis supplied) In Mohan Lal v. Management of Bharat Electronics Ltd (supra) a two-Judges Bench referred to various judicial precedents and held as under :-  "Where the termination is illegal especially where there is an ineffective order of retrenchment, there is neither termination nor cessation of service and a declaration follows that the workman concerned continues to be in service with all consequential benefits, namely, back wages in full and other benefits."
6.
In Gammon India Limited v. Niranjan Dass (supra) a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court described the effect of non-compliance of Section 25-F in the following words :-  "Where the service of the employee of Company was terminated on account of recession and reduction in the volume of work of the company, and the termination of service of the employee did not fall in any of the excluded categories, the termination of his service would amount to retrenchment.
That being so, when the pre-requisite for a valid retrenchment as laid down in Section 25-F was not complied with, the retrenchment bringing about termination of service of employee would be ab initio void."
7.
We have prefaced this judgment by noticing a settled proposition of law and making reference to the judicial precedents on the subject because relief sought in this appeal is that order dated 20.9.1996 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 3392 of 1980 and award dated 2811980 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana in Reference No. 77 of 1977 be set aside and the respondents be directed to give the appellant the benefit of continuity of service and full back wages.
8.
The facts of the case lie in a narrow compass.
The appellant was engaged on temporary basis on 9101972 by the Executive Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R), Provincial Division, Ludhiana, (Construction Sub Division, Jagraon) on monthly wages of Rs. 350/-.
The tenure of his appointment was three months, but he continued in service till 24.10.1975 when his services were discontinued on the ground of financial stringencies caused due to the alleged stoppage of construction activities.
The dispute raised by him was referred by the State Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act to Labour Court, Ludhiana.
9.
The petitioner challenged the termination of service mainly on the ground of non-compliance of mandatory provisions contained in Section 25-F(a) and (b) by asserting that he had not been given one months' notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation.
The employer, namely, the Executive Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R), Ludhiana did not controvert the facts relating to the employment of the appellant and termination of his service, but questioned the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to entertain the appellant's claim by stating that P.W.D.
(B&R) does not fall within the definition of `industry' under Section 2(j) of the Act and the workman i.e. the appellant was not entitled to any relief because his service has been terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions embodied in the appointment letter.
10.
After recording evidence of the parties and hearing their representatives, the Labour Court recorded a finding of fact that the workman had been in continuous employment for a period of more than one year and his services had been terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F It also held that the termination of the services of the appellant was unjustified.
However, while awarding relief of reinstatement, the Labour Court directed that the appellant shall not be entitled to the benefit of continuity of service and back wages.
11.
The State challenged the reinstatement of the appellant by filing the writ petition which was registered as C.W.P.
No. 7551 of 1981 and the appellant challenged denial of continuity of service and back wages in C.W.P.
No. 3392 of 1980.
The learned Single Judge dismissed both the petitions.
The State felt satisfied with the order of the learned Single Judge but the appellant felt aggrieved and, therefore, he filed this appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
12.
Shri BN Sehgal argued that the impugned order may be set aside because the learned Single Judge has not assigned any reason for upholding the award of the Labour Court vide which the appellant was, without any rhyme or reason, denied the relief of continuity of service and back wages.
Learned counsel further argued that in the face of the findings recorded by him that the action of the employer to terminate the services of the workman was illegal and unjustified, learned Presiding Officer did not have any discretion in the matter of awarding relief of reinstatement and continuity of service and back wages and the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by upholding a patently erroneous award.
13.
Shri NDS Mann, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab conceded that in the cases of wrongful (sic) of any extraordinary reason for making a deviation from the normal rule of reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages, the Labour Court was not justified in refusing the relief of continuity of service and back wages and the learned Single Judge committed a serious legal error by declining to interfere with a patently erroneous award.
14.
Hence, the appeal is allowed.
Order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Award dated 2821980 passed by the Labour Court in Reference No. 177 of 1977 is partially quashed and it is declared that the appellant shall be entitled to benefit of continuity of service and full back wages.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 3 are directed to calculate the amount of back wages and pay the same to the appellant within a period of four months from the date of submission of the certified copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.