SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Amritsar-I and the Director, State Transport, Punjab, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as "the Management") with the prayer for quashing the impugned award dated 2871993 published in Government Gazette October 15, 1993 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as "the Labour Court").
2.
The workman was employed as Conductor with the Management since November, 1969.
His services were terminated w.e.f.
971980.
The services of the workman were terminated on the basis of report submitted by the Checking staff.
An enquiry was conducted and ultimately, the order of termination of services of the workman dated 971980 was passed.
The checking staff had detected that six passengers who boarded the bus from Gurdaspur to Jaura were without ticket.
On enquiry from the passengers, it was learnt that the Conductor had collected 75 paise each from the passengers, but did not issue any ticket.
In this way, the Conductor had misappropriated the amount of Rs. 450.
Charge-sheet was served on the workman on 10.4.1980.
According to the case set out by the Management, the workman did not file any reply.
Consequently, the charge was held to be proved against the workman.
The workman filed a declaratory suit challenging the order of termination in the Court of Sub-Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, being Civil Suit No. 783/25.9.82/28.8.82.
This suit was dismissed for default on 29111984.
The order reads as under :-  "Plaintiff not present in person.
Counsel for the plaintiff has pleaded on instructions.
In view of the statement, suit of the plaintiff is dismissed in default u/order 9 rule of CPC.
File be consigned.
Sd/- MM Aggarwal.
SJIC Asr.
291184."
3.
After the dismissal of the suit for default, the workman raised a demand notice.
After failure of the conciliation, the industrial dispute was referred to the Labour Court, Amritsar.
The Labour Court framed the following two issues :-  "(i) Whether the termination of services of workman Amir Chand is justified, legal and valid ?
If not, to which benefits, relief he is entitled ?
(ii) What is the effect of previous litigation between the parties in the Civil Court ?"
4.
Both the parties produced evidence before the Labour Court.
The Labour Court has held that during the enquiry only two Inspectors had appeared before the Enquiry Officer.
One of the Inspectors had stated that the cash of the Conductor could not be checked in the running bus.
The other Inspector also admitted that he had not checked the cash of the Conductor.
None of the passengers had been joined with the enquiry.
The Labour Court also perused the enquiry report.
After marshalling the entire evidence, it has been held that the enquiry conducted against the workman is vitiated and illegal, and therefore, the termination is not justified.
Thereafter, the Labour Court adverted to the second plea taken by the Management with regard to the filing of the civil suit which was dismissed in default.
Here again the Labour Court had held that the aforesaid dismissal of the suit in default does not operate as res judicata.
5.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has reiterated the submissions made before the Labour Court.
I find no merit in the submissions.
Admittedly, the award had been passed on the basis of evidence independently assessed by the Labour Court.
It is also patent that the enquiry report was based on no evidence.
The findings returned by the Labour Court are based on the evidence which had been produced before the Labour Court.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the award suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record.
There is also no infirmity in the finding of the Labour Court to the effect that the dismissal of the suit under Order 9, rule 8 CPC does not operate as res judicata.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the reference was not maintainable.
Consequently, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
It is, however, to be noticed that during the pendency of this writ petition, the workman had died.
The LRs have been brought on record.
Consequently, it is ordered that any amount which was due and payable to the deceased workman under the award shall now be paid to the LRs who have been duly impleaded.
6.
In view of the above, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
The petitioners are directed to make the payment was which due and payable to the deceased-workman under the award within a period of two months from today.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.