SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks a writ in the natutre of certiorari for a limited order modifying the impugned award dated 2.2.1999 passed by the Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court) whereby the termination of the services of the workman has been held to be unjustified but he has been ordered to be reinstated into service without any back-wages.
In paragraphs No. 7 and 8 of the award it is mentioned as follows :  "7.
The workman has deposed in his cross-examination that from the year 1984 till now he had been working on daily wages.
When he is earning his likelihood, he is not entitled to get the back wages w.e.f.
15121984 upto the date of his reinstatement.
The disengagement of the workman has been found unjustified contravening the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act, 1947, therefore, the reference is answered in affirmative way.
8.
On the basis of the discussions made above, the reference is answered holding that the termination of the services of Shri Krishan Gopal son of late Shri Kairati Lal a daily rated plumber in December 1984 is unjustified.
He is entitled to be reinstated w.e.f.
15121984 but he will not get the back wages from the date of termination till the date of the award.
The workman shall get the cost of the proceedings amounting of Rs. 1000/- from the management.
Appropriate Govt. be informed."
2.
Mr. RS Longia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the statement recorded by the Labour Court in paragraph No. 7 of the award which has been attributed to the workman is patently against the record.
The learned counsel has referred to the vernacular version of the statement made by the workman in which it is stated as follows :  "Dihadi duhadi kar leta hoon jub kabhi mil jaati hai."
3.
From the perusal of the above, it becomes apparent that the statement attributed to the workman has not been correctly recorded or appreciated by the Labour Court.
4.
It is a settled proposition of law that back-wages cannot be denied to the workman merely because the workman had found some employment during the pendency of the proceedings in the Labour Court to avoid starvation.
Once the Labour Court had given a finding that the termination of the services of the petitioner-workman was unjustified he was entitled to be reinstated in service with continuity of service and with full back-wages.
This proposition of law has been categorically laid down by a Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, P.L.R.
Vol. LXXXI-1979 720.
The Full Bench observed as follows :  "6.
However, all controversy now seems to have been set at rest by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, wherein the appeal by Special Leave was expressly limited to the question of grant of back wages.
It has been held therein in no uncertain terms : "Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Another view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer".
And again :  "Full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure."
The aforesaid view has been reiterated by their Lordships in GT Lad and others v. Chemicals and Fibres India Ltd" 5.
In view of the above, the workman was entitled to be reinstated into service with continuity of service and full back-wages.
The present petition has been filed by the widow of the workman who died during the pendency of the reference in the Labour Court.
6.
In view of the above, she would now be entitled to monetary benefits which would have accrued to the deceased workman.
Consequently, the petition is allowed.
the impugned award (Annexure P.9) is modified to the extent that the deceased-workman was entitled to be reinstated into service with continuity of service and full back-wages from the date of the service of the demand notice till the passing of the award.
7.
The management is directed to make the payment of the full back-wages to the petitioner within a period of 2 months of the receipt of copy of this order.
The management is also directed to pay the aforesaid full back-wages with interest @12% per annum from the date of the award till payment.
The management is also directed to pay the costs awarded by the Labour Court.
No costs.
Petition allowed.