SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This is the third writ petition filed by the petitioner for the same relief apart from the contempt of court petition which he was constrained to file.
2.
The petitioner was initially selected for the post of Senior Scale Lecturer in the College of Architecture and for the post of Assistant Architect in the grade of Rs. 250-750 in the department of architecture.
He first joined as Assistant Architect and thereafter on receipt of the appointment letter to the higher post he joined as Senior Scale Lecturer on 29th of September, 1965.
The post of Senior Scale Lecturer carried the pay scale of Rs. 350-850.
At the time of his appointment as Senior Lecturer.
Mr. SN Kohli, Mr. VP Anil, Mr. NS Mathur, Mrs. K C Gupta, Mr. GL Verma, Mr. RP Verma and Mr. DR Gupta were all working on the post of Assistant Architects.
Prior to 1962, the College of Architecture was not a part of department of architecture and was controlled by the Technical Education Department.
The department of Architecture was under the Public Works Department.
By order dated 20th of July, 1962, College of Architecture and architecture department were fused into one department under the administrative control of the Secretary, Public Works Department.
Prior to the fusion of these departments, the following posts were in existence.
College of Architecture Architecture Department Lecturer : Rs. 250-750 Assistant Architect : 250-750 Sr.
Scale Lecturer : Rs. 350-850 Architect Assistant Professor : Rs. 375-925 Associate Professor : Rs. 625-1275 Architect : 625-1275 Principal :Rs.1500-1750 Senior Architect : 1500-1750 Chief Architect : 2000-2250 3.
Consequent upon the fusion of the department, the Punjab Government on 26th of October, 1965 prepared a joint seniority list of the fused department.
Seniority was fixed on the length of the service on the post then held.
Although the petitioner was holding the post of Senior Lecturer in the scale of Rs. 350-850, his seniority was fixed below the Assistant Architects mentioned above, who were working in the pay scale of Rs. 250-750.
Not only was the seniority of the petitioner wrongly fixed, he was even denied promotion to the post of Assistant Professor which fell due to him with effect from 1st of November, 1965.
The petitioner was, therefore, constrained to file Civil Writ Petition No. 563 of 1969 which was allowed by this Court on 20th of April, 1970 with the following observations :-  "i) The petitioner was to rank senior to Shri SN Kohli in the joint seniority list.
ii) Shri SN Kohli and others who were holding the post of Assistant Architect which was equivalent to the post of Lecturer could not be straightaway considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor without first being considered for the post of Senior Lecturer i.e. the post which the petitioner was holding.
iii) The petitioner had to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor if on 31101965 his record as compared to that of Shri SN Kohli and others made him eligible for promotion and the same criteria was to be followed in considering the petitioner for the post of Associate Professor w.e.f.
2451966 i.e. prior to the promotion of Shri SN Kohli as Associate Professor."
4.
While purporting to implement the decision of this Court, the respondent appointed the petitioner as Assistant Professor with effect from 1st of June, 1970.
His claim for being promoted to the post of Associate Professor was totally ignored.
Consequently, the petitioner filed the second writ being Civil Writ Petition No. 4678 of 1971.
This petition was allowed by this Court by order dated 1st of November, 1974.
The relevant part of the order is as follows :-  "In view of the clear and self-explanatory findings of Narula, J. which have stood their grounds upto the Supreme Court, the respondent State of Punjab to which State the petitioner stands finally allocated and where he is not posted on his reversion from Union Territory, Chandigarh has no option in the matter but to accord notional promotion to the petitioner as Assistant Professor from a date prior to 1.11.1965 and further to consider his case for promotion on the basis of his record and seniority for promotion to the post of Associate Professor w.e.f.
the date prior to 25.5.1996.
Since the persons who were working on junior posts were nevertheless promoted first to the post of Assistant Professor, the petitioner has to be given national promotion in a manner to place him senior to such persons on the basis of record as stood on the aforesaid dates.
Accordingly, the respondent State of Punjab is directed to act in accordance with the judgment of Narula, J. dated 2041970 and the aforesaid observation made by me and give a final shape to their decision in this regard within three months from today."
5.
The aforesaid clear direction that the petitioner had to be given notional promotion was still not complied with.
During the pendency of Civil Writ Petition No. 4678 of 1971, the petitioner had been allocated to State of Punjab in 1972.
Therefore, the decision in the aforesaid writ petition had to be implemented by the State of Punjab rather than the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
On 21st of March, 1975, the State of Punjab passed three orders purporting to give effect to the order of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4678 of 1971.
By the first order the petitioner was given ad hoc promotion to the post of Assistant Professor with effect from 31101965 for a period of six months whereas he was to be given notional promotion on the post.
By the second order the petitioner was promoted as Associate Professor with effect from 2451966 for a period of six months.
Here again, the petitioner ought to have been promoted notionally on the post.
By the third order dated 2131975, the petitioner was posted as Assistant Architect with effect from 22.7.1974, although he was entitled to be posted as Architect as the post was equivalent to the post of Associate Professor.
6.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid three orders, the petitioner was constrained to file COCP No. 175 of 1975.
This petition was decided by this Court on 10th of March, 1976 with the following observations :-  "Admittedly the petitioner has not been appointed to the post of Associate Professor equivalent whereof in the Punjab is only the post of Architect even for a day, for he was never given physical charge of that post, nor any order had been issued by the State appointing him ad hoc Architect or to any post equivalent thereto.
It is also further beyond dispute that the petitioner had not worked even for a day either on the post of Associate Professor or on equivalent post of Architect and so the Government had no occasion ever to judge his work and worth on that post for his continuation on that post.
That being so, it certainly would not be right on the part of the State Govt. to state in the return of respondent No. 1 that he was not found fit for the post of -------- to which the petitioner had been promoted in compliance with the judgment of this Court.
That since the record of the petitioner was as good as of Shri Kohli who was junior to the petitioner and who had been promoted to the aforesaid post prior to the petitioner.
On this there is no option of the State Govt. but to give notional promotion to the petitioner from the date prior to the date his juniors were promoted and also to give actual physical charge which was never done."
7.
In view of the aforesaid order, the petitioner was appointed as Architect by letter dated 10th of May, 1976 with retrospective effect from 22nd of July, 1974, whereas he ought to have been given the appointment on the said post with effect from 24th of May, 1966 ie the date on which Shri SN Kohli, who was junior to the petitioner, was so promoted.
The petitioner took the charge of the post of Architect on 13th of May, 1976.
The petitioner made representation against the aforesaid order stating therein that the aforesaid order was in contravention of the order of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4678 of 1971.
Consequently on 20th of November, 1979, the petitioner was promoted again on the post of Architect.
But again he was promoted to the post only for a period of six months.
This ad hoc arrangement continued upto 30.10.1984.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the Punjab Service Commission vide its orders dated 2nd of April, 1985 informed the Secretary, Public Works Department that after giving due consideration the Punjab Public Service Commission was of the opinion that the record of the petitioner warranted the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Architect.
However, the promotion of the petitioner was not released by the Public Works Department as this would have led to the admission by the goverment that the service record of the petitioner as Architect with effect from 7th of December, 1979 was good.
However, the writ petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
The petitioner, therefore, filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 203 of 1987.
Pending the Letters Patent Appeal by order dated 20th of March, 1987, the Government of Punjab directed his reinstatement with immediate effect.
Subsequently, they also made some consequential order regarding the treatment of the period from 1st of November, 1984 to 20th of March, 1987.
The petitioner thereafter made a representation which was rejected on 24th of August, 1988.
The petitioner also sought personal interview with the Adviser to the Governor of Punjab which was granted to the petitioner on 24th of January, 1989.
However, subsequently, the petitioner was informed that the earlier decision taken by the Government could not be reviewed.
Thereafter, the petitioner made some more representations which also met the same fate.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
In paragraph 15(iii) the petitioner has specifically stated that his claim with regard to seniority had not been decided by the Punjab Government till date.
This averment has not been denied by the respondents.
Furthermore, the Division Bench while deciding the Letters Patent Appeal has held that all the claimant's relief to the treatment of the period from 1st of November, 1984 to 20th of March, 1987 and also the claim for seniority as per the earlier judgment of this court and the consequential relief in respect of the same, are all not adjudicated upon and it is open to the petitioner to claim the reliefs in the appropriate forum.
9.
In view of the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 563 of 1969 and Civil Writ Petition No. 4678 of 1971, the claim of the petitioner for notional promotion on the post of Assistant Professor with effect from 1.11.1965 cannot possibly be denied by the respondents.
Further, in view of the decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 563 of 1969, the petitioner has to rank senior to SN Kohli in the joint seniority list on the ranks of Assistant Professor and Associate Professor.
The petitioner is entitled to the benefit of notional promotion on these two posts from the dates earlier to promotion of SN Kohli on the same post.
With regard to the treatment of the period, while the petitioner was prematurely retired, the respondents have taken shelter under Rule 420 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules which relates to the treatment of period of suspension.
Rule 420(b) is as under :-  "(b) The period of break in service between the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement or premature retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement, and the period of suspension (if any), shall not count unless regularized as duty or leave by a specific order of the authority which passed the order of reinstatement."
10.
A perusal of this rule clearly shows that the same cannot be used to deprive the benefit of service to an officer who has been wrongly prematurely retired from service.
The respondent cannot be permitted to firstly prematurely retire a government servant and then to deny him the benefit of service on reinstatement either on account of the orders passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction or on the department realising its own mistake.
A perusal of the facts narrated above clearly shows that the petitioner was prematurely retired for no fault of his own.
Therefore, the respondent cannot be permitted to rely on rule 420 to deny the benefit of service to the petitioner in the intervening period from 1st of November, 1984 to 20th of March, 1987.
Apart from this, since the impugned order dated 27th of July, 1987 causes civil consequences, the name could not have been passed without complying with the principles of natural justice.
11.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders Annexures P-1 to P-5, P-13, P-15, P-19, P-21 and P-28 are hereby quashed.
the petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits on the basis that he has been on duty throughout.
In view of the fact that the consequential benefits accrued to the petitioner almost 16 years ago, the respondents shall have to pay interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date when the benefits became due till payment.
Let consequential benefits be calculated and paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
Petition allowed.