SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The State of Punjab has filed the present petition challenging the impugned award dated 21071998, passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as "the Labour Court").
The respondents (hereinafter referred to as "the workmen") were employed on daily wages with the Public Works Department (B&R), Punjab (hereinafter referred to as "the management"), on Class-IV posts.
The details of the employment of the workmen are given at page 5 of the award, which is as follows :  Sr. No. Name of the Worker and Father's name.
Post Date of employment.
1.
Shri Balbir SinghShri Bakshi Ram Beldar-cum-Mali 1485 2.
Shri Kulwant SinghShri Tulsi Ram Ditto 1.12.87 3.
Shri Des RajShri Mehar Chand Ditto 11.7.88 4.
Shri Chul BulShri Bandan Store ChowkidarLabourer 51184 5.
Shri SukhdevShri Tulsi Labourer 1.3.85 6.
Shri Pawan KumarShri Moti Lal Labour-cum-Chowkidar 3.6.86 7.
Shri Sushil KumarShri Chaman Lal Ditto 1.12.89 8.
Shri ParkashShri Bishan Dass Ditto 9491 9.
Shri Satwinder PalShri Hans Raj Beldar 1.12.86.
2.
These workmen, through their Union, raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication by reference dated 16121996.
The reference was as follows :-  "Whether the workmen Sarv Shri Balbir Singh, Kulwant Singh, Des Raj, Chul Bul, Sukhdev, Pawan Kumar, Sushil Kumar, Parkash and Satwinder Paul are entitled to pay at par with the regular employed, and are entitled to be regularised, if so from which date ?"
3.
It was pleaded that the workmen are being paid daily wages although they were performing the same duties as regular employees for a long period of time.
It was further pleaded that earlier also the workmen similarly situated had raised the similar industrial dispute which was decided in their favour.
As a result, the workmen who had raised the industrial dispute are now being paid the regular scales of pay.
It was also pleaded that the concerned officers had recommended the case of the workmen for regularisation to the Superintending Engineer, Construction circle, P.W.D.
(B and R), Hoshiarpur, vide Memo No. 869 dated 13011997.
According to the government policy, it was also recommended that the pay at par with the regular employees of the establishment should be paid to the workmen on their regularisation.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  "1.
Whether the workmen Sarv Shri Balbir, Kulwant Singh, Des Raj, Chul Bul, Sukhdev, Sushil Kumar, Parkash and Satinder Paul are entitled to wages at par with the wage of regular employees of their category ?
If so, from which date ?
2.
Whether the concerned workmen are also entitled to regularisation ?
If so, from which date ?"
5.
Both the issues have been decided together by the Labour Court.
6.
The Labour Court has rejected the claim of the workmen with regard to the regular pay scales even without first being regularised, on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Hasmer Singh and others, JT 1996(10) SC 876.
It has also been observed that merely because on an earlier occasion claim of the similarly situated daily wagers was upheld in reference No. 57 of 1992 and 17 of 1995, is of no assistance to the claim put forward by the workmen.
It was argued before the Labour Court that the management has been indulging in unfair labour practice as defined in Section 2(ra) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
The Union relied on the Fifth Schedule of the Act and Entry No. 10.
Entry No. 10 of the Fifth Schedule is as follows :  "To employ workmen as "badlis", casuals or temporaries and to continue them as such for years, with the object of depriving them of the status and privileges of permanent workmen."
The Labour Court has noticed that the management in the written statement has not taken the plea that the work for the execution of which the workmen concerned are employed, is of temporary, casual or seasonal in nature or their services are not needed throughout the year.
The Labour Court noticed on the basis of the details of the employment given by the management in the written statement that seven of the workmen had already served for a period more than 10 years.
Only two of the workmen, namely, Sushil Kumar and Parkash figuring at serial Nos. 7 and 8 have not completed 10 years though they too have put in more than seven years of service.
The Labour Court noticed the plea sought to be raised by the management during the course of evidence which was contrary to the pleaded case in the written statement to the effect that services of the workmen are not required because of the decision taken by the government that the work shall be got executed on contract basis.
This stand of the management was rejected by the Labour Court being in conflict with the plea taken in the written statement.
The Labour Court also took into consideration the recommendation made by Khazan Singh, Executive Engineer for regularisation of the services of the workmen to the Superintending Engineer according to the policy instructions of the government.
Relying on the aforesaid evidence the Labour Court has come to a conclusion that the management has indulged in unfair labour practice.
In regard to the aforesaid conclusion, the Labour Court has relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC.
118.
The Labour Court has taken into consideration the observations made by the Supreme Court that efforts must be made to regularise the workcharged employees or casual labourers who have completed two to three years of service subject to fulfilling the qualification.
The Labour Court further noticed the observations of the Supreme Court that if casual labourers continued for a fairly long spell, say two to three years, then presumption may arise that there is regular need for their services.
In para 5 of the written statement, the management has pleaded as follows :-  "That the case of regularisation of services, of the person under reference sent to Superintending Engineer Construction Circle PWD (B and R), Hoshiarpur, vide this office No. 858 dated 13th January, 1997, for regularisation of services under Government Policy in this respect and pay equal to regular establishment will be paid on regularisation.
Necessary information in this regard already given to the General Secretary of the Union."
7.
In view of this admission, the Labour Court has upheld the claim made by the workmen for regularisation.
Necessary direction has been issued to the Superintending Engineer to issue requisite Orders regularising the services of the workmen after satisfying that they fulfil the qualification on the subject within a period of three months from the date of the award and to allow the wages to the workmen in the regular scale of posts on and from the date each is regularised against it.
As noticed earlier, the workmen's claim for regular pay scale prior to order of regularisation has been rejected.
The management has however been directed to regularise the workmen within a period of three months from the date of the publication of the award.
8.
Mr. Kang appearing for the workmen has informed this Court that the award was published in the Punjab Govt. Gaz.
on 941999.
During the pendency of the writ petition, all the workmen have been regularised.
Mr. Kang has made a grievance that the order of regularisation has been issued after three months, i.e. on 26062001.
9.
After considering the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered opinion that this award does not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record.
The award is based on evidence and on the policy instructions issued by the Punjab Government.
Furthermore, the Labour Court has thoroughly examined the legal issues and given the findings on the basis of the judgments of the Supreme Court.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the award suffers from any legal infirmly which would constitute an error apparent on the face of the record.
10.
Mr. Rajiv Kwatra, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has vehemently argued that the Labour Court has no jurisdiction to grant the relief of regularisation.
11.
A perusal of the order of reference would show that the Labour Court was directed to decide the question as to whether the workmen were entitled to be regularised on the basis of the policy instructions.
It is not as if the Labour Court has granted a relief by exercising some jurisdiction not vested in it.
In fact, the Labour Court has decided the reference as it was incumbent upon it to do so.
Therefore, there is no merit in the submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the management.
12.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
With regard to the plea raised by Mr. Kang, of non-payment of the regular scales within a period of three months of the publication of the award, the remedy under Section 33C(2) of the Act is available to the workmen.
The workmen are at liberty to make application before the Labour Court for grant of wages in accordance with the award w.e.f.
three months after publication of the award in the gazette.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.