Amitava Lala, J - The contempt application is made for alleged violation of the order dated 20.12.1999 passed by this Court by persons holding the posts of Director of School Education and District Inspector of Schools, formerly or presently.
Affidavits are exchanged between the parties.
In the affidavit the alleged contemners have explained their position as to what was the difficulty in approving the appointment of Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff.
The specific case of the alleged condemners is that the posts are not sanctioned posts.
Therefore, unless the posts are sanctioned, no approval of service can be given apart from the fact that the same should be done, at present, through the School Service Commission.
Moreover, if the posts are now sanctioned on the basis of the roll strength, in that case 100-Point roaster is to be followed.
However, this might have been the subject matter of defence in the writ petition which has already been made before this Court and finally disposed of.
In a contempt proceeding, scope is very limited to decide this issue.
A general stand is taken by the persons concerned holding the office of the State that if they do not get an opportunity at the time of disposal of the writ petition, they will quietly observe the situation like a silent spectator and take the similar stand by way of filing affidavit in the contempt application as against Rule of Contempt which is highly deprecable stand and accordingly deprecated by this Court hereunder.
The justifiable stand would be, in that case, that to show the respect towards the Court by proceeding with the order for compliance within time span and if not possible during the time make a request to the Court to get extension of time or come with a case before issuance of Rule as to why the compliance is not possible.
Such part should be recorded in writing by communication to the party who may come forward alleging the Contempt.
Moreover it should be remembered who has obtained an order is in an advantageous position.
Therefore only by way of an affidavit a defence to the contempt cannot be an acceptable stand for the Court at all.
Another stand is normally taken by the alleged condemners before the Single Bench that an appeal has been preferred from the order which is pending before the Court.
Sometimes such appeals are so belated that it is made with an application for condonation of delay under Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
Therefore, unless delay is condoned by the Appeal Court for the purpose of making the appeal valid or the appeal has filed within the time and stay is obtained there is no appeal in the eye of law.
In such circumstances contempt application should be disposed of at first irrespective of pendency of the appeal following the observations as made in 1998(8) SCC 640, Dr. H Phunindre Singh and others v. KK Sethi and others.
Therefore, according to me, there cannot be any embargo in hearing of the contempt application but apart from deprecating the stand of the alleged contemners, no further order can be passed by the Court in the situation since the balance of convenience does not permit so.
2.
However, I dispose of the contempt application, without taking any penal action, by passing an order that the Authority concerned will proceed with the matter on the basis of the roll strength in creating the vacancy and if such vacancy is created, the Teaching and Non-teaching staff who have made this application will be given priority in approving their service.
3.
Thus, the contempt Rule stands disposed of.
Personal presence, if any, is dispensed with.
No order is passed as to costs.
Let xeroxed Certified Copy of this Judgment and Order be supplied to the parties by the department within seven days from the date of putting in requisition for drawing up and completion of the order as well as the Certified Copy thereof.
All parties are to act on a signed copy of the operative part of the judgment upon usual undertaking and as per the satisfaction of the officer in this Court as above.
Orders accordingly.