SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable on 29111952.
He was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on 16111970 and as Sub Inspector with effect from 1961984.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that he had earned 100 commendation certificates from his superior officers besides cash reward of Rs. 4000/- for the meritorious service during his service career.
However, by the impugned order annexure P/1 he was compulsorily retired at the age of 55 years on 27111985.
This order is under challenge in this writ petition.
2.
The respondents have contended that in the years 1972-73 and 1973-74, the petitioner had adverse remarks regarding his integrity in his service record and, therefore, the petitioner was rightly retired at the age of 55 years.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that the adverse remarks of integrity were before the promotion of the petitioner on 1961984 as Sub Inspector and, therefore, the adverse remarks stood wiped out in view of the promotion of the petitioner.
Counsel for the respondents argued that adverse remarks regarding integrity will not be wiped out even by promotion.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner has relied on the case of Dr. Om Prakash Gupta v. State of Haryana and others, 1988(6) SLR 370.
It is a judgment of the Division Bench of this court in which it has been held that adverse entry prior to promotion, crossing of efficiency bar etc. should not be taken into consideration for forming opinion regarding public interest for prematurely retiring a person.
The Division Bench had considered this question in the light of the judgment of Single Judge of this court in the case of Satpal Singh v. Deputy Inspector General of Police and another, 1985(2) SLR 36.
In that case the learned Single Judge has taken a view that in such matters the overall record of a Government servant has to be taken into account and that mere fact that such an officer has been allowed to cross efficiency bar after the report of "integrity doubtful" is of no consequence and the old report can be acted upon.
The Division Bench has relied on the case of Baldev Raj Chadha v. Union of India and others, 1980(3) SLR 1 where it was held that the obsolete reports even reflecting upon the integrity of a Government servant cannot be taken into account for determining his suitability for being retained in service on his attaining the age of 50/55 years.
Learned counsel has also relied upon the judgment of the Single Judge of this court in the case of Tara Chand v. Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh, 1992(3) SCT 301 (P&H) : 1992(2) RSJ 652.
It has been held that the petitioner in that case has already crossed the efficiency bar with effect from April 1, 1985 and that most of the adverse reports and punishments relate to the period prior to April 1, 1985 and in view of the fact that petitioner had been permitted to cross the efficiency bar and the rule of law as laid down in the case of Dr. Om Parkash Gupta (supra), the record prior to crossing the efficiency bar could not have been taken into consideration.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also argued that the appointing authority of the petitioner was Deputy Inspector General and he could not have been retired by the Superintendent of Police who has signed annexure P/1.
Counsel for the respondents has argued that the decision as to retirement has been taken by the officers committee and the Superintendent of Police has merely conveyed the order.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents has relied on the judgment in the case of State of Punjab v. Gurdas Singh etc., reported as 1998(2) SCT 165 (SC) : 1998(2) RSJ 574.
It is a judgment of three Judges of the Supreme Court in which it has been held as under:-  "11.
The facts in the present case are quite similar to that in Union of India v. VP Seth (supra).
Here also the only ground on which the order prematurely retiring Gurdas Singh was set-aside was that two adverse entries after his promotion from the rank of Asstt.
Sub-Inspector to Sub- Inspector were not communicated to him and earlier adverse entries could not be taken into account because even when those existed Gurdas Singh had earned his promotion.
It is not necessary for us to again reiterate the principles where the Court will interfere in the order of premature retirement of an employee as these have been accurately set-down by various pronouncements of this Court and particularly in Baikunth Nath Das case.
Before the decision to retire a Government servant prematurely is taken the authorities are required to consider the whole record of service.
Any adverse entry prior to earning of promotion or crossing of efficiency bar or picking up higher rank is not wiped out and can be taken into consideration while considering the overall performance of the employee during service.
The whole record of service of the employee will include any uncommunicated adverse entries as well."
6.
Regarding adverse remarks prior to the promotion, the learned counsel for the State has also cited the case of Badrinath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others, reported as 2000(4) SCT 832 (SC) : 2000(4) RSJ 256.
It is delivered by two Judges of the Supreme Court.
In the said case, in paragraph No. 58, the principles to be followed in such a case, have been laid down and the principle No. (3) is as under :-  "(3).
Adverse remarks of an officer for the entire period of service can be taken into consideration while promoting an officer or while passing an order of compulsory retirement.
But the weight which must be attached to the adverse remarks depends upon certain sound principles of fairness."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the case of State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M Patel, reported as 2001(2) SCT 339 (SC) : 2001(2) RSJ 87.
In the said judgment, the Bench has relied on the case of JD Srivastava v. State of M.P. and others, reported as 1984(2) SCC 8, in which it has been observed that the reports relating to the remote period are not quite relevant for the purpose of determining whether the employee should be compulsorily retired or not in the year 1981, as it would be an act bordering on perversity to dig out old files to find out some material to make an order against the officer.
In paragraph No. 11, the points decided by the Court are summarised and as per point No. (vii), if an officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
8.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has further argued that the petitioner's date of birth is 27.11.30 as can be calculated in annexure P/1.
He joined service on 29111952.
This, the petitioner has stated in para No. 2 of the writ petition and it is not in dispute.
Learned counsel has further argued that according to rule 918 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Haryana, a person can be compulsorily retired after commencing qualifying service of twenty-five years or after he attains the age of 55 years.
He has further argued that now the respondents have retired the petitioner at the age of 55 years but the petitioner completed 25 years of service in the year 1977.
He was promoted as Sub Inspector on 1961984.
Learned counsel has further argued that he was already having the adverse remarks when he was promoted as Sub Inspector and before he completed 25 years of service and when at that time, he has not been considered for compulsory retirement, the adverse remarks now cannot be considered against him, when he has been retired at the age of 55 years.
9.
The ratio of the judgments Supreme Court has now to be considered.
In the case of Badrinath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others (supra), the case of Gurdas Singh etc. (supra) is considered.
While laying down the guidelines out of which one is quoted above, it has been observed by the Supreme Court in Badrinath's case that the sentence in Gurdas Singh's case that any adverse entry prior to earning of promotion or crossing of efficiency bar or picking up higher rank is not wiped out and can be taken into considering while considering the overall performance of the employee during service needs to be explained in the context of the Bench accepting the three Judge Bench ruling in Baikunth Nath Dass's case.
It has been further held that the last observation in Gurdas Singh's case does not go against the general principles laid down in Baikunth Nath Dass's case to the effect that though adverse remarks prior to an earlier promotion can be taken into account, they could have lost their sting.
It was further held that there is a special fact in Gurdas Singh's case, namely, that the adverse remarks prior to the earlier promotion related to his "dishonesty" and in case relating to compulsory retirement, the sting in adverse remarks relating to dishonesty prior to an earlier promotion, cannot be said to be absolutely wiped out.
It is further observed that Gurdas Singh's case is not an authority to say that adverse remarks before a promotion, however remote, could be given full weight in all situations irrespective of whether they related to dishonestly or otherwise.
11.
After considering these principles, the fact that the adverse remarks before the promotion of the petitioner as Sub Inspector could be taken into consideration.
As mentioned in the case of Badrinath (supra), the sting is lost to the extent that full weight of the adverse remarks, though of dishonesty, cannot be given so as to compulsorily retire a person at the age of 55 years.
In these circumstances another position remains to be considered so far as present case is concerned.
The petitioner obviously was not retired after the qualifying service of 25 years when the respondent could have retired him.
He has completed qualifying service of 25 years in the year 1977 and promoted as Sub Inspector in 1984.
When this position is settled, the effect of continuation of petitioner after the qualifying service of 25 years and also promoting him would have an additional effect on the adverse remarks which he had suffered earlier.
In view of this peculiar circumstance, this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
12.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order annexure P/1 compulsory retiring the petitioner is quashed.
He shall be entitled to the consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.