SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners seek a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the orders passed by respondents No. 1-Union of India declining to make a reference of the Industrial dispute on 1881999.
The petitioners also seek a writ of Mandamus directing respondent No. 1.
Union of India to make the reference of the industrial dispute to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
2.
The State Bank of India Staff Congress, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as "the Union") sought a reference of the industrial dispute on behalf of petitioner No. 2-Ranjit Singh described as Canteen Boy-cum-Cash Coolie (hereinafter referred to as "the workman").
The workman claims that he was appointed by State Bank of India-respondent No. 3 (hereinafter referred to as `the Bank') at Bilaspur, HP to perform the duties of a messenger, but was designated as Canteen Boy in the year 1988.
The workman, in addition to the duties of the messenger, water boy, cash coolie was also required to prepare and serve tea to the employees of the bank twice a day.
The respondent-Bank used to pay the wages of Canteen Boy through the Local Implementation Committee constituted by the Respondent-Bank.
For the duties performed as Messenger, Water Boy and Cash Coolie, the workman was paid separately from the Bank's petty cash register.
It was further pleaded that workman is being paid a meagre sum of Rs. 700/- per month for the preparation of tea and Rs. 8/- per day for the duties of messenger/water-boy/cash coolie.
The Trade Union raised an industrial dispute in the year 1996.
However, the aforesaid dispute was closed as the Management assured to absorb the workman.
Thereafter, the Bank did not honour its commitment of absorption and initiated a move to terminate the services of the workman.
Thereafter, the Union again raised an industrial dispute by making a representation on 2971993.
The Union claimed on behalf of the workman full back-wages and absorption in the service of the Bank as he had completed 10 years of continuous service.
3.
The Bank, in its reply, stated that the workman was not an employee of the Bank, but that of the Local Implementation Committee.
It was further stated that the work of Cash Coolie was entrusted to the workman as he was easily available.
Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chandigarh submitted failure report of the Conciliation Proceedings on 2641999.
It was observed that both the sides had been given various suggestions for amicable settlement of the dispute.
Both the parties are adamant on their respective stands.
Hence no settlement could be arrived at.
Thus the conciliation proceedings were declared as failure.
On the basis of this conciliation report, the Union of India has declined to make the reference with the following observations :-  "The Bank has not extended any appointment, conditions of service, and as such the claim is frivolous."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. JG Verma submitted that the order - Annexure P-4, declining the reference dated 1881999, is liable to be quashed as it is beyond the jurisdiction vested in respondent No. 1.
It is submitted that respondent No. 1 could not have adjudicated on the merits of the industrial dispute.
This matter had to be left to be decided by the appropriate Tribunal.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. Ashok Gupta, learned counsel appearing for respondents No. 3 and 4 has vehemently argued that the matter is no longer res integra.
It is covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of India and others v. State Bank of India Canteen Employees' Union, 1998(3) SCT 12 (SC) : 2000(2) RSJ 528.
Learned counsel has also relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Employers in relation to the Management of Reserve Bank of India v. Their Workman, 1996(2) SCT 678 (SC) : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 1241.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgments, it is submitted that the petitioner, being a canteen worker, no relationship of employer-employee existed between the Bank and the workman.
Learned counsel has also taken the preliminary objection on the ground that petitioner No. 1 has not disclosed that the earlier industrial dispute raised by the workman had been rejected.
Learned counsel further submitted that under any circumstances, this Court will not have any territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition as no part of the industrial dispute had arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
6.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
I find no merit in the submission of Mr. Gupta with regard to the non- disclosure of the earlier industrial dispute.
A perusal of paragraph 6 of the writ petition shows that the dismissal of the earlier industrial dispute has been clearly disclosed.
8.
I also do not find any substance in the second preliminary objection with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
It is not disputed that the Head office of the Bank is situated within the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the Union Territory Government would not be appropriate Government under the Industrial Disputes Act.
I also do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel to the effect that the matter is squarely covered by the judgments of the Supreme Court quoted above.
A bare perusal of the petitioner would clearly indicate that the workman is claiming to be an employee of the respondent-Bank in the capacity of messenger and cash coolie.
His categoric case is that although he has been made to perform multifarious functions, yet he is being described as a Canteen Boy.
These are matters which will be adjudicated upon by the Labour Court, after receipt and appreciation of the evidence.
The aforesaid two judgments relied upon by the learned counsel proceeded on the basis that there was no dispute as to whether or not the employees therein were canteen workers.
9.
I find considerable force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the respondents have no jurisdiction to adjudicate the industrial dispute on merits.
From the facts narrated above, it becomes quite evident that the issues raised involved disputed questions of facts.
Decision on these facts can only be given after appreciation of the evidence.
This function has been left under the various legislations dealing with the problems of the labour with the Labour Courts/Tribunals established thereunder.
I am of the considered opinion that the order-Annexure P-4 is wholly without jurisdiction, and therefore, liable to be quashed and set aside.
10.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order-Annexure P-4, declining the reference of the workman, is hereby quashed and set aside.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to make the reference of the industrial dispute to the appropriate Labour Court/Tribunal.
Let the reference be made within a period of two months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.