Pratap Kumar Ray, J - In the instant case the writ petitioner has challenged the decision dated 18th March, 1997 passed by the Secretary, Department of School Education, Government of West Bengal being Annexure `M' page 36 of the writ application whereby and whereunder the contentions of the writ petitioner namely, the post of Headmistress of a school being a single cadre post was not possible to be reserved and the contention that the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Cooch Bihar had the right to cancel, modify and vary the reservation process by deserving the posts, were rejected by the said Authority.
The fact of the writ application not in dispute.
A post of Headmistress was buying vacant.
The District Inspector of Schools (SE) Cooch Bihar hereinafter referred to as the `District Inspector of Schools' concerned following the roster rule reserved the said post for scheduled caste candidate and accorded permission in favour of the school authority to fill up the said vacancy by the decision dated 13th December, 1991.
The school authority, however, took a resolution on 17991 to change the said vacancy as reserved for scheduled caste candidate to a general candidate and had referred the matter to the District Inspector of Schools concerned, who in turn by the decision dated 18th January, 1992 dereserved the vacancy and directed to fill up the vacancy by general candidates upon observing that the next vacancy (teaching) must be filled up by scheduled caste candidate.
In pursuance of such decision, the school authority advertised the post in the newspaper seeking the names from general candidates and simultaneously invited the names from the National Employment Exchange.
The panel was prepared following the recruitment rule with such candidates of general category wherein the writ petitioner stood first in the panel.
However, second candidate of the panel though he was not a candidate belonging to the scheduled caste community challenged such selection upon questioning the entire panel and the decision of the District Inspector of Schools concerned contending, inter alia, that the District Inspector of Schools had no power and jurisdiction to dereserve a vacancy, which was marked for scheduled caste candidates.
This writ petition was numbered as C.O.
No. 1359 (W) of 1993.
The writ petitioner also moved another writ petition being C.O.
No. 368 (W) of 1993 praying necessary directions to the District Inspector of Schools concerned to accord approval of the panel.
Both the matters were taken up together and by the judgment dated 21st November, 1996 SK Sen, J (as His Lordship then was) disposed of the matters directing the Secretary, Education Department, Government of West Bengal to decide the grievances of the present writ petitioner as well as the second candidate of the panel.
In terms of such direction of this Court, the impugned decision of this writ application was passed by the Secretary, Education Department, Government of West Bengal whereby and whereunder it has been held that the post of Headmistress since not a single cadre post, the same can be tagged with the other teaching post for maintaining the roster rule upon relying the Government Memo issued under Memo No. 40/TW/EC Cal.
dated 22nd January, 1991.
By the impugned decision it is further held that the District Inspector of Schools had no power to dereserve the vacancy.
Hence, the entire panel was cancelled challenging such the present writ application.
2.
The only question for decision lies as to whether the post of Headmaster or Headmistress is a single cadre post or not.
The writ petitioner has placed a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court passed in F.M.A.T No. 642 of 1996 on 4696 by the Bench comprising of SB Sinha, J (as His Lordship then was) and SN Chakraborty, J (as His Lordship then was).
Relying upon the said judgment of the Division Bench, it is contended that since there is a decision of the Division Bench of this Court declaring that the post of Headmaster of a school cannot be reserved, the impugned decision of the writ application is not sustainable.
Furthermore, it is submitted that a judgment of the Division Bench is binding to a Single Bench of this Court and in the event of any contrary view by this Single Bench, the matter should be referred to a Larger Bench for adjudication.
The writ petitioner further submitted the judgments of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1988 SC 959 (Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar, 1988(4) SCC 1; Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research v. Faculty Associate, and 1999(4) SCT 627 (SC) : 1999(8) SCC 176 : 1999 C Cr LR (SC) 542, S.R.
Murthy v. State of Karnataka and others, to contend that a single cadre post cannot be reserved.
There is no doubt about the legal proposition as settled by the Apex Court.
A single Judge cadre post cannot be reserved but the question is whether the post of Headmaster of Headmistress of school is a single cadre post or not.
The answer goes in the negative in view of positive Memorandum issued by the Government being Memorandum No. 40-TW/EC Cal.
dated 22nd January, 1991 issued by the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes Welfare Department, Government of West Bengal, which speaks as follows :-  "1.
Both the Secondary and Higher Secondary Units in any particular school shall be considered as one single Judge unit and all the posts in both the units shall be deemed to belong to one single establishment.
2.
All the posts in any school shall be divided under two distinct categories, viz. (i) teaching category and (ii) non-teaching category.
3.
The post of Headmaster, the post of Assistant Headmaster and the posts of Assistant Teachers in any school shall be grouped together to constitute the teaching category, while all the other posts (including the post of Librarian) in the said school shall constitute a separate Group under the non-teaching category.
4.
The 50-point roster of vacancies shall apply in relation to each of the aforesaid two Groups of posts under the respective categories and it shall not apply individually in relation to any individual post under either Group, one roster shall be maintained in respect of all the vacancies against all the posts grouped together under the teaching category.
Similarly, another roster shall be maintained in respect of all the vacancies against all the posts grouped together under the non-teaching category."
3.
From the aforesaid Memorandum it is clear that in a school, Secondary or Higher Secondary there are only two Groups, one is teaching cadre and another is non-teaching cadre.
Further it is clear that under the teaching cadre, post of Headmaster/Headmistress/Assistant Headmaster/Assistant Headmistress and other teaching staff are included.
It is further revealed from the said Memorandum that for the purpose of maintenance of roster only two rosters are to be maintained, one for teaching staff and another for non-teaching staff.
In the Circular it is further emphasised that "it shall not apply individually in relation to any individual post under either Group, one roster shall be made in respect of all the vacancies against all the posts under Group together under the teaching cadre".
In Clause 3 it is noted that the post of Headmaster, Assistant Headmaster and the posts of Assistant Teachers in any school shall be grouped together to constitute the teaching category.
Hence from the aforesaid Memorandum it is clear that the post of Headmaster is not a single cadre post.
But it is a post in teaching cadre wherein there are so many teaching posts.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the impugned decision cannot be said as illegal and arbitrary.
Now the question whether this matter to be referred to a Larger Bench for adjudication as pleaded by the learned Advocate of the writ petitioner.
On perusal of the judgment of the Division Bench as already referred to in FMAT 642/96 it is clear that this Memorandum No. 40-TW/EC Cal.
dated 22nd January, 1991 was not all referred to before the said Division Bench.
Accordingly, the said Division Bench had no occasion to analyse as to whether the post of Headmaster is a single cadre post or not, on the reflection of the Government Memorandum aforesaid, which is very clear on that point.
Hence, the judgment passed by the Division Bench as referred to is attracted by the doctrine of judgment per incuriam and/or doctrine of Sub silentio.
Hence, that judgment cannot be a binding precedence with due respect to the Division Bench, before this Court.
It has been decided by the Apex Court that for the purpose of having binding precedence ingredients and materials must be of the nature as would satisfy the doctrine of ratio decidendi.
What is precedent or not having been considered and decided by the Apex Court in several judgments and tests have been prescribed.
In the case reported in State of Punjab v. Baldeb Singh, 1994(6) SCC 172 which is a Constitution Bench Judgment, in paragraph 43 it is held that" a decision is an authority for what it decides and not have everything said therein constitutes a "precedent".
The Court are obliged to employ an intelligent technique in the use of `precedent' bearing it in mind that "a decision of the Court takes it colour from the questions involved in the case in which it was rendered".
In the case of Regional Manager v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, AIR 1976 SC 1766, it is held "it is the rule deducible from the application of law to the facts and circumstances of a case which constitutes its ratio decidendi and not some consequences based upon the facts which may appear to be similar.
One additional or different fact can made a world of difference between conclusion in two cases, even when the same principles are applied in each case to similar facts."
4.
Further analysing the doctrine of sub silentio and/or judgment per incuriam and/or the principle of judgment passed in-advertance, the Apex Court in the case of Good Year Ltd v. State of Haryana, reported in AIR 1980 SC 781 and in the case of Mittal Engg.
Works (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, 1997(1) SCC 203, has decided the point on categorical observation that if any factual matrix is not considered which may be guiding factor for change of the proposition of law, then under such state of affairs that judgment cannot be said as an authority and/or binding `precedent' to the other Courts.
Considering the matter in that angle with due respect to the judgment of the Division Bench, I am sorry not to accept the said judgment as a `precedent'.
It is ex-facie clear that the Division Bench got no scope to decide the said question of law on the factual matrix namely, Memorandum No. 40-TW/EC Cal.
dated 22nd January, 1991 wherein it has been clearly stated that the post of Headmaster and Headmistress belonging to teaching cadre wherein there are so many posts in that cadre and accordingly the post of Headmaster and Headmistress declared as not of "a single cadre post".
Since it is held by this Court that a post of Headmaster is not a single cadre post, accordingly the judgment as relied upon by the learned Advocate of the writ petitioner has no relevancy.
5.
In that view of the matter the impugned decision as assailed in the writ application cannot be said as illegal and arbitrary for judicial review of this Court.
6.
Hence the writ application is dismissed.
7.
There will be no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.