Gorachand De, J - The writ petitioner filed this writ petition claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs:-  "(a) A writ of and/or in the nature of Mandamus be issued commanding the respondents to pay the DCR Gratuity, money value of commuted portion of pension and other retirement dues and any other payment due and payable to your petitioner on any account whatsoever including interest @ 18% for delayed payment of the said retirement dues and to forbear them to give effect to the notice dated April 6, 1991 and/or to act in accordance with and/or in pursuance to the said letter dated April 6, 1991 (being Annexure `J' to the petition).
(b) A writ of and/or in the nature of Certiorari directing the respondents to certify and transmit all the records including the notice dated April 6, 1991 to this Hon'ble Court so that the same may be quashed and consinable (conscionable ?)
justice may be done; (c) Rule Nisi in terms of prayers (a) and (b) above.
If the respondents fail to show cause or sufficient cause the Rule may be made absolute.
(d) An injunction restraining the respondents and/or each one of them and their servants, agents and assigns to give effect and/or further effect to the said notice dated April 6, 1991 and/or to take any steps and/or to act in accordance with and/or in pursuance to the aid notice dated April 6, 1991 issued the land Manager (being Annexure J) to the petitioner till the disposal of the Rule; (e) An ad interim order of injunction be passed restraining the respondents and/or each one of them, their agents and servants and assigns to give effect and further to the notice dated April 6, 1991 and/or to take any steps and further steps and/or to act in accordance with and/or pursuance to the said notice dated April 6, 1991 (being Annexure `J') to the petition.
(f) Ad interim order of injunction in terms of prayers (d) and (e) above; (g) Cost of this application; (h) Such other and further order or orders, direction or directions as to this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper."
2.
The basic fact of the case is that the writ petitioner was appointed on 2061952 as a Clerk in the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer's Department of the Calcutta Port Trust and was promoted to the post of Head Clerk in the year 1966.
Subsequently he was selected for the post of Inspector of Accounts and became an officer in Class II category in the year 1976 and ultimately, he was promoted to the post of Accounts Officer in Class I category in the year 1978.
In February 1987, the writ petitioner was promoted in a newly created post of Senior Accounts Officer and thus, he was the first man, it is alleged, from a Class III clerical cadre to have such a promotion in the entire Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer's Department and it caused eye sure (sore ?)
to some of his colleagues.
3.
All on a sudden, an order of suspension bearing No. 7806/CON/FA and CAO/2 dated June 5, 1987 was served on the writ petitioner by the Deputy Chairman on the contemplation of a departmental proceeding and on October 12, 1987 a charge-sheet was issued by the Chairman, acting as a Disciplinary Authority by his order dated September 19, 1987.
The writ petitioner by a letter dated 26th October, 1987 denied all the charges and prayed for giving inspection of and taking copies of documents relied upon.
By an order dated November 19, 1987 the Inquiring Officer requested the writ petitioner to attend the inquiry to be held in his office on 27111987 and a reply was sent by the writ petitioner on November 24, 1987 requesting the Inquiring Officer not to hold that inquiry till the inspection and availability of the documents on the basis of which a written statement of defence was to be filed.
4.
Meanwhile, on November 3, 1987 a group of officers of the Central Bureau of Investigation raided the residence of the writ petitioner and subsequently started a case bearing No. RC No. 70/87 (GR Case No. 3407/87), on the charges identical to the charges made in the charge-sheet issued to the writ petitioner by the Disciplinary Authority.
During the pendency of the investigation of the said case by the CBI, the writ petitioner was directed to disclose his defence by the Disciplinary Authority for which the petitioner moved this Hon'ble Court and on 15121987, Mr. Ajit Kumar Sengupta, J (as His Lordship then was) passed the following order :  "The petitioner shall reply to the charge sheet within four weeks from date, either denying or admitting the charges levelled against him.
The petitioner shall be given inspection of the documents or the copies of the documents which have been asked for by the petitioner or relied or to be relied on by the Disciplinary Authority in the enquiry proceedings.
Without giving the petitioner the inspection or the copies of the documents as mentioned hereinbefore the proceedings will not continue.
In any event, the Enquiry Officer shall proceed with the departmental enquiry only after the charge- sheet in the criminal case is filed upon oral application CBI is made a party.
CBI is directed to file the charge-sheet within eight weeks from date.
Respondents will be at liberty to extend the service of the petitioner for the purpose of completing the disciplinary proceedings subject to the aforesaid disciplinary proceedings shall continue but the final order, if passed, shall not be communicated to or enforced against the petitioner without leave of the Court."
5.
The CBI having failed to make out a case submitted a final report on February 16, 1988 before the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Calcutta and prayed for discharge of the accused and the Chief Presidency Magistrate by an order dated February 25, 1988 discharged the accused from that case.
6.
The date of retirement of the writ petitioner from the service was on and from 29.2.1988 on attaining the age of superannuation.
But by a letter dated 29th February, 1988, posted on March 1, 1988 under Registered Post with AD, the respondent No. 3, the Chief Accounts Officer informed the writ petitioner that the Chairman was pleased to extend the service of the writ petitioner beyond 29.2.1988.
The said letter was received by the writ petitioner on 8th March, 1988, that is long after his date of superannuation, and hence it is alleged that the said order is not binding on the writ petitioner and no order can be passed against him either in the disciplinary proceeding or otherwise after cessation of employee and employer relationship on superannuation.
But the Enquiry Officer by a letter dated 12th March, 1988 asked the writ petitioner to attend various offices on 2131988, 2231988 and 2331988 for taking inspection of the documents.
The writ petitioner by a letter dated 21st March, 1988 intimated the Inquiring Officer that he was incompetent to proceed with the purported departmental proceedings after retirement of the writ petitioner on 29th February, 1988 and after cessation of the relationship of employer and employee on superannuation.
As the retirement dues and benefits were not paid to the writ petitioner on the pretext of pendency of the disciplinary proceeding, another application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India was moved before this Court and after hearing both sides, Mr. Ajit Kumar Sengupta, J (as His Lordship then was) on April 29, 1988 passed the following order :  "There will be a rule as prayed for.
Mr. Banerjee appearing for the respondents waives service of the rule is made returnabel forthwtih.
There will be an ad interim order of injunction in terms of prayers (d) and (f) of the petition.
Liberty is given to the respondents to apply for vacating or varying this interim order upon notice to the petitioner.
Affidavit in opposition is to be filed by 3151988, reply by 111988 and adjd.
till 1661988.
All parties shall act on a signed copy of the minutes of the order on usual undertaking."
7.
Incidentally it is to be mentioned that the prayers (d) and (f) of the said writ petition were as under :  "(d) An injunction restraining the respondents and/or each one of them and their servants, agents and assignees not to take any steps or further step or steps to proceed further with the purported departmental proceedings initiated by the respondent No. 2 by issuing charge sheet being No. FA/N/204 dated September 19, 1987 till the disposal of the rule; (f) An ad interim order of injunction be passed restraining the respondents and/or each one of them and their servants, agents and assignees from taking any step and/or further steps under and in terms of charge-sheet dated September 19, 1987 and/or give any effect or further effect to the said charge-sheet as well as the order of suspension and/or proceeding further in any manner whatsoever with the departmental proceedings initiated on the basis of the charge-sheet dated September 19, 1987."
8.
The respondents preferred an appeal against the said order dated 29th April, 1988 and on hearing was pleased to pass no order on the application for stay filed by the respondents.
On the other hand, for wilful violation of the order dated 29th April, 1988 a Contempt Rule was issued against the respondents by Ajit Kumar Sengupta, J and during the pendency of the said contempt matter, the Chairman by an order dated 24th August, 1990, revoked the order of suspension of the writ petitioner.
By another letter dated 24th August, 1990 the Financial Adviser of the Chief Accounts Officer informed the petitioner that he was allowed by the Chairman to retire on superannuation on February 28, 1988.
In the said letter, request was also made to return the Identity Card of the writ petitioner to the Senior Accounts Officer, Pre-audit to enable the said Senior Accounts Officer to process the settlement paper.
The Identity Card was returned by a letter dated 27.8.1990 to the said Senior Accounts Officer.
9.
By a letter dated 27th August, 1990, the Financial Adviser and the Chief Accounts Officer intimated the writ petitioner that the period of suspension had been treated as on duty and he would get the full pay and allowances from the period from 561987 to 29.2.1988 after deducting the subsistence allowance already paid to the writ petitioner.
By separate letter dated 27th August, 1990, the Financial Adviser and the Chief Accounts Officer intimated the writ petitioner that the bill for payment of first pension and DCR Gratuity had been passed for payment and he was advised to call at the Head Office of the respondents with passport size photograph of his wife in one block on any Monday, Wednesday and Friday.
It was also intimated in the said letter that the amount of pension and gratuity had been calculated on provisional basis pending final Government decision as regards calculation of the pension and gratuity.
It was intimated that by a letter dated 27th August, 1990, the respondents made a request to the Government in terms of Government Order No. A-38011/7/87 PE dated August 13, 1990 issued by the Ministry of Surface Transport (Port Wing) for issuing necessary instruction and clarification with regards to calculation of pension and gratuity payable to the officers.
10.
The writ petitioner was paid the difference of full pay and allowances and first pension in terms of the letter dated 27th August, 1988, but he was not paid the DCR gratuity.
This fact was brought to the notice of the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer by a letter dated 6th September, 1990 demanding payment of the DCR gratuity with interest @ 18% for delayed payment.
The petitioner also applied for commutation of one-third of pension by letter dated 6th September, 1990 and requested to pay the cash equivalent of the commuted value of pension.
11.
Since the order of retirement of the writ petitioner with effect from 29th February, 1988 was communicated on 24th August, 1990 and all his retirement dues were not paid, it is alleged that he could not arrange for a suitable accommodation after vacating the official quarter at 9/1, Remount Road.
The land Manager of the respondent Trust asked the writ petitioner by a letter dated 28th November, 1990 to vacate the said official quarter by 25th February, 1991.
In reply the petitioner sent a letter dated 5th February, 1991 praying for permission to retain the quarter for a further period of six months after 25th February, 1991.
The prayer was however rejected by the land Manager by his letter dated 9th February, 1991 and the writ petitioner was directed to hand over vacant possession of the quarter on 25th February, 1991 to the representative of the department.
An appeal dated 22nd February, 1991 was made to the Chairman of the respondent Trust for recalling of the direction contained in the letter dated 9th February, 1991 of the land Manager and for release of all his dues.
The appeal was turned down and by a letter dated 6th April, 1991, the land Manager asked the writ petitioner to quit, vacate and deliver up vacant and peaceful possession of the said quarter on 30th April, 1991 at 11 A.M. On receiving the said notice the writ petitioner again sent a representation on 16th April, 1991 to the Chairman of the respondent Trust with copy to the land Manager praying for release of the retirement dues and for retention of the said quarter till payment of all his dues.
But no reply having been received and being apprehensive of the action to be taken on the notice dated 6th April, 1991, this writ petition was filed.
12.
An interim order was passed on 2941991 by Kalyanmoy Ganguly, J (as His Lordship then was) whereby the respondents were restrained from evicting the petitioner from the said quarter and the petitioner was directed to go on paying quarter rent at the rate at which he was paying.
The said interim order was made without prejudice to the rights and contention of the parties.
13.
The respondents contested the writ petition after filing an affidavit solemnly affirmed on 18th of September, 1991.
14.
The substance of the Affidavit-in-Opposition is that though the petitioner retired from service in February, 1988 and though he was allowed to occupy the official flat upto 25th February, 1991, the writ petitioner has been occupying a valuable quarter of the respondent-Trust located at Alipore by paying a nominal rent and the Trust is entitled to proceed against him for eviction for his unauthorised occupation and also for recovery penal rent or damages.
It is also contended that under CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 the respondent-Trust is entitled to withhold the gratuity till the completion of the departmental proceedings so that the loss suffered by the Trust due to misconduct of the writ petitioner could be recovered by adjustment of the gratuity amount.
15.
In course of hearing it was contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that :  (a) the writ petitioner has a legal right to occupy the quarter until his entire retiral benefits are paid; (b) port trust has withheld gratuity arbitrarily on the ground that the petitioner did not vacate the quarter; (c) for delayed payment of gratuity the petitioner is entitled interest @ 18% per annum, since non-payment is due to administrative lapses.
16.
It is already indicated above by quoting the prayer portion of the writ petition that the prayer (a) can be split into two parts :-  (i) Issuance of a mandate on the respondents to pay DCR gratuity, money value of committed pension and other dues with interest @ 18% per annum; (ii) not to give effect to the impugned notice dated 6th April, 1991 as regards vacating the official quarter on 30th April, 1991 at 11 am 17.
At the very outset it is to be noted from the materials on record including the statement made in paragraph 19 of the Affidavit-in-Opposition that the respondents actually withheld DCR gratuity, commutted value of pension and a further sum of Rs. 10,000/- for adjustment of quarter rent.
Admittedly a disciplinary proceeding was initiated against the writ petitioner while he was in service.
Pointing out Rule 9(4) of Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 it was argued by the learned Counsel for the respondents that in the case of Government servant who has retired on attaining the age of superannuation or otherwise and against whom any departmental or judicial proceedings are instituted or where departmental proceedings are continued under sub-rule (ii), a provisional pension as provided in Rule 69 shall be sanctioned.
The learned Counsel also pointing out the Rule 69(1)(c) of the said Rules argued that no gratuity shall be paid to the Government servant until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon.
Hence it was argued that till the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issuance of final orders thereon, the question of making payment of the gratuity to the writ petitioner did not arise.
It is further argued that under Rule 4 of the Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981 the writ petitioner after his retirement was not eligible to commute fraction of his provisional pension during the pendency of the departmental or judicial proceedings.
18.
So in fact the entire dispute in this writ petition centers round on the two questions referred to the points (a) and (b) in paragraph 15 hereinabove.
Admittedly a departmental proceeding was started against the writ petitioner and for the purpose of its continuation, even after the date of retirement of the writ petitioner, his service was extended, but ultimately he was allowed to retire on the due date of his retirement on superannuation with effect from 29.2.1988 and this intimation was given to the writ petitioner by a letter dated 24th August, 1990.
The disciplinary proceedings also did not proceed any further thereafter.
It is also an admitted fact that during the pendency of the previous two writ petitions and in course of the pendency of the contempt application all the retiral benefits excepting gratuity were paid to the writ petitioner in 1990 and the DCR gratuity was withheld due to the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings.
The petitioner was also allowed to occupy the official flat upto 25th February, 1991 presumably due to the delayed intimation given to the writ petitioner as regards his date of retirement.
So it appears that upto 2421991 the occupation of the official quarter by the writ petitioner was authorised by the respondents.
Subsequently by the notice dated 6th April, 1991, the respondent asked the writ petitioner to vacate the said quarter on the 30th April, 1991.
It appears that till 30th April, 1991, 11 am, the writ petitioner was allowed to retain authorised and lawful possession of the quarter.
19.
There is nothing in the notice issued by Port Trust to indicate that the DCR gratuity or other retiral dues were withheld for not getting the vacant possession of the quarter.
On the other hand, from the notice dated 6th April, 1991 (Annexure `J') a threat was given to the writ petitioner to proceed against him under the provisions of Major Port Trust Act, 1963 for evicting the writ petitioner in due course of law.
However, on the basis of the Interim Order passed on 2941991 the writ petitioner has been occupying the quarter on payment of rent at the rate at which he was paying.
However, the said Interim Order was made without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
So the writ petitioner tried to argue that unless and until all his retirement dues are paid, he is not liable to be evicted from the quarter.
Moreover, it is also argued that as the retirement benefits were not paid due to the administrative lapses of the respondents, the writ petitioner is entitled to get interest on the entire dues.
However, in the Affidavit-in-Opposition it is contended that the respondents are entitled to withhold gratuity under CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 till the conclusion of the departmental proceedings so that the loss suffered by the Port Trust due to the misconduct of the writ petitioner could be recovered by way of adjustment against the gratuity amount.
In course of hearing, the learned Counsel for the respondents pointed out that in this writ petition, an interim order was obtained by the writ petitioner whereby the Port Trust was restrained from evicting the petitioner from the quarter.
In the said order the writ petitioner was directed to go on paying quarter rent at the rate at which he way paying, and the order was made without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
In view of the said interim order the Port Trust could not take any action on the basis of the Eviction Notice issued on April 6, 1991 and the writ petitioner practically prevented the Port Trust from exercising its statutory right of recovering its possession of public property in accordance with law on the basis of its alleged legal right to withhold possession.
So the writ petitioner had taken a great risk by restraining the Port Trust from proceeding against him in accordance with law and the Port Trust was deprived of its right to recover damages for wrongful occupation.
Hence the learned Counsel concluded that the occupation of the quarter by the writ petitioner beyond the period allowed by the Port Trust is unauthorised and as such, the Port Trust has every right to realise penal rent in accordance with Rules for the unauthorised occupation of the quarter by the writ petitioner.
20.
However, the learned Counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on a decision of the Apex Court reported in 1991(1) Supreme Court Cases 725, Smt. Violet Issac and others v. Union of India and others tried to argue that unless retiral benefits are paid, eviction from the official quarter is not permissible.
But it appears from the said decision that the issue before the Supreme Court was whether family pension was payable to the widow notwithstanding contrary direction in the Will and it was held that in so far as the family pension is concerned, the widow is entitled to it for reasons stated in the judgment.
The attention of the Supreme Court was drawn to the fact that the widow was occupying the quarter.
On that ground the trial Court held that the Railway Administration was free to evict the writ petitioner in accordance with the rules but only after payment of family pension to the widow.
So it is rightly contended by the learned Counsel for the Port Trust that the ratio in the said decision is not directed that an employee is entitled to withhold possession of the Government quarter until his retiral dues are fully paid.
The Apex Court merely noted the submission without deciding anything about entitlement of the employee to hold over possession.
In fact, no decision was produced before this Court to show that an employee is entitled to or has a right to occupy quarter until his retiral dues are fully paid.
21.
It is already stated above the writ petitioner was in authorised occupation of the flat upto 30th April, 1991.
The subsequent possession is on the strength of the interim order passed on 2941991.
In this writ petition.
It is also stated above that against the said interim order dated 2941991, an appeal was filed by the respondent Trust, but no stay order was granted.
Ultimately, the writ petition was disposed of on 16112000 and the inquiry proceeding was quashed mainly on the ground that the writ petitioner was permitted to retire w.e.f.
29.2.1988.
Consequently the appeal filed by the respondent Trust against the interim order was also dismissed as infructuous by an order dated 21112000 in A.P.O.
No. 385 of 1988.
Thus the writ petitioner had been occupying the flat in terms of the interim order dated 2941991 and such possession was without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties in this writ petition.
The respondent-Port Trust did not allow the writ petitioner to occupy the flat beyond 30th April, 1991.
Since there is no rule that the employee has a right to occupy the official flat until the payment of all retiral dues, it cannot be said that the occupation of that flat by the writ petitioner was authorised or had any sanction of law.
Accordingly, it is held that for the period from 1st May, 1991, the writ petitioner is in unauthorised occupation of the flat in question and hence, the respondents shall be at liberty to recover penal rent in accordance with the approved rules.
22.
The learned Counsel for the writ petitioner tried to argue, placing reliance on different judgments of the Apex Court reported in 1995(1) SCT 233 (SC) : 1994(6) SCC 589, R Kapur v Director of Inspection (Painting and Publication) Income Tax and another, 1991(1) SCC 725 (Smt. Violet Issaac and others.
v. Union of India and others), 1995(2) SCT 534 (SC) : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 1129, Anirudh Pandey v. Bihar State Road Transport Corporation and another, 1987(4) SCC 328, OP Gupta v. Union of India and others, and 1999(2) SCT 347 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1212, Dr. Uma Agrawal v. State of UP and another that for withholding the retiral benefit interest at the rate of 18% is to be accorded.
It was further pointed out that in the decision of Dr. Uma Agrawal (supra) the Apex Court granted interest even at penal rate which was computed at a lump sum of Rs. 1,00,000/-.
It was also argued that as the respondent has not been able to explain the cause of withholding the retiral benefit, the writ petitioner is entitled to claim interest at the rate of 18% per annum which is less than the reasonable rate of interest being charged by the nationalised bank.
23.
Replying on this issue the learned Counsel for the respondents placing reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court in Union of India v. Ujagarh, reported in 1991(11) SCC 116 and Union of India v. Balakrishna Nambiar, reported in 1998(2) SCC 706 argued that interest would not be payable on the amount of gratuity so long the writ petitioner is in unauthorised occupation of the government accommodation.
24.
The learned Counsel further placed reliance on the decision of Wajid Chand v. Union of India and others, reported in Judgment Today 2000 Suppl.
(1) Supreme Court 515 and Union of India and others v. Shibcharan, reported in 1991 Suppl.
(2) Supreme Court Cases 386 and contended that penal rent is to be charged for unauthorised occupation of the quarter and the said amount is to be deducted from the retiral dues.
25.
On scrutiny of the different decisions it appears that the principle is well settled that interest on retirement dues should be allowed if it is found that the delayed payment was due to the administrative lapses.
Similarly the law is well settled that penal rent can be charged from an employee for unauthorised occupation of official quarter after retirement.
In this case, both the parties tried to justify their respective cases the writ petitioner tried to argue that his possession was not unauthorised, whereas the respondents tried to show that the delayed payment was not due to administrative lapses but due to the pendency of the departmental proceedings.
It is pertinent to mention that the date of retirement of the writ petitioner on superannuation was 29.2.1988 and his service was extended for conclusion of the departmental proceeding by a letter dated 29.2.1988 which was issued on 131988.
It is further to be noted that the order of suspension was dated 561987 and the charge-sheet dated 1991987 was served on the writ petitioner on 12101987.
The CBI after investigation in the case filed final report on 1621988 and after accepting the said final report, the learned Magistrate discharged the writ petitioner on 25.2.1988.
Surprisingly enough, even getting an order for extension of the service of the writ petitioner for completion of the departmental proceeding as early as on 15121987, the said service could only be extended on the basis of a letter dated 29.2.1988 issued on 131988.
This delayed extension of service is undoubtedly due to administrative lapses.
Similarly no reason was assigned for non-payment of the balance retiral dues though no order of stay was received from the appellate Court by the respondents against the interim order passed against them for proceeding further with the said inquiry proceeding as early as on 29.4.1988.
No attempt was also made for proceeding with the appeal which was subsequently dismissed on 21112000 being infructuous.
So from the series of events, it can safely be concluded that the non-payment of the retiral benefit or delayed payment of the balance retiral benefits was due to administrative lapses and hence, interest at the rate of 18% per annum is to be paid on the balance amount of gratuity from 131988 till payment.
26.
While answering the points raised in paragraph 15 hereinabove, it is accordingly concluded that (a) the writ petitioner had no legal right to occupy the quarter after 1st May, 1991 and he was not entitled to occupy the same until his entire retiral benefits are paid; (b) the Port Trust has withheld gratuity arbitrarily; and (c) for delayed payment of gratuity the petitioner is entitled to interest at the rate of 18% per annum, since the non-payment is due to administrative lapses.
27.
In view of the above findings, the writ petitioner is not entitled to get any mandate as prayed for in respect of the eviction notice dated April 6, 1991.
But the writ petitioner is entitled to get a mandate as regards early payment of DCR gratuity with interest at the rate of 18% per annum, money value of commuted portion of pension and other retirement dues.
But at the same time, the writ petitioner is liable to vacate the quarter.
So in disposing of this case, it is  Ordered (i) The writ petitioner shall vacate the suit premises as early as possible preferably within 31st March, 2001.
(ii) A mandate is issued upon the respondents to pay the DCR gratuity to the writ petitioner along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum for delayed payment from 131988 till repayment.
A mandate be also issued directing the respondents to pay the money value of the commuted portion of the pension and other retirement dues after adjusting the penal rent for the unauthorised occupation of the official quarter from 1st May, 1991 till recovery of vacant possession.
While adjusting the penal rent, the amount of rent already paid and the amount of Rs. 10,000/- kept on account of the rent, shall be adjusted.
28.
Parties do bear their own cost of this case.
Xerox certified copies, if applied for, be supplied on usual undertakings.
Orders accordingly.