Satya Brata Sinha, J - The predecessor-in-interest of the appellants, Kalipada Roy was a Peon attached to the Office of Sub Divisional Controller, Food and Supplies, Arambagh (hereinafter referred to as the employee).
A charge-sheet was issued against him on or about 31121975, the articles of charge being :  "That the said Shri Kalipada Roy, wile functioning as a peon in the office of the Sub Divisional Controller, Food and Supplies, Arambagh acquired assets to the tune of Rs. 5,42,000 in the shape of landed properties during the years 1962, 1965, 1966, 1968 and 1970 which is disproportionate to his own sources of income.
Shri Roy could not given any satisfactory explanation for such acquisitions.
The conduct of Sri Kalipada Roy, as such is lacking in integrity and improper and unbecoming of a Government servant and violative of rules 3 and 4 of the West Bengal Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1959.
That during the above said period and while functioning in the aforesaid office the said Sri Kalipada Roy has purchased lands jointly in the name of his wife, Smt. Pratima Rani Roy and in the name of his elder brother's wife.
Smt. Rekha Rani Roy as mentioned in the article of Charge I in Annexure II without permission from his Appointing Authority, which is in violation of Rule 15(2)(a) of West Bengal Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1959."
An explanation was submitted by the employee wherein, inter alia, he stated that his father was a rich man and had extensive landed properties.
The said employee contended that his father used to run a Hat and also had a coal depot.
According to the said employee, his father was maintaining the entire family and the salary which he used to receive was being given to his father except for a paltry sum of Rs. 20/- per month, which he used to keep with himself towards his pocket expenses.
2.
An enquiry was held and before the enquiry officer, father of the employee submitted a statement which is contained in Annexure `A' to the stay application.
The said statement was filed on 27.8.1973 and reads thus :  "I, Sri Surya Kumar Roy residing at Garbari, PO Arambagh, do hereby declare that I have divided my entire ancestral house and landed properties amongst my sons and sons's wives in proportion due to each of them and have got the same registered.
Accordingly it is in their names that I purchased landed property at convenient times as and when my sons gave me money from their salaries.
The cause of purchasing land in their names is that it was not possible for me alone to look after all those landed properties at this old age of mine.
Being attacked with various diseases, I have been become disabled and almost unable to move about.
All those lands that have been purchased in their names, I have purchased them from their salary and from the income of the house.
I declare this to be true from the core of my heart and there is no fault and suppression of fact."
One Sri M. Bhattacharya, departmental enquiry Officer of Vigilance Commission was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
It not the case of the said employee that while holding the enquiry any violation of the principles of natural justice had taken place.
Enquiry report was submitted on 20.5.1977.
The said report is a detailed one and all the materials brought on record had been taken into consideration.
Evidences adduced on behalf of the parties had been properly analysed.
The Enquiry Officer found that the said employee is guilty of the charges levelled against him.
The disciplinary authority thereafter issued a show cause notice upon the said employee on or about 24.6.1977 accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer, whereto the said employee filed his show cause.
By an order dated 1.6.1979 the disciplinary authority imposed a sentence of compulsory retirement.
An appeal was preferred thereagainst, but the Director, District Distribution, Procurement and Supply, acting as an appellate authority by an order dated 10.12.1979 dismissed the said appeal.
3.
The petitioner being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said order filed a writ application before this Court.
A learned Single Judge of this Court by a judgment and order dated 11th August, 1983 dismissed the said writ application.
As against the said judgment the present appeal has been filed.
Mr. Mihir Chakraborty, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that the purchase having been made in the year 1962 onwards and the charge-sheet has been submitted on 31st December, 1975 the same must be held to be a stale one.
Our attention has also been drawn to the charge levelled against the petitioner and it was submitted that a bare perusal thereof would clearly show that the disciplinary authority had a closed mind.
According to the learned Counsel the bias on the part of the disciplinary authority being manifest on the face of the record, the impugned order must be held to be bad in law.
According to the learned Counsel, not only the actual bias but also the likelihood of bias would vitiate the entire proceedings.
4.
It was submitted that the charges were vague and in that view of the matter the prayer of the petitioner for obtaining assistance of a Lawyer should not have been rejected as was sought to be done by the disciplinary authority.
The learned Counsel further submitted that the finding of the Enquiry Officer is based on surmise and conjecture.
In support of the aforementioned contention reliance has been placed on the decisions reported in AIR 1957 SC 425, Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand; AIR 1971 SC 752, Surath Chandra v. State of WB; 1977 CHN 634, Shyama Sankar Mukherjee v. State of WB; 1976(1) CLJ 483, Sudhir Chandra Chakrabarty v. State of West Bengal and others; AIR 1983 SC 109, Board of Trustees, Port of Bombay v. Dilipkumar Bhavendranath Nadkarni and others; AIR 1983 SC 454, Bhagat Ram v. State of HP and AIR 1971 SC 746, Rukmanand Bairoliya v. State of Bihar and others.
5.
The learned Counsel submits that the death of the employee during the pendency of the proceedings could not make the appeal infructuous as his legal heirs and representatives are entitled to the arrear of salary till his date of superannuation.
6.
So far as the ground of staleness of the charge is concerned it appears from the judgment delivered by the learned trial Judge that the said question had not been raised before it.
It further appears from the report of the Enquiry Officer that even the contention in that regard has not been raised before him.
7.
It may be that having regard to the fact situation of a given case as also having regard to the charge levelled against the delinquent officer the court may interfere on the ground that the same are stale in nature.
However, the question as to whether the charges levelled against the delinquent officer should be set aside on the ground that the same was stale or not depends upon the fact situation of each case.
8.
The Apex Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh, reported in AIR 1990 SC 1308 did not interfere with a finding of the Central Administrative Tribunal on the ground of staleness as therein the irregularities which were the subject-matter of the enquiry were said to have taken place between the years 1975-77 and it was found that the department was aware thereof.
The charge-sheet was submitted only in the year 1977 and in that situation it was held that as the involvement of the officer in respect of the said irregularities was doubtful and investigation was going on still 1987, it was unreasonable to think that they would have taken more than 12 years to initiate the disciplinary proceedings.
Such is not the position here.
The charge shows that the delinquent officer acquired various properties in the name of his wife on 1331962, 611965, 13.6.1966, 4.5.1968 and 1261970.
No materials were brought on record to show that the aforementioned fact was known to the department.
9.
As indicated hereinbefore, even the said question was not raised in the departmental proceeding.
We may usefully refer to a decision of the Apex Court in the case of Secretary to Government, Prohibition and Excise Department v. L Srinivasan, reported in 1996(2) SCT 510 (SC) : 1996(3) SCC 157 wherein the Apex Court held :  "We are informed that charge-sheet was laid for prosecution for the offences of embezzlement and fabrication of false records etc. and that the offences and the trial of the case is pending.
The Tribunal had set aside the departmental enquiry and quashed the charge on the ground of delay in initiation of disciplinary proceedings.
In the nature of the charges, it would take a long time to detect embezzlement and fabrication of false records which should be done in secrecy.
It is not necessary to go into the merits and record any finding on the charge levelled against the charged officer since any finding recorded by this Court would gravely prejudice the case of the parties at the enquiry and also at the trial.
Therefore, we desist from expressing any opinion on merit or recording any of the contentions raised by the counsel on either side.
Suffice it to state that the Administrative Tribunal has committed grossest error in its exercise of the judicial review.
The member of the Administrative Tribunal appears to have no knowledge of the jurisprudence of the service law and exercised power as if he is an appellate forum de hors the limitation of judicial review.
This is one such instance where a member had exceeded his power of judicial review in quashing the suspension order and charges even at the threshold."
The Apex Court expressed similar view in the case of State of Orissa v. S Bimal Kumar Mohanty, reported in 1994(2) SCT 626 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 126 and UP Rajya Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad v. Sanjiv Rajan, reported in 1993(2) SCT 732 (SC) : 1993 Supp(3) SCC 483.
It was therefore not a fit case where the charge can be quashed on the ground of delay alone.
As regard the plea of bias it is true that the terminology used in the charge-sheet is not happy but the substration theory has to be considered in such a matter.
The court must also bear in mind that the Criminal Court while framing the charges against the accused person in terms of Sections 211, 212 and 213 of the Code of Criminal Procedure states the charges in the manner as if the accused person has committed an offence as would appear from Form No. 32 of the Second Schedule appended to Code of Criminal Procedure.
10.
In the charge-sheet it has been stated as regard the first charge that the entire amount of the consideration appears to be the assets disproportionate to the known source of income which he could not satisfactorily explain for having acquired by him other than by honest means.
11.
The charge-sheet itself is to be read with the aforementioned statement issued in terms of the letter dated 31121975 whereby and whereunder the departmental enquiry was to be held.
What had been communicated to him in terms of the aforementioned letter was the substance of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in respect of which the enquiry was proposed to be held.
Together with the said charge-sheet, a list of documents and a list of witnesses had also been annexed.
The delinquent officer was directed to submit a written statement before the Enquiry Officer who had been appointed in terms of sub-rule (4) of Rule 10 of the West Bengal Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1971.
He was also asked to inform the Enquiry Officer as to whether he desires to be heard in person.
It was further stated :-  "3.
He is informed that an enquiry will be held only in respect of those articles of charge (which) are not admitted.
He should, therefore, specifically admit or deny each article of charge.
4.
Shri Kalipada Roy is further informed that if he does not submit his written statement of defence on or before the date specified in paragraph 2 above, or does not appear in person before the inquiring authority or otherwise fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of the rules/orders/Directions issued (sic) pursuance of rule of West Bengal Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1971, the inquiring authority may hold the inquiry authority against him ex parte."
As the articles of charge are to be read along with the contents of the said letter dated 31121975, we are of the view that no case has been made out to show that the disciplinary authority proceeded to hold the enquiry with a closed mind.
A question as to whether the enquiry proceeding should be quashed only on the ground of closeness of mind of the Enquiry Officer or not had led to a conflicting decisions.
Whereas on the one hand, having regard to the fact situation the Court has held that the disciplinary authority having formed his opinion and proceeded to hold departmental enquiry with a closed mind the same was liable to be set aside on the ground of actual bias, there are decisions which show that even if punishment proposed to be imposed had been mentioned along with the charge-sheet, the same by itself would not vitiate the punishment.
12.
In the case of Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand, reported in AIR 1957 SC 425 the Apex Court was considering the matter under the Bar Council Act.
In that case the Chairman of the Tribunal appointed by the Chief Justice of the Rajasthan had filed a Vakalatnama in a proceeding on behalf of the opposite party.
The question of likelihood of bias came up for hearing in that context.
In the instant case no allegation of bias has been made out as against the Enquiry Officer who admittedly was an independent person.
13.
In the case of Sunil Kumar Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1977 CHN 1014, a Division Bench of this Court distinguished on fact the earlier Division Bench decision in the case of Collector of Customs, Calcutta v. Biswanath, reported in AIR 1972 Cal.
401.
It was held : The word used in the charge-sheet shows projection of a closed mind of the appointing authority even at the stage of framing of the charge-sheet.
In that case the validity of the charge-sheet as also the enquiry proceeding were challenged on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice as the delinquent officer was not permitted to examine himself nor he was supplied with the documents whereupon reliance had been placed by the department.
As indicated hereinbefore in the instant case the disciplinary authority had an open mind and no allegation has been made as regard violation of the principle of natural justice.
A question as to whether the court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India would interfere with such a matter has been considered in a great details by one of us in the case of Coal Mines Officers Associations of India v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1996 Cal.
28.
This court in the aforementioned judgment referred to the latest judicial trend having regard to the decision in Regina v. Gough, reported in 1993 AC 646.
The learned Single Judge in the judgment under appeal similarly relied upon a Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Sudhir Chandra Chakraborty v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1976(1) CLJ 483 wherein it was held that an enquiry is not necessarily always vitiated merely because the charge-sheet mentioned the proposed punishment.
The learned trial Judge, in our opinion, rightly has not applied the ratio of the decision in the case of Bimal Kanta Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1980(2) CHN 35 having regard to the distinguishable factor of the present case.
Yet again in the case of Collector of Customs v. Biswanath Mukherjee, reported in 75 CWN 797 this Court laid down the law to the effect that the proper way of interpreting a charge-sheet in disciplinary proceeding is not to be continue technically or strictly as in the case of a charge-sheet in the criminal proceedings.
It should be fairly and reasonably interpreted in a common sense to see that there was a plain statement of thing complained of as wrong so that the party complained against may be put on his defence to meet the allegation.
It was held that fair interpretation of a charge-sheet in a disciplinary proceeding depends upon the context of facts in which the charge is (sic).
This court has noticed that the words `found' and `giving rise to the presumption' were not enough by themselves to make the charge in in limine bad and void on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
14.
The contention to the effect that the charges are vague cannot be accepted.
The charges as noticed hereinbefore are absolutely clear.
The delinquent employee not only replied to the said charge but also raised a positive defence in relation thereto.
In support of his aforementioned defence he even relied upon the statement made by his father.
The Enquiry Officer while arriving at a finding of fact took into consideration not only the materials on record brought by the department but also the materials on record brought by the delinquent officer and came to a definite conclusion that the delinquent officer had failed to prove the fact which was within his special knowledge.
The Enquiry Officer, in our opinion, has rightly analysed the evidence on record and applied the correct principles of law.
15.
The decision in the case of Surath Chandra v. State of West Bengal, reported in AIR 1971 SC 752 upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Chakraborty, learned Counsel, is again of no assistance.
The Apex Court merely stated in the following terms :  "The grounds on which it is proposed to take action have to be reduced to the form of a definite charge or charges which have to be communicated to the person charged together with a statement of the allegations on which each charge is based and any other circumstance which it is proposed to be taken into consideration.
This passing orders has also to be stated.
This Rule embodies a principle which is one of the basic contents of a reasonable or adequate opportunity for defending oneself.
If a person is not told clearly and definitely what the allegations are on which the charges preferred against him are founded he cannot possibly, by projecting his own imagination, discover all the facts and circumstances that may be in the contemplation of the authorities to be established against him."
The ratio laid down by the Apex Court, in our opinion, is not applicable to the facts of the present case, inasmuch as, the charges as noticed hereinbefore are not vague and indefinite.
The contention of Mr. Chakraborty, learned Counsel, to the effect that the delinquent employee was prejudiced as he was not permitted to be defended by a lawyer is again a matter which cannot be said to have any merit.
The appellant only at the stage of showing cause made a prayer that he be permitted to be assisted by a lawyer.
Such prayer had not been made even before the Enquiry Officer.
Before the Enquiry Officer the petitioner, delinquent officer, and his father were examined.
It may be noticed that even in the second show cause the delinquent officer did not raise the contention that he had been prejudiced in any manner by reason of refusal on the part of the disciplinary authority to allow him to be represented through a Lawyer in the disciplinary proceeding.
The department was also not represented by a person who was legally trained.
He, therefore, having not been represented by a Lawyer cannot be said to have been prejudiced and in that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Board of Trustees, Port of Bombay v. Dilipkumar Bhavendranath Nadkarni (supra) and Bhagat Ram v. State of HP (supra) cannot be said to have any application.
Furthermore, we are of the opinion that the entire defence of the charges levelled against the delinquent officer was dependent on arriving at a finding of fact with regard whereto he had a special knowledge.
16.
For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed but before parting with this case we may observe that having regard to the fact that the delinquent employee was charge-sheeted as far back as in the year 1975 and had merely been imposed with a punishment of compulsory retirement, the authority of the FCI must see to it that all terminal benefits payable to the delinquent employee and upon his death to the appellant herein should be disbursed on priority basis.
17.
We are constrained to observe that the contention raised by Mr. Chakraborty, learned Counsel for the appellant, to the effect that despite the fact that although a writ petition was filed which is pending in this court for a long time, the same by itself could not have been a ground for non- payment of terminal benefit to the delinquent employee and/or upon his death to the appellant herein only on the ground of pendency of the writ application, inasmuch as, such payment could have been made without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties in the writ application also, was correct.
The appeal is, thus disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.