KJ Sengupta, J - This is second round of battle of the petitioner for saving his services in the post of Constable in Central Reserve Police Force.
He was appointed on 24th December, 1981.
Previously without any notice surreptitiously petitioner's services was terminated summarily by an order dated 4th October, 1993.
At that time (hereafter referred to first time) the petitioner challenged the aforesaid summary order of termination in this court.
The learned trial Judge, however, dismissed the said writ petition summarily which compelled the petitioner on the first occasion to prefer appeal from the summary order of dismissal.
The Appellate Court by a judgment and order dated 21st October, 1990 allowed the appeal as well as the first application, and was pleased to set aside the previous order of termination.
The learned Judge of this appeal court, however, was pleased to grant leave to the disciplinary authority to initiate any disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner herein on account of any alleged misconduct or any other ground in accordance with law.
I am told the aforesaid appellate court's judgment and order reached its finality and none challenged, and in fact acting upon this judgment and order the petitioner was reinstated in his services but such reinstatement was the beginning of his present misery as following and/or availing of the leave granted by the appeal court the present disciplinary proceeding which has been questioned herein, was initiated by issuing a charge-sheet dated 7th March, 1991.
The sum and substance of the allegation of misconduct imputed against the petitioner is quoted hereunder :  "No. 810708425 Ct. Bhim Singh of GC CRPF Durgapur while enlisted in CRPF as Ct/GC produced false educational and age proof certificate showing VIII-class passed and date of birth is 3.1.1963, whereas on verification from his concerned school authorities, it has been found that the individual passed class IV (four) only and his date of birth is 311964, as per verification report received from the Headmaster, Rajkeeya Uchatam Prathmic Vidyalaya, Kasharu (Jhunjhunu), Rajasthan Letter No. 1496 dated 1031983.
As per above report, the No. 810708425 Ct. Bhim Singh has not fulfilled the requisite qualification for enlistment as constable Ct/GC in CRPF and he was under age, i.e., he had not attained the age of 18 years which is minimum age limit for joining in CRPF as constable.
Thus, No. 810708425 Ct/GC Bhim Singh of GC CRPF, Durgapur committed an offence of misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force under Section 11(1) of CRPF Act, 1949."
2.
Needless to mention on receipt of this charge the petitioner delinquent denied the same.
So an Enquiry Officer was appointed who held enquiry allowing the petitioner to participate in the enquiry proceedings.
It appears from the report of the enquiry officer that in course of enquiry the enquiry officer himself made verification and/or enquired once again from the school authority and procured a letter dated 29th May, 1991.
He also procured another letter from District Education Officer dated 13th May, 1991.
It is appropriate to record that the aforesaid two letters did not form the supporting document of the alleged charges nor the copies of the aforesaid two documents were given before the enquiry had been started as there was no such scope since those two letters were collected admittedly by the Enquiry Officer of his own.
It appears after considering all the documents including those two documents that were subsequently collected after issuance of the charge sheet the Enquiry Officer held the petitioner guilty of the alleged charges of production of false certificate.
3.
It also transpires that a second show cause notice was issued calling upon the petitioner to answer to the same and which was done by the petitioner.
The Disciplinary Authority on receipt of the explanation of the second show cause notice has accepted the report of the Enquiry Officer and found the petitioner guilty of the alleged charges, so he imposed the punishment of dismissal.
4.
The aforesaid dismissal order was passed on 22nd May, 1992 and the Enquiry Officer submitted a report on 5th September, 1991.
Upon careful perusal of the order of the Enquiry Officer imposing punishment it appears that the Enquiry Officer submitted another report on 21st April, 1992 which has been considered by the Disciplinary Authority.
It further appears punishing authority in his turn subsequently collected a letter dated 14th May, 1992 from the concerned school authority whereby it is alleged that the school authority did not issue the said school certificate produced by the petitioner.
5.
The aforesaid narration of facts are admitted and borne out by the admitted records and documents annexed to the writ petition.
6.
It appears from the affidavit-in-opposition that previously the petitioner was summarily dismissed on the self-same misconduct of production of false school certificate showing his age and qualification.
But with the leave of the appeal court this disciplinary proceedings has been initiated.
7.
Mr. Chatterjee, learned senior Counsel, appearing for the writ petitioner submits that the initiation of disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner is nothing but a concerted effort of the Disciplinary Authority and the Enquiry Officer to victimize the petitioner illegally.
The Enquiry Officer was biased and it will appear from the records of the enquiry proceedings of his biased attitude against the petitioner.
The petitioner was asked to prove his defence before the departmental authority could prove the charges in preponderance of probability.
Such an irregular procedure is illegal and in violation of the principle of natural justice.
The Enquiry Officer in fact played a role of prosecutor as during of enquiry he collected evidence, viz. letters from the school concerned and Educational Department of the Rajasthan Government on behalf of the department in order to prove falsity of the School Certificate produced by the petitioner.
Significantly and curiously the aforesaid two documents were not disclosed at the time of the framing of charges nor copies thereof were supplied at the time of enquiry and the same were considered by the Enquiry Officer behind his back.
Even going by the face value of the aforesaid records the charge of production of false certificate was not proved at all.
It is significant to mention that during the course of enquiry or prior thereto no attempt was made by the Disciplinary Authority to verify from the school authority the certificate produced by the petitioner.
The aforesaid letters were sought to be produced to contradict the contents of the certificate produced by the petitioner.
The punishing authority was more vindictive than the Enquiry Officer and he unduly proceeded against the petitioner to punish, not only accepting the aforesaid biased report of the Enquiry Officer but also procuring two letters allegedly issued in the month of May 1992 by the Headmaster and the officer of the Education Department who allegedly informed the enquiry officer that the certificate produced by the petitioner was false.
8.
Mr. Chatterjee argues that the punishing authority having found vital lacuna in the report of the Enquiry Officer and wanting of material evidence took aforesaid illegal step behind the back of the petitioner.
The aforesaid two documents were considered without giving any chance to the petitioner to belie correctness of the contents of the said letter of May 1992.
Moreover, the vindictive attitude of the punishing authority would reveal from the fact that the Enquiry Officer has considered not only the first report of the Enquiry Officer but also considered a subsequent report of the Enquiry Officer the nature of which is completely unknown even today to the writ petitioner.
9.
Mr. Chatteree contends that the aforesaid facts are good enough for the Court to come to conclusion that the impugned order of punishment is absolutely male fide and it was passed in grossest violation of principle of natural justice.
10.
The learned Lawyer appearing for the respondent submits that in terms of the appellate court's order the charge-sheet was framed and there was grave charge of production of false certificate as to age and education.
Upon proper enquiry and verification it was found that the petitioner produced false certificate and subsequently it has been confirmed by the concenred department by issuing a letter dated 14th May, 1992 and confirmed by another one dated 18th May, 1992.
The aforesaid two documents are good enough to prove the case of the respondents.
Therefore, there is no illegality and/or infirmity.
The petitioner was given chance and/or opportunity in the enquiry proceedings.
An independent person held such enquiry.
Under the Act itself the petitioner is liable to be dismissed from services as allegation of misconduct has been proved.
11.
Having heard the learned Counsels for the parties and having considered the materials produced before me it appears to me that the respondent authority in fact dismissed the petitioner on the first occasion summarily on the self-same charges of production of alleged false school certificate, and this will be evident from paragraph 6 of the affidavit-in-opposition.
It is significant to mention that on the date of the summary dismissal the respondent authority had one document in its possession to cast doubt in genuineness of the certificate produced by the writ petitioner.
The charge against the petitioner was production of false certificate as to age his and qualification, by the writ petitioner.
I agree with the submission of Mr. Chatterjee that the Enquiry Officer was biased in conducting domestic proceedings.
The reason of my conclusion is that it was not the duty of the Enquiry Officer to collect evidence on behalf of the Disciplinary Authority from the third parties by writing letter by himself which he admittedly did while collecting the two letters from the Headmaster of the school concerned dated 13th May, 1991 and 14th May, 1991.
By his act and conduct he demonstrated his intention to act on behalf of department rather than to act as fair Enquiry Officer.
12.
The aforesaid two letters did not find place in the charge sheet.
No chance or opportunity was given to the delinquent writ petitioner to rebut the correctness and genuineness of the aforesaid two documents.
Curiously neither the Disciplinary Authority nor the Enquiry Officer before enquiry and during enquiry made any attempt for verification of the school certificate produced by the writ petitioner as to its genuineness.
No competent person and/or witness from the school authority or the District Inspector of Schools were called as a witness to tell that the certificate produced by the writ petitioner was not genuine.
In fact none of the documents substantiates the charges of production of false certificate before Enquiry Officer.
So even going by the admitted documents no reasonable prudent man could come to conclusion that the alleged misconduct has been proved.
By the documents produced by the department only a suspicion could be raised as to genuineness of the contents of the certificate produced by the petitioner.
In a domestic proceeding being quasi judicial proceedings suspicion cannot take place of proof.
13.
In the premises I hold that the fact finding report of the Enquiry Officer is vitiated not only with the biased conduct and attitude of the Enquiry Officer but also it is legally bad as the charges not being proved.
14.
I am not oblivious of the established legal principle that the writ court cannot appreciate or analyse the evidence adduced in the domestic enquiry but this rule is not inflexible one and in certain cases after going through the materials if the writ court finds that on the basis of the material no reasonable prudent man can come to conclusion that the charges have been proved, in such cases the writ court will not hesitate to examine such evidence and the court indeed will interfere with this report and enquiry proceedings.
15.
So, on the aforesaid two grounds, I hold that the report of the Enquiry Officer holding the petitioner guilty is liable to be and is hereby set aside.
16.
I accept the submission of Mr. Chatterjee that the Disciplinary Authority was more vindictive and biased as against the petitioner than the Enquiry Officer, as he not only relied on the aforesaid report which was the first one but he called for second report also from the same biased Enquiry Officer subsequently and the contents whereof are still unknown to the writ petitioner and even he did not disclose the contents of the second report in his punishment order.
The Disciplinary Authority was not only contented with the aforesaid two reports but strangely, also he in his turn collected two letters allegedly from the school authority and the Education Department of the Rajasthan Government on 14th May, 1992 long after submission of the enquiry report much less before issuance of the charge-sheet.
So the writ petitioner could not get any chance of rebutting of the aforesaid two documents.
It appears from contents of the aforesaid letter of 14th May, 1992 recorded in the findings of the Disciplinary Authority that the petitioner is alleged to have produced false certificates.
In my view the disciplinary authority while considering the undisclosed second report and the aforesaid letter dated 14th May, 1992 without giving any chance to the writ petitioner have committed gross violation of principle of natural justice.
Such a course of action on part of the punishing authority is possible, in flagrant violation of principle of natural justice, only when there is concerted effort and one mind to impose punishment by any means consequently victimize an employee.
The aforesaid conduct of the punishing authority amply demonstrates the biased and victimizing attitude of the punishing authority, without due recourse to law.
17.
I am unable to accept the submission of the learned lawyer for the respondent that the writ petitioner produced false certificate as it will be apparent from the aforesaid materials which have been duly considered by the punishing authority.
It is settled principle of law that in a departmental proceedings the authority has to follow fair procedure conforming to principle of natural justice at all levels and all stages, and if there is any lapses at any stage it vitiates the entire proceedings.
Collection of evidence viz., the letter dated 14th May, 1992 and consideration thereof by the Disciplinary Authority after departmental proceeding was over is absolutely unfair.
Besides the above document there was and is no material to prove that the Certificate produced by the petitioner was false.
In other words, had the aforesaid letter not been collected at the final stage or at the time of imposing punishment the charge of false production of certificate could not have been proved.
18.
Therefore, I have no hesitation in my mind to come to conclusion that the aforesaid order of punishment is illegal and is a product of biased mind and attitude and the same is set aside.
The petitioner shall be reinstated forthwith.
However, the petitioner shall be paid back wages of 50% of his salary.
Such back wages of the petitioner shall be paid within four weeks from the date of reinstatement with all benefits as if he were in service.
The petitioner also paid costs assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Order accordingly.