The case of the petitioner is that he was employed as a Peon from 10th August, 1945 under the Respondent Gram Panchayat and he was illegally terminated from employment with effect from 3rd November, 1980.
According to him, no charge- sheet was served on him, nor was there any inquiry against him before he came to be terminated from employment.
He further alleges that the Respondent Gram Panchayat has not complied with the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and, therefore, the act of the Gram Panchayat to terminate him from employment is illegal and improper and, therefore, he was entitled to be reinstated with full backwages and continuity of service.
2.
Being aggrieved by the said order of termination he raised an Industrial Dispute under Section 10 read with Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The State Government referred the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
In spite of due notice having been served on the Respondent Gram Panchayat it did not care or bother to appear before the Labour Court to defend itself and, therefore, the Award of the Labour Court is an ex parte Award.
Though there were no pleadings filed by the Gram Panchayat the Labour Court has considered the material adduced by the Gram Panchayat before the Conciliation Officer.
It appears that the Gram Panchayat had participated in the conciliation proceedings and put forward its case that the petitioner had committed an act of theft of Gram Panchayat's property and the same was seized from him under Panchanama and, therefore, he was terminated from employment after a unanimous resolution passed by the Gram Panchayat.
It was also the case of the Gram Panchayat that before he was terminated from employment his explanation was called for but he failed to give any explanation and, therefore, his services were terminated.
It would have been better for the Gram Panchayat to have appeared before the Labour Court and put forward the said case once again by filing a proper written statement and by adducing cogent evidence before the Labour Court to justify its action of termination on the ground of misconduct of theft to the Panchayat's property committed by the petitioner.
For the reasons best known to the Sarpanch and the Gram Panchayat they did not participate in the proceedings before the Labour Court to justify its action of termination of the petitioner from employment.
The Labour Court has held that the termination of the petitioner from employment was grossly illegal and was held to be liable to be set aside.
He, however, refused to grant the normal relief of reinstatement with continuity of service and backwages on the ground of his age which he gave in the year 1984 at the time oral evidence to be 55 years.
There was no documentary evidence to show the correct age of the petitioner.
The Labour Court has, however, recorded its assessment that the petitioner was of 60 years age and, therefore, he could not be granted reinstatement at that age.
The Labour Court, however, computed an amount of Rs. 1,050/- as compensation in lieu of reinstatement and other reliefs.
The Labour Court has also considered the falsity of the petitioner's evidence that he was in employment from 1945.
The Labour Court found that the Gram Panchayat as an entity came into existence in 1952 for the first time and, therefore, he could not have been employed from 1945.
The Labour Court has disposed of the reference by awarding an amount to Rs. 1,050/- as compensation as full and final relief to the petitioner.
3.
Being aggrieved by the said award of the Labour Court the petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
Shri Golewar, the learned Advocate for the petitioner, has submitted that after holding the order of termination to be illegal and improper the Labour Court ought to have granted him normal relief of reinstatement with full backwages and continuity of service.
He has further submitted that a paltry sum of Rs. 1,050/- computed on the basis of retrenchment compensation, has been awarded by the Labour Court.
He has fairly admitted that the said amount has been paid to his client by the Gram Panchayat.
He, therefore, submits that the petitioner should be awarded full back wages from the date of termination dated 3rd November, 1980 till the age of retirement i.e. 58 years.
He is praying for seven years back wages.
4.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, particularly, the fact that the respondent employer is a small Gram Panchayat of a small village, taking judicial note of the financial conditions of the village Panchayats and the constraints under which they are functioning, I am not at all inclined to put heavy financial burden of awarding full backwages to the petitioner.
A further judicial note also can be taken that by and large village Panchayats have grave financial stringenices due to which they cannot provide primary civil amenities to the village folk.
Though it is fact that the order of termination was punitive I also cannot ignore the crucial fact that the petitioner was caught red-handed with the Panchayat's property which was seized from him and a Panchanama was prepared at the time of such seizure.
The Panchayat had passed a unanimous resolution to terminate the services of the petitioner.
The Panchayat, however, had taken care before resorting to the termination of the petitioner by calling upon him to furnish his explanation for the incident.
The petitioner, however, appears not to have submitted his explanation.
In view of non-submission of the explanation the village Panchayat thought it proper, according to their own wisdom, to get rid of him without any further formalities such as giving a charge-sheet and holding an inquiry.
These concepts have as yet not percolated to the village level and they are more or less confined to the industrial activities.
Small villagers, who try to manage their own affairs in their small village, cannot be expected to know and comply with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as they might not have even heard the name of the said Act applicable to the Panchayat.
Nonetheless, the law operates as it is.
The act of the village Panchayat being punitive ought to have been preceded by a domestic departmental inquiry.
If no such inquiry was held before imposing the punishment of termination the employer is further given an opportunity to justify his action before the Labour Court.
The Village Panchayat appears to have not done anything in this matter.
May be sheer gross ignorance of law.
It is also possible that they might have thought that having appeared before the Conciliation Officer and having explained the factual position they had done whatever was expected from them under the law.
The legal position is very clear that if an order of punishment is punitive and if it is not preceded by a domestic inquiry and if the same is not justified before the Labour Court in that case the termination order would be absolutely vulnerable to be illegal and improper and the workman would be entitled to get the normal relief of reinstatement with full back wages and continuity in service.
Though it is a normal rule it can be departed from by giving sufficient and cogent reasons.
The Labour Court has refused to grant reinstatement with full backwages and continuity of service for more than one reason.
The Labour Court has found the petitioner to be of 60 years of age and, therefore, no reinstatement was granted to him on account of his old age.
I do not find any fault with the said reasons given by the Labour Court to deny reinstatement.
I, however, fail to understand why the Labour Court has computed an amount of Rs. 1,050/- as retrenchment compensation when the petitioner was not retrenched but was dismissed on account of his act of misconduct.
According to me, there was no question of giving retrenchment compensation to the petitioner.
It appears the Labour Court has taken some basis to give him an amount of compensation and the Labour Court has taken the said retrenchment compensation as a basis for awarding some amount of compensation to the petitioner after considering his service from 1952 to 1980.
5.
According to me, as the law stands, the petitioner is entitled to get full back wages from the date of termination till the age of retirement which was 58 years.
The Labour Court has found that in the year 1984 the petitioner was of 60 years of age.
It is, therefore, clear that in the year 1982 he had completed the age of 58 years.
The petitioner is, therefore, entitled to get full backwages from the date of termination i.e. 3rd November 1980 to 31st December, 1982 at the rate of Rs. 70/- per month.
The petitioner would be entitled to backwages for 26 months at the rate of Rs. 70/- per month.
The amount of backwages computed as above would be Rs. 1,820/-.
The petitioner has already received an amount of Rs. 1,050/- from the Gram Panchayat.
The respondent Gram Panchayat is, therefore, directed to pay to the petitioner an amount of Rs. 770/- within two weeks from receipt of this order.
6.
The petition is partly allowed.
No orders as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.