SR Nayak, J - The petitioner was appointed as Junior Assistant in the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh on 881974.
The petitioner was promoted as Senior Assistant on 191976 and he was further promoted as Superintendent with effect from 11.3.1993 and at the relevant point of time he was serving in the office of the first respondent.
The petitioner tendered his resignation to the post on 31.12.1998.
His resignation letter reads as under :-  "To  The Vice-Chairman and Managing Director,Sports Authority of APLB Stadium,Hyderabad.
Sir,  I am not keeping good health as such I have decided to tender resignation to the post of Superintendent in SAAP under VRS with effect from 111998.
Please accept the same and arrange to settle all the dues to me.
Thanking you, Sir,  Yours faithfully, Sd/- (V.S.
Prakasa Rao) Superintendent."
2.
The Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh on the same day issued proceedings dated 31121997, accepting the resignation of the petitioner to the post of Superintendent under Voluntary Retirement Scheme with effect from 111998 AN Thereafterwards, the petitioner on 111998 submitted a letter to the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh withdrawing his resignation to the post submitted on 31121997.
The letter of the petitioner dated 111998 reads as under : "To  The Vice-Chairman and  Managing Director, Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh, LB Stadium, Hyderabad.
Sir,  Sub :- SAAP - Estt.
Sri VS Prakasha Rao, Superintendent, Submission of Resignation withdrawal - Request for sanction of 6 months leave - Reg.
Ref :- My application dated 31121997.
Kind attention is invited to the reference cited, wherein I have tendered my resignation for the post of Superintendent on the AN of 31121997 on health grounds.
As I had became mentally unbalanced at that time due to ill health I had taken that drastic step.
I coolly think over the same and decided to withdraw my resignation on voluntary basis.
Hence I am withdrawing my resignation.
Kindly consider the same.
I also therefore request you sir, to kindly sanction me 6 months leave on Medical grounds from 111998 to 30.6.1998 to get through medical examination and recover completely.
Thanking you, sir  Yours faithfully, Sd/- (V.S.
Prakasa Rao) Superintendent."
3.
Since the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh refused to recall the Proceeding No. SAAP/Estt-3/4721/1997- 98 dated 31121997, and accepted the resignation of the petitioner to the post of Superintendent not permitting the petitioner to function as Superintendent after 111998, this writ petition is filed praying for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to retain and continue the petitioner in the office of the first respondent by holding the impugned termination order in Proceeding No. SAAP/Estt.3/4721/1997-98 dated 31121997 of the first respondent as illegal, arbitrary and unjust and violative of Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution and sub-rule (2) of Rule 26 of the AP Sports Authority Rules and for consequential benefits such as salary, seniority as if the impugned orders were never passed.
4.
In response to rule Nisi, the respondents have filed counter-affidavit justifying the acceptance of the resignation of the petitioner tendered on 31121997 and not continuing the services of the petitioner after 111998.
5.
Although the petitioner has set out the circumstances which led to his tendering resignation to the post of Superintendent in great elaboration in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition, I do think it necessary for the Court to refer to those parts of the pleadings for the purpose of deciding the writ petition.
Suffice it to state that the factual assertions made by the petitioner in the affidavit highlighting the background that led to his retirement have been squarely denied by the respondents in their account-affidavit, and there is no independent material placed before the Court to express any opinion on the above factual assertions made by the petitioner in his favour.
Upon hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I found that the petitioner is entitled to succeed in the writ petition solely on point of law.
There is no controversy and there cannot be any controversy that the petitioner's resignation was accepted by the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh by proceeding dated 31121997 with effect from 111998 AN The petitioner in his affidavit filed in support of the writ petition in Paragraph 7 has stated thus :  "....I submit that immediately realising the consequences of the said letter I had approached the first respondent in person and handed over him a letter on the forenoon of 111998 withdrawing my letter of resignation and requested not to accept my resignation...." 6.
The averments made in paragraph 7 of the affidavit are traversed by the respondents in paragraph 8 of the counter-affidavit.
The statement made by the petitioner on oath that he submitted the letter withdrawing his resignation on the forenoon of 111998 is not denied by the respondents.
Even otherwise, nothing is placed before the Court by the respondents to doubt the integrity of the statement made by the petitioner on oath in paragraph 7 of the affidavit.
Therefore, I hold that the petitioner, as a matter of fact, submitted the letter on the forenoon of 111998 to the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh.
Should it be noted that by the time of Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director received the letter of the petitioner withdrawing his resignation, the order passed by the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director on 31.12.197 accepting the resignation of the petitioner with effect from 111998 AN did not come into force.
If that is the factual position what emerges from the materials placed before the Court, the situation is squarely covered by the authorities of the Supreme Court and this Court.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Punjab National Bank v. PK Mittal, 1989(1) SLR 596, is an authority to state that an employee can withdraw resignation even in a case where resignation is already accepted by the employer until it becomes effective and operative.
In the instant case, the resignation letter would have become effective only in the afternoon of 111998 whereas the petitioner submitted the letter withdrawing resignation on the forenoon of 111998.
The Supreme Court in the above judgment in paragraph 8 observed thus :  "In the result of the above interpretation is that the employee continued to be in service till the 21st April, 1986 or 30th June, 1986, on which date his services would have come normally to an end in terms of his letter dated 21st January, 1986.
But, by that time, he had exercised his right to withdraw the resignation.
Since the withdrawal letter was written before the resignation became effective, the resignation stands withdrawn, with the result that the respondent continues to be in the service of the bank.
It is true that there is no specific provision in the regulations permitting the employee to withdraw the resignation.
It is, however, not necessary that there should be any such specific rule.
Until the resignation becomes effective on the terms of the letter read with Regulation 20, it is open to the employee, on general principles, to withdraw his letter of resignation.
That is why, in some cases of public services, this right of withdrawal is also made subject to the permission of the employer.
There is no such clause here.
It is not necessary to labour this point further as it is well settled by the earlier decisions of this Court in Raj Kumar v. Union of India, 1968(3) SCR 857, Union of India v. Gopal Chandra Misra, 1978(3) SCR 12 and Balram Gupta v Union of India, 1987 (Suppl.)
SCC 228."
7.
Further a Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court in Union of India v. Gopal Chandra, 1978(1) SLR 521, in paragraph 47 opined that in the absence of a legal, constitutional bar, `prospective' resignation can be withdrawn at any time before it becomes effective, and it becomes effective when it operates to terminate the employment or the office-tenure of the resignor.
To the same effect is the opinion of this Court in National Thermal Power Corporation v. S Partha, 1993(6) SLR 201.
8.
The above authorities and several authorities to which references are made in the above judgments clearly go to show that in the absence of constitutional, legal or contractual limitations imposed on the employee, it is always permissible for an employee to withdraw the resignation even if it is accepted by the employer unless the acceptance of resignation has already become effective and operative.
In the instant case, as pointed supra, the designation accepted by the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh would have become effective and operative only on the afternoon of 111998 whereas the letter withdrawing resignation was submitted by the petitioner to the Vice-Chairman and the Managing Director on the forenoon of 111998 itself.
9.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the termination of the service of the petitioner with effect from 111998 AN is declared as invalid and illegal.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner into service.
The petitioner also entitled to all the benefits, pecuniary or otherwise, flowing from this order.
The parties are directed to bear their own costs in this writ petition.
Petition allowed.