GL Raina, J - While posted as a Staff Graduate Nurse in the Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Soura (hereinafter the Institute), the petitioner's services were terminated by respondent-Director of the Institute, vide his order No. SIMS/HA-73/95, dated 31-1-1995.
She challenged its legality and validity through SWP No. 252 of 1995.
This Court vide the order dated 7-7-1997 allowed that writ petition and quashed the termination order but permitted the conduct of fresh enquiry against the petitioner for her alleged unauthorised absence from duty with effect from 21-2-1991 to 8-12- 1994.
2.
This order of the Court was appealed against through LPA No. 291/1997.
The Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated 24th of October, 1997, while turning down the appeal directed that the petitioner be allowed to join her duties as such nurse and in case the management of the Institute decides to initiate disciplinary proceedings against her, they shall do it in accordance with the law and complete it within a period of six months.
3.
In pursuance to this direction the petitioner was allowed to join her duties with effect from 22-12-1997, but the Enquiry Committee was constituted vide order No. SIMS/HA-547 of 1997, communicated to the Deputy Medical Superintendent vide No. SIMS/138/DMS/04/97-649-51, dated 22-12-1997.
The Committee comprised of the Administrative Officer (HA), Administrative Officer (Per) and the Law Officer.
4.
The charge-sheet drawn up on 10th of January, 1998, by the Director of the Institute, inter alia set out the background in which the charge-sheet was required to be served afresh.
The charge-sheet contains the particulars of the alleged misconduct, namely the petitioner's unauthorised absence from duty with effect from 21-2-1991 to 8-12-1994.
The Disciplinary Authority called upon the petitioner to substantiate her cause of absence and to explain as to why disciplinary action be not taken for the said misconduct.
The petitioner replied through counsel on 24-1-1998 demanding the fresh charge-sheet and the statement of allegations whereon the charge-sheet was based.
The petitioner sought through the reply to the charge-sheet, the copies of the documents referred to in the charge-sheet.
The fresh Enquiry Committee came to be constituted consisting of Mr. Akhter Ali, Administrative Officer (Per) and Mrs. Haseena Wani, Nursing Superintendent.
This was done by the Director vide the Administrative Officer's communication No. SIMS/HA-75/98, dated 12-2-1998.
Convenor of the Enquiry Committee, that is the Administrative Officer, intimated the petitioner, vide his no. SIMS/HA/511/98/480-84, dated 18-2-1998, to present herself before the Enquiry Committee at the stated time, date and place.
The convenor again intimated the petitioner vide No. SIMS/HA-511/98- 535, dated 21-2-1998 to attend at the stated date, time and place before the Enquiry Committee and produce the documentary evidence in support of her statement of illness during the period of absence.
Their communication intimated the petitioner that her failure to appear and produce documentary evidence in support of her illness will lead to the presumption that she had nothing to substantiate the statement of her having remained ill during the period of absence.
The convenor vide his No. SIMS/Enquiry/98-1273-75 dated 20-3-1998 yet again called upon the petitioner to produce the medical certificate or any other document in support of her statement of illness during the absence period.
The petitioner having ostensibly not come up with the supportive material about her statement of illness led the Enquiry Committee to submit the enquiry report, vide No. SIMS/Enquiry/98-1328, dated 21-3-1998, with the finding that the delinquent, the petitioner had wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from the duty during the period in reference.
The disciplinary Authority, that is the Director, who is the Ex- officio Secretary of the Government issued the second show cause notice calling upon the petitioner to show cause as to why she be not removed from service from the date of her wilfull and unauthorised absence from duty.
The Director issued this show cause notice under No. SIMS/HA/511/98/882-83, dated 3-4-1998.
5.
The petitioner replied it in terms of Annexure-S intimating the punishing authority that as the charge-sheet whereon the enquiry report was based had been challenged in a separate writ petition, and whereas on the interlocutory application the Court had stopped further action against the petitioner till the date of hearing before the Court, and whereas the disciplinary Authority had appeared/entered upon appearance in the said writ petition, so in the circumstances the second show cause notice calling upon her to show cause as to why the penalty of removal from service be not imposed deserved to be withdrawn.
6.
The Director-respondent thereafter issued/passed order No. SIMS/HA-186/98, dated 22-4-1998 whereof the operative part is extracted :-  "Now in exercise of powers conferred under Rule 33 of the J & K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 and having observed all the codal formalities as established and undergone due process of law/regulations/rules/procedure etc. as laid down in this behalf, the services of Mrs. Nafisa Akhter (511) Staff Nurse Grade-I Department of Nursing, Administration D/O Bashir Ahmad Shah R/O Solina, Silk Factory Road, Rambagh, Srinagar are hereby terminated and she is removed from rolls of the Institute for all practical purposes with effect from 21-2-1991 viz. from the date Mrs. Nafisa was wilfully unauthorisedly absent from duty."
7.
The order of termination and removal from service is challenged inter-alia on the grounds :  (1) that the charge-sheet, Annexure K, being not only defective, was not accompanied by the statement of allegations and the copies of the documents relied upon during the enquiry; (2) that there was no material before the Enquiry Committee to make the report and thereby there was no material before the disciplinary authority to pass the impugned order; (3) that the enquiry proceedings got vitiated because she was not allowed to engage the services of a legal counsel to defend herself; and (4) that the punishment imposed is disproportionate to the alleged mis- conduct.
8.
In the reply affidavit the respondents have conceded that in the light of the order of the Court passed in LPA No. 291 of 1997, the petitioner was allowed to join her duties but the disciplinary proceedings as allowed by the Court, were initiated about her unauthorised absence from duty.
The Enquiry Committee was duly constituted.
After the decision in the LPA, the Director of the Institute issued fresh show cause notice against the petitioner calling upon her to substantiate the projected cause of her absence from duty.
The grounds of charge-sheet being simple in nature, there was, therefore, no necessity to attach the statement of allegations to the charge-sheet.
On receipt of the reply to the charge-sheet the disciplinary authority after its perusal came to the conclusion that as the charge of unauthorised absence from duty for the said period was denied it was as such proper to hold the enquiry into the matter consequent upon which the Enquiry Committee came to be constituted.
It is further pleaded in the reply that the delinquent official, that is the petitioner, participated in the enquiry proceedings on 21-2-1998 when she appeared before the committee and rendered the statement which has been recorded in the shape of typed-form but when put to her, she refused to sign it and left the venue.
It is denied in the counter, that the petitioner had ever sought permission from the enquiry committee to engage a lawyer to defend her.
Even if she had made such a request, it would not have been accepted as it was not permissible under the rules applicable.
It is pleaded that the enquiry committee adhered to the procedure of enquiry strictly in accordance with the law by providing the opportunity of hearing and to produce the proof of her illness for the period she had remained absent from duty.
She adopted the non-co-operative attitude and instead of coming forth to substantiate the statement of her having remained ill for the period of her absence attempted to stall the enquiry proceedings.
9.
The Court order dated 11-3-1998 passed in Writ Petition No. 329/1998 was, as per the counter, brought to the notice of the Enquiry Committee on 24-3- 1998, but by that date the Enquiry Committee had submitted its report.
The second notice dated 20-3-1998 issued by the Disciplinary Authority requiring the petitioner to show cause as to why the proposed penalty be not imposed was instead of being replied challenged by her through the medium of SWP No. 647/1998 which was subsequently dismissed along with SWP No. 328 of 1998 by the Court vide order dated 2-5-1998.
10.
Codal requirements and statutory formalities are pleaded to have been adhered to, both at the enquiry level and at the level of disciplinary action but the petitioner adopted non-co-operative attitude by not coming forward to substantiate by documentary evidence or otherwise her alleged illness during the period of absence from duty.
The final show cause notice issued by the disciplinary authority having been not replied, led to the passing of the impugned order of termination and removal from service.
It is pleaded that the enquiry had to be concluded within a period of six months as was enjoined by the direction of the Court passed in LPA No. 291/1997.
11.
In the rejoinder the petitioner has after restating plea projected in the writ petition come to label the impugned order as vindictive, discriminatory and disproportionate to the misconduct of unauthorised absence.
It is in this context pleaded that a number of employees in the Institute had either gone abroad on Foreign assignments without any permission from the competent authority or had remained unauthorisedly absent but all of them were subsequently permitted to resume their duties despite the fact that they had remained on unauthorised absence from duty.
Instances have been quoted in this context to put across that the management of the Institute has been liberal in dealing with the rest of the delinquents of the Institute but in her case she has been subjected to the hostile discrimination which is violative of the concept of equality before law as guaranteed by the Constitution.
12.
It is well settled principle of law that the findings on facts recorded at the domestic enquiry are not interfered with in the writ jurisdiction.
It is only where the finding of guilt is based on no evidence or where the finding is perverse that the judicial scrutiny gets attracted to set aside the finding of guilt recorded at the domestic enquiry.
If a decision is arrived at by the disciplinary authority on no evidence or where the evidence relied upon is thoroughly unreliable, not acceptable on unreasonable considerations, then the order of domestic enquiry can be labelled as perverse.
It is on the other hand that if there is some evidence on record which is acceptable and which would be relied upon the conclusions would not be treated as perverse and the findings of the domestic enquiry cannot be interfered with.
Findings recorded by the enquiry officer which are not supported by evidence or where the evidence is unreliable as no reasonable person would act upon, then the order of termination/removal based on such findings has to be set aside.
This is the principle of law laid down in the cases reported in AIR 1999 SCW 129 : 1999 Lab IC 437 and AIR 1999 SCW 625 : AIR 1999 SC 999.
13.
Keeping the above legal position in view it has to be seen whether the requirements of S. 126 of the Constitution of J&K (corresponding to Art. 311 of the Constitution of India) reflected in Rules 33 and 34 of the CSR have been in this case fulfilled.
The settled law in this context is that a public officer/person holding a public post, against whom disciplinary proceedings are intended to be taken, is entitled to have two opportunities before disciplinary action is finally taken against him.
The enquiry as envisaged for disciplinary proceedings must be conducted in accordance to the rules prescribed in that behalf which are consistent with the requirements of natural justice.
At the domestic enquiry the delinquent public servant would be entitled to test the evidence adduced against him by cross-examination, where necessary and to lead his own evidence.
He is entitled to have an opportunity to defend himself at the first stage of the proceedings.
Where the enquiry is over and the enquiry officer submits his report the disciplinary authority has to consider the report and decide whether it agrees with the conclusions of the report or not.
If the findings of the enquiry report are against the public officer and the disciplinary authority agrees with the findings then the stage is reached where another opportunity to the delinquent officer to show cause as to why the action be not taken against him comes up.
In issuing the second notice, the disciplinary authority has to come to a tentative or the provisional conclusion about the guilt of the public officer as also about the punishment which would meet the requirement of justice in case of the alleged mis-conduct.
On both these matters that the conclusions provisionally arrived at, the competent authority issues the second notice which enables the delinquent to cover the whole ground and to plead that no case has been made out against him for taking and disciplinary action and to urge that if he fails in substantiating his innocence the proposed action to be taken is either unduly severe or not called for.
Denial of opportunity to show cause either during the enquiry proceedings or after the disciplinary authority comes to tentative conclusions violates the principles of natural justice and the power under Art. 226 of the Constitution gets attracted.
14.
There is no denial of the fact that in departmental enquiries details of accusation have to be furnished to the employee.
He has to be informed about the evidence sought to be relied against him and the enquiry has to be conducted in his presence.
The results of the enquiry or the conclusions recorded by the enquiry officer will not get vitiated simply because the delinquent has of his own volition stayed away from the enquiry proceedings.
15.
In the case at hand the mis-conduct attributed to the writ petitioner is her unauthorised absence from duty from 21-2-1991 to 8-12-1994.
This is the allegation against her.
This accusation is simple and very short.
This allegation is specifically and unambiguously mentioned in the charge-sheet issued by the Director under his No. SIMS/HA-511/98/86-88 dated 10-1-1998.
It has to be noticed at this stage that all the proceedings that followed the first charge-sheet and the first order of termination got struck down by the decision in the first writ petition and confirmed in LPA No. 291 of 1997.
Earlier proceedings got washed out.
Fresh charge-sheet, Annexure-K, dated 10-1-1998 was issued by the Director.
The Director's competence to issue the charge-sheet against the petitioner is not disputed.
16.
True the charge-sheet does not say that the statement of allegations was drawn up and served on the delinquent petitioner.
True the requirement of the rules is that the statement of allegations has to be served on the delinquent along with the charge-sheet but where the allegation is so simple and short and where it is reflected and mentioned specifically in the charge-sheet, then the non-service of the statement of allegations with the charge-sheet loses its significance/importance.
Where the charge(s) pertain to certain details, certain allegations or certain accusations then the charge-sheet has to be accompanied by the statement of allegations; the purpose being to convey it to the delinquent official as to what is the material on which the charge/charges is/are based.
Non-service of the statement of allegations in such a situation assumes significance as the delinquent can get prejudiced in making the reply to the charge-sheet on account of the non-furnishing of the details of the allegations on which the charge/charges are based.
To say at the cost of repetition the non-service of statement of allegations with the charge-sheet is in the present case of no significance because the charge-sheet itself set out the allegations on which the proposed enquiry was to be initiated; the allegation being that the petitioner had remained on unauthorised absence from duty with effect from 21-2-1991 to 8-12-1994.
The non-service of statement of allegations about this mis-conduct has no significance as it cannot be countenanced that the petitioner was not informed of the material on which the allegation of unauthorised absence was based.
It has to be kept in view in this context that the petitioner's case is not that she had not absented herself from duty but her case appears, as borne out by the records produced for perusal, that she because of her alleged illness could not attend her duties from 21-2-1991 to 8-12-1994.
The charge of unauthorised absence for the said period was not based on lengthy allegations nor was based on any such record of which the petitioner had no knowledge.
She according to her plea, projected throughout, had fallen ill and had thus been prevented from attending to her duties from 21-2-1991 to 8-12-1994.
It is in this situation hard to accept that any prejudice has been caused to her in defending herself by non-service of the statement of allegations or non-disclosure of the material on which the charge of her unauthorised absence for the period in reference was based.
The matter of the fact is that the disciplinary authority called upon the petitioner to substantiate her alleged illness, the cause of her absence from duty and to explain as to why the disciplinary action as warranted by the rules be not taken against her.
It is in this context to be noted that the nature of misconduct attributed through the charge-sheet did not warrant either the issuance of statement of allegations or the copies of the documents sought to be relied upon during the enquiry.
It is perhaps not open to the delinquent public servant, to say that she was prevented in making the reply to the charge by the non-supply of the statement of allegations or by non-supply of the copies of the documents.
The matter of fact is, as stated above, that the mis-conduct whereabout the enquiry has been conducted is in respect of her unauthorised absence from duty for a long time.
No separate statement of allegations was required to be issued in respect of this mis- conduct.
The charge-sheet did not convey that any document was to be relied upon during the enquiry.
The matter of the fact appears to be that having noticed and communicated that the petitioner had absented herself from duty unauthorisedly, she was called upon through the charge-sheet, to put forth the cause/reason for such unauthorised absence.
17.
It is in the facts and circumstances of the case that the non-issuance of the statement of allegations or the copies of the documents, as would have become necessary, had the alleged mis-conduct been in respect of any other act or omission, has not caused any prejudice to the delinquent.
Fetish and exaggerated devotion to the concept of natural justice reflected in the rules providing for domestic enquiries sometimes can lead to such results as would enable the strong spider to break our of its web.
The principle behind the requirement to communicate in writing the statement of allegations or provide the copies of the documents sought to be relied in the domestic enquiry with respect to a mis-conduct is to intimate and inform the delinquent public servant as to what charge(s) has it to meet in the enquiry and what is the material to be relied upon in support of the charge/charges.
Where the charge is very brief and simple, as for example the unauthorised absence from duty, the non-supply of the statement of allegations does not keep the delinquent in darkness as to what is the accusation/allegation against him.
Unauthorised absence is such a misconduct on the part of the public servant that its bare recital in the charge-sheet is sufficient to tell him as to what is to be met by him in the domestic enquiry.
18.
I am, therefore, unable to agree with the contention that the charge- sheet served at the domestic enquiry against the petitioner has been in any mode or manner defective.
It does not open to be countenanced that the statement of allegations having been not furnished with the charge-sheet has in any manner either been prejudicial to the delinquent or has rendered the charge-sheet defective.
19.
The record that is produced for perusal goes to indicate that the petitioner initially applied on 16-2-1991 for fifteen days earned leave.
The leave was not sanctioned but nonetheless she proceeded to avail it.
The Institute informed her vide the telegram dated 4-4-1991 to resume her duties or else face the consequences.
In reply she telegraphically (dated 6-5-1991) sought extension of earned leave by ninety days.
The Administrative Officer thereafter issued the charge-sheet on 24-5-1991 calling upon (sic) taken for her unauthorised absence from duty.
The record reveals that she replied the charge-sheet intimating that having applied for fifteen days earned leave with effect from 21-2-1991, she had suddenly fallen ill, and under the medical advice had to take complete bed rest for the period of three months and had accordingly sought extension of leave.
She made in the reply to the charge- sheet the specific mention that she will resume her duties as soon as the medical advice permitted her to do so.
The reply having not led to the satisfaction of the disciplinary authority, another show cause notice appears to have been issued to her to explain as to why her services be not terminated, for the said unauthorised absence.
She replied to this notice vide her communication dated 22-4-1993 whereunder she again projected her illness as the cause of her absence and assured that she will produce requisite medical certificate on joining her duties.
The Medical Superintendent of the Institute thereafter vide his No. SIMS/HA-5/91/93-2186 dated 14-6-1993 called upon her to produce medical certificate in support of her illness as the alleged cause of her absence.
The disciplinary authority thereafter issued the termination order No. SIMS/HA-73/95 dated 31-1-1995.
The validity and legality of this order came to be challenged in SWP No. 252/95.
This termination order was quashed vide the judgment dated 7-7-1997.
It was appealed against (LPA No. 291/97), but to no other result.
The Court instead directed that the petitioner be permitted to join her duties subject to the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings qua against her unauthorised absence from duty.
The enquiry committee was got constituted and the Director issued the fresh charge-sheet, Annexure K, which came to be replied by her.
In the reply she harped upon the tune that the summary of allegations having been not furnished the charge-sheet could not be proceeded with.
The enquiry committee was constituted vide Annexure M Then the enquiry committee asked her vide Annexure D to put forth the documentary evidence in support of her alleged illness that had prevented her from performing her duties for the period of her absence.
This was challenged by the petitioner in SWP No. 328/98.
The petition was dismissed on 11-3-1998.
Enquiry report was furnished by the enquiry committee indicating that no material had been put-forth in the nature of medical certificate to sustain the petitioner's alleged cause of absence from duty.
The committee while submitting the report recommended that another chance for producing medical documents in support of the alleged cause of absence be provided to the delinquent and the matter be thereafter decided on its merits.
The enquiry committee asked vide Director's No. SIMS/Enquiry/98- 1273-75 dated 20-3-1998, the petitioner to produce documents in support of her alleged illness during the period of absence.
She again did not meet the demand of the enquiry committee which led to the submission of the final enquiry report under No. SIMS/Enquiry/98-1328 dated 23-3-1998 wherein the enquiry committee forwarded the finding that as the delinquent official had failed to substantiate her statement of prolonged illness despite repeated notices, the conclusion was that she had wilful and unauthorisedly absented herself from duty during the period in question.
The enquiry report having received the due consideration of the disciplinary authority led to the issuance of the second notice under No. SIMS/HA-511/98/1823 dated 3-4-1998 calling upon the delinquent to show cause as to why she be not removed from service as the enquiry committee had reached the conclusion that she had wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from duty for the period in reference.
The disciplinary authority not only referred, in this second notice, to the conclusions of the enquiry proceedings and the findings of the enquiry committee but also decided on the proposed punishment to be imposed for the misconduct in reference.
This show cause notice was replied by the petitioner vide her communication dated 15-4-1998 wherein she sought deferment of the final orders on the enquiry proceedings as she had filed writ petition No. 318 of 1998.
The disciplinary authority after consideration of all the factors and circumstances passed the impugned order whereby the petitioner has been removed from service.
20.
The aforestated sequence of events, though referred to at the cost of repetition, goes to indicate that in the nature of the charge, namely the wilfully and unauthroised absence from duty, the delinquent petitioner projected the cause of absence as her prolonged illness.
She was repeatedly called upon to substantiate the statement of illness by production of medical certificate(s).
Instead of putting forth the material in support of her alleged illness, she wilfully and deliberately disassociated herself from the enquiry proceedings and instead resorted to the filing of one writ petition after another to challenge the notices.
21.
It is true that the enquiry committee did not examine any witness in support of the charge.
It relied only on the records that were put-forth by the presenting officer, appointed by the competent authority.
It is contended that the records would not have spoken itself but in order to base the findings on the record the enquiry committee ought to have examined some witness(s) to speak from the records.
Put in other words, the contention urged is that the enquiry committee had no material, whatsoever, before it to base the finding that the petitioner had wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from duty during the period in reference.
22.
In departmental/domestic enquiries as envisaged by Section 126 of the Constitution of the State read with Rules 33, 34 and 35 of the J. and K. Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, examination of the witness/witnesses by the enquiry officer/agency is not always and in every situation necessary for the recording of the findings on the charge/charges.
23.
The charge against the petitioner in this case pertains to her unauthorised absence from duty.
The enquiry committee examined the record and from the records it came to the conclusion that the charge is established against her.
No witness was required to be examined as the record could be seen by the enquiry committee.
Conclusion(s) can be deduced from the records, if not challenged/refuted.
The petitioner chose not to participate in the enquiry and not to produce any material in support of her statement of illness that had become the cause of her unauthorised absence.
The enquiry committee on examination of the records and on the ground of her not substantiating, by documents or otherwise, her statement of illness during the period in reference reached the conclusion that the petitioner had wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from duty.
Had the petitioner participated in the enquiry, she could have convinced the enquiry committee about the cause of the absence either by putting forth the medical certificate(s) or by examination of certain witness(s).
In the absence of the petitioner the enquiry committee did not ostensibly feel the necessity of examining any witness and instead made up its mind and reached the conclusion from examination of the record.
It cannot be, in this situation, countenanced that the enquiry is vitiated as no witness was examined or no document was exhibited.
Examination of witness and exhibition of documents would arise had the petitioner associated herself with the enquiry.
She cannot take advantage of her any conduct and urge that the enquiry report is based on no material/no evidence and the conclusions arrived by the enquiry committee are perverse.
No infirmity can, in the totality of the circumstances of this case, be attributed to the report of the enquiry committee.
24.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied to subscribe to the view that there was no material before the enquiry committee to reach the conclusion that the petitioner had wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from the duty.
25.
After the enquiry committee was constituted vide Annexure M dated 12-2- 1998 the convenor of the committee associated, vide Annexure M, the law officer with the enquiry.
It is contended that the petitioner was not permitted to engage the services of the legal counsel and thus the guarantee of equality extended by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution have been observed in breach rendering the report of the enquiry committee unsustainable.
26.
It is not always obligatory on the part of the enquiry authority to allow the delinquent to engage the services of a legal counsel.
It is in this context that the nature of the charge/charges, which the delinquent public servant has to face at the enquiry, become relevant.
Allegations of the misconduct that is the basis for the charge-sheet in this case is the unauthorised absence from duty.
This charge is not at all complicated but is very simple; so even if it be assumed that the petitioner was not permitted to engage the legal counsel, yet it cannot be countenanced thereon that the principles of natural justice have been violated.
This opinion is based on the Apex Court decision in the case, reported in AIR 1997 SC 3658 : 1997 Lab IC 2076.
27.
The enquiry committee through its convenor called upon the petitioner vide letter dated 20-3-1998 to produce the medical certificate or any other document in support of her statement of illness during the period of absence.
The petitioner complaints that this notice was not served on her and no occasion was provided to her to produce the certificate.
Assuming that it was so, even then the petitioner ought to have responded to second show cause notice wherein the findings of the enquiry committee were tentatively accepted by the disciplinary authority and it had tentatively taken the view that she be removed from service.
She could have projected it that she was not informed of the need or necessity to produce the medical certificate and/or that the enquiry committee's letter dated 20-3-1998 had not been served.
In 14th paragraph of the second disciplinary authority mentioned that the petitioner had in terms of the report of the enquiry committee not put-forth any medical certificate or other documents in support of her statement of illness during the period of her absence though she was required by the committee to do so vide the communication dated 17-2-1998 and 20-3-1998.
The receipt of this show cause notice is acknowledged by the petitioner as she filed the reply to this notice on 15-4-1996.
Instead of raising any objection as to the sustainability of the enquiry committee's findings and the reasons therefor the petitioner while making the reference to the pendency of the SWP No. 328 of 1998 sought the withdrawal of the second show cause notice till the disposal of the writ petition.
It is, therefore, not open to her to say that she was not informed at any stage either by the enquiry committee or by the disciplinary authority that she was required to put forth the medical certificate or any other document in support of her statement of illness during the period in question.
It is in this context worth to be restated that in this second opportunity afforded by the disciplinary authority the petitioner could have come forward to cover the whole ground of enquiry and to plead that no case had been made out against her for taking the disciplinary action.
She could have even urged that there was no basis for the enquiry committee to reach the conclusions and the disciplinary authority had no material to take any tentative decision either about the findings or about the proposed punishment.
She could have in this context at the stage of second opportunity put-forth the medical certificate or any other document to support the statement of illness during the period of absence.
She could have urged her innocence as against the action proposed to be taken against her.
She could have been canvassed that the tentative/proposed punishment was disproportionate or not called for.
None of these courses/options was adopted but instead withdrawal of the second show cause notice was sought till the disposal of the writ petition No. 328/1998.
28.
She cannot be heard to say that she had no notice at any stage, prior to the issuance of the impugned order of termination, that she was required to produce medical certificate or any other document in support of her statement of illness that prevented her from attending to her duties during the period of her absence.
This view is fortified by the authority reported in AIR 1963 SC 1612.
29.
The facts and the circumstances as referred to here-before go to show that neither was the charge vague not was it obligatory on the part of the enquiry authority to have examined any witness in support of the simple charge of unauthorised absence from duty.
The enquiry committee was justified to reach the conclusion on the perusal of the records.
It is so, as the delinquent despite notice did not come up with the documentary evidence in support of her statement of illness that had allegedly prevented her from attending to her duties.
There is evidence thus to support the findings and sustain the view taken by the disciplinary authority.
No interference is called for on that count.
30.
It has been contended that other persons/employees of the Institute against whom the same type of charges of unauthorised absence were levelled have been taken back into the service and the petitioner has been singled out to be visited by the severest of the punishments in the nature of termination from service.
Instead of taking this plea in the Court, the petitioner could have in response to the second show cause notice issued under Classification, Control and Appeal Rules gone to the disciplinary authority/punishing authority to cover the whole ground and plead that no case had been made out against her for action being taken.
She could not also in response to this notice urge that the action proposed to be taken against her was either unduly severe or even not called for (Reliance AIR 1963 SC 1612).
She did not choose this course and instead she sought to forestal the disciplinary authority from taking the final decision by making reference to the pendency of SWP No. 328/1998.
This is Annexure S to the writ petition.
It cannot thus lie with her to groan that the punishment imposed is too severe and disproportionate or that she has been singled out for such type of punishment, though other employees of the Institute who were similarly circumstanced had been lightly dealt with.
It has to be noticed in this context that reference to the similarly circumstanced employees of the Institute is made not in the writ petition but in the rejoinder.
No case can be built up on the averments in the rejoinder.
Whoever invokes the writ jurisdiction has to set out all the circumstances and the facts in the writ petition itself.
Assuming that the similarly circumstanced employees of the Institute have been either not punished for authorised absence or have been lightly dealt with, yet in the manner and the fashion in which the petitioner conducted herself with the enquiry disentitles her to the claim of similar treatment.
31.
In the totality of the circumstances, I am unable to subscribe to the view that the punishment imposed on the petitioner is disproportionate to the charge or that she has been victimised.
Had she not deliberately and wilfully disassociated herself from the enquiry proceedings and had she projected before the punishing authority the same grounds which she has now projected then perhaps the plea could be accepted that enquities are in her favour or that she has been shockingly discriminated in the matter of infliction of punishment that is disproportionate to the established misconduct.
She cannot even appeal to the compassion of the Court.
Having wilfully and unauthorisedly absented herself from duty for nearly four years, she cannot be heard to say that she has been unevenly dealt with or that the punishment imposed is severe or excessive.
Appeal to compassion could perhaps help her had she associated herself with the enquiry proceedings up to the filing of the writ petition.
Her defiant attitude and non-cooperative behaviour renders her plea of equal treatment untenable.
No reasons are there to subscribe to her contention that the punishment imposed is harsh or severe or that she has been unevenly dealt with.
There is no case for judicial intervention.
32.
For the reasons said here-before, no scope for intervention with the imposed order is made out.
The petition is, therefore, hereby dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Records produced for perusal be returned.
Petition dismissed.