JN Bhatt, J - By this petition, under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners, who are the original workmen, have challenged the award recorded by the Labour Court, at Vadodara, in Reference (LCB) No. 1470/77, passed on 1st June, 1983, whereby, order of the punishment of the dismissal imposed in departmental inquiry by the respondent-employer-company, upon a proof of delinquency with regard to indulging in a go-slow tactics in discharge of employment duties, came to be quashed, but, without awarding back-wages.
Therefore, precisely, the question which would emerge for determination and adjudication in this petition would be limited in a small circumference as to whether proportionality of imposition of penalty, in not awarding back wages while exercising the discretionary powers, under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is not commensurate with delinquency established against the employee ?
In other words, question requiring determination would be as to whether refusal or order withholding of backwages while passing order of reinstatement of the petitioners-employees could be said to be shockingly disproprationate to the delinquency established against employees.
The answer to this question recorded by the Labour Court is evident from the enumeration of the facts in the impugned award.
Nothing has been successful point out which would warrant departure or calling for interference of this Court, in the exercise of the discretionary powers of the Labour Court, under Section 11-A, in terms of the delinquency established.
More so in view of the following unquestionable aspects emerging from the records of the present case :  (1) The indulgence in go-slow tactics cannot be said to be a lesser misconduct.
On the contrary, as pointed out by the learned advocate on behalf of the respondent-company by relying upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court, in case of Bharat Sugar Mills v. Its Employees, reported in 1996(II) LLJ 644, wherein it is held as under :- "...... "Go-slow" which a picturesque description of deliberate delaying of production of workman pretending to be engaged in the factory is one of the most pernicious practice that discontented or disgruntled workman sometimes resort to.
It would not be far wrong to call this dishonest.
For while thus delaying production and claim to have remained employed and thus to be entitled to full wages.
Apart from this also, go-slow is likely to be much more harmful than total cessation of work by strike.
For, while during a strike such of the machinery can be fully turned off, during the "go-slow" the machinery is kept going on at reduced speed which is often extremely damaging to the machinery parts.
For all these reasons, "go-slow" has always been considered a serious type of misconduct."
Reliance is also placed on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in case of New Shorrock Mills v. Meshbhai T Rao, reported in AIR 1997 SC 252 : 1997(1) SCT 338 (SC), wherein the award of the Labour Court granting reinstatement to the employees with 40% backwages, was quashed and set aside.
(2) Incidence of late filing of the petition without enumeration or satisfactory elaboration of the grounds for being late, as the award of the Labour Court was recorded as early as on Ist June, 1983, whereas the petition came to be filed on 19th February, 1986, coupled with the fact that in a petition, at the instance of the employer, this Court, in Special Civil Application No. 228 of 1984, while dismissing the petition on 28th April, 1984, has incidently also observed that the Labour Court was not in any way in error in matter of principle or authority to hold on the facts and circumstances that the punishment was excessive.
(3) The respondent-employer-company is not an on-going concern, which is as such closed since 12th July, 1986 and the employees including the petitioners have been paid their legal dues at the stage of the closure.
(4) The jurisdictional sweep of a Court, while entertaining the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, which empowers the Court with powers of the superintendence of the Court, including the authority or the Tribunal.
There is no question of jurisdictional error.
Again exercise of the discretionary powers of the Labour Court, under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, in the peculiar facts, and special circumstances and the allegations of indulgence and go-slow tactics of the leaders of the Union, could not be shown or has not been spect (spelt ?)
out in any way tainted with information calling for interference of the exercise of superintendence powers of this court, under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
In the result, the petition deserves to be rejected accordingly.
2.
The petition shall stand rejected, without any order as to cost.
Petition dismissed.