VK Bali, J - Appellant, who was plaintiff in the original lis, having lost his cause both before the trial Court as also learned Single Judge, has filed this Letters Patent Appeal under clause X of the Letters Patent.
Brief facts culminating into filing of present appeal need a necessary mention.
2.
Appellant (here-in-after referred to as `plaintiff'), an Assistant Supervisor in the Ministry of Defence, Government of India, pursuant to a departmental enquiry, was compulsorily retired from service w.e.f.
February 27, 1967.
The enquiry was held under Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 (for short `Rules of 1965').
He successfully challenged the order of his compulsory retirement through a civil suit and judgment and decree rendered by the trial court was confirmed in appeal as well on October 15, 1976.
Consequent upon the judgment and decree, referred to above, plaintiff was reinstated in service vide order dated March 2, 1977 from the date of his compulsory retirement, i.e., February 27, 1967.
3.
In consequence of the order of reinstatement, plaintiff approached the Director, Military Farm for payment of his emoluments for the period from February 27, 1967 to March 2, 1977.
He claimed an amount of Rs. 40,76175 In his endeavour to get payment of emoluments for the period, referred to above, he succeeded, even though partly, inasmuch as vide orders dated March 17, 1987 he was held entitled to payment of Rs. 18,924/- only.
Dis-satisfied with the order dated March 17, 1987, when his claim had only been partly allowed by the Director, he filed yet another suit claiming the entire amount pertaining to pay and emoluments for the period, referred to above.
The cause of the plaintiff was seriously contested by the respondent-Union of India, thus, giving rise to the issues, as have been reflected in the judgment passed by the learned Sub Judge.
4.
Learned Sub Judge, Amritsar, vide his judgment dated October 16, 1979, in view of the findings recorded by him on various issues, decreed the suit of the plaintiff to the extent of recovery of Rs. 18,924/- with proportionate costs.
Before we might proceed any further in this matter, we would like to mention that it is conceded position that inasmuch as the amount of Rs. 18,925/- had since already been sanctioned in favour of the plaintiff, the suit ought to have been dismissed.
This is how the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court has been taken by the parties, as is clearly depicted from the grounds of appeal filed by the plaintiff which came to be disposed of by the learned Single Judge.
Not only that it is mentioned in the very first para of the grounds of appeal that the learned Sub Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff with respect to an amount of Rs. 21,837.75, learned Single Judge too has observed that "as a result of the trial that followed, lower court has upheld the order of Director and has dismissed the suit."
5.
The suit of the plaintiff has been dismissed by the trial Court as also by the learned Single Judge on the dint of Article 193, clause 4(a), (b) and proviso attached to clause (b) of the Rules of 1965, which, for facility of reference, are reproduced as under :-  "193 (4)(a) : Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of a Government servant is set aside by a Court of law and consequently the Government servant is reinstated without any further inquiry the period of absence from duty of such Government servant shall be regularised as per existing orders in that behalf and the Government servant shall be paid, subject to the direction of the Court, if any, pay and allowances in accordance with the provision of sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c).
(b) (i) Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of a Government servant is set aside by the Court solely on the ground of non- compliance with the requirement of the provisions of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, and where he is not exonerated on merits, the Government servant shall, subject to the provisions of sub-clause (g) of clauses (3) be paid such amount (not being the whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled had he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, as the competent authority may determine after giving notice to the Government servant of the quantum proposed and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him, in that connection within such period (which in no case shall exceed sixty days from the date notice has been served), as may be specified in the notice : Provided that any payment under this sub-clause to a Government servant shall be restricted to a period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the judgment of the Court was passed or the date of retirement on superannuation of such Government servant, as the case may be."
6.
It is conceded position and so has also been held by the learned Single Judge, that order of compulsory retirement was set aside in the first suit, instituted by the plaintiff on the only ground that the said order was not speaking one.
Operative part of the judgment passed by the trial Court reads thus :-  "Now the perusal of both these orders will show that they do not give any reasons and thus these orders cannot be said to be speaking orders.
An order of this type which does not give reasons and is not speaking cannot be sustained in court of law."
7.
While affirming the order passed by the trial Court, the appellate Court observed as follows :-  "The impugned order, as reproduced earlier, is cryptic and does not show any reason on the basis of which this order was passed."
8.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the plaintiff, however, contends that there is no provision contained in the 1965 Rules that may require passing of a speaking or reasoned order and in fact an order of compulsory retirement was invalidated on the ground that was not in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
That being the situation, it could not be held that clause 4(b)(i) and proviso to Article 193 of the Rules of 1965 would be applicable to the facts of this case, further contends the learned counsel.
9.
We have given our anxious thoughts to the contentions of learned counsel as noted above but find no merit therein whatsoever.
Clause 4(b)(i) of Article 193, as would be evident from reading of same, would apply where dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of a government servant is set aside by the Court solely on the ground of non-compliance with the requirement of provisions of the Rules of 1965 as also where the delinquent has not been exonerated on merits.
That apart, there is a specific rule in the Rules of 1965 dealing with procedure for imposing penalties which provides that after conclusion of enquiry, the report shall contain the findings on each article of charge and reasons thereof.
Rule 12(23)(i) of the said rules reads thus :-  "(23)(i) After the conclusion of the inquiry, a report shall be prepared and it shall contain  (a) the articles of charge and the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour;  (b) the defence of the Government servant in respect of each article of charge; (c) an assessment of the evidence in respect of each article of charge; (d) the findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefor."
A reading of sub-clause (d) of Rule 14(23)(b)(i) (Rule 12(23)(b)(i) ?
), as has been reproduced above, would, thus demonstrate that the report has to contain findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefor.
Confronted with the specific rule dealing with passing of speaking order, learned counsel for the appellant had then nothing to urge before this Court.
Finding no merits in this appeal, we dismiss the same, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.