JS Khehar, J - In exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 16.1(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, the petitioner was dismissed from service vide an order dated 17.2.1989.
At that time, the petitioner was holding the post of Sub Inspector.
He preferred an appeal against the order of dismissal.
The appeal was rejected by the Deputy Inspector of General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar vide an order dated 13.3.1989.
2.
The petitioner approached this Court though CWP No. 11271 of 1990 impugning the orders dated 17.2.1989 and 13.3.1989, referred to above.
The said writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge of this Court on 2111995.
As per aforesaid order, the impugned orders were quashed and the Authorities were directed to reinstate the petitioner, with all consequential benefits.
It may also be mentioned that in the order passed by this court dated 2111995, it was expressly mentioned that the respondents would be at liberty to hold a departmental enquiry against the petitioner in accordance with law.
3.
Instead of the implementing the decision rendered by the court in CWP No. 11271 of 1990, the Authorities preferred an appeal i.e. LPA No. 342 of 1996.
A Division Bench of this Court dismissed the aforesaid appeal on 7111996.
These decisions of this Court were challenged by the Authorities though Special Leave to Appeal No. 10625 of 1997.
Hon'ble Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on 871997.
4.
The order of the learned Single Judge passed in CWP No. 11271 of 1990 having attained finality, the Authorities reinstated the petitioner in service vide an order dated 1591997 w.e.f.
17.2.1989.
He was also allowed all consequential benefits which accrued to him as a consequence of his retirement (reinstatement ?
).
5.
The petitioner retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on 3091997.
After he retired from service, he was issued a charge sheet dated 24111998.
A copy of the aforesaid charge sheet has been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-I A perusal of the charge sheet would show that he was proceeded against on the basis of charges pertaining to December, 1988.
The petitioner has filed the instant writ petition challenging the charge sheet dated 24111998 which has been issued to him after his retirement on 3091997.
6.
The solitary argument addressed by the learned counsel for the petitioners is based on Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol. 11.
The aforesaid rule is being extracted hereunder for facility of reference:-  "22(b)  The Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if, in a departmental or judicial proceeding the pensioner is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his service, including service rendered upon re-employment after retirement :- Provided that :- (1) Such departmental proceedings, if instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-employment shall after the final retirement of the officer, be deemed to be a proceeding under this Article and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer had continued in service.
(2) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his reemployment - (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government; (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution; and  (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceeding in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to officer during his service.
(3) No such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re- employment shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution; and  the public Service commission should be consulted before final orders are passed.
Explanation - For the purpose of this rule - (a) a departmental proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which the statement of charges is issued to the officer or pensioner, or if the officer has been placed under suspension from an earlier date on such date; and (b) a judicial proceeding shall be deemed instituted -  (i) in the case of criminal proceeding, on the date on which the complaint or report of the police officer on which the Magistrate takes cognizance is made; and  (ii) in the case of civil proceeding, on the date of presentation of the plaint in the Court.
Note : As soon as proceedings of the nature referred to in the above rule are instituted, the authority which institute such proceedings should without delay intimate the fact to the Accountant General.
The amount of the pension withheld under clause (b) should not ordinarily exceed one- third of pension originally sanctioned, including any amount of the pension to be so withheld, regard should be had to the consideration whether the amount of the pension left to the pensioner in any case would be adequate for his maintenance.
(c) (i) Where any departmental or judicial proceeding is instituted under clause (b) of Rule 22. or where a departmental proceeding is continued under clause (i) of the provision thereto against an officer who has retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement or otherwise, he shall be paid during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which upon conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed, a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of his qualifying service up to the date of retirement or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement up to date immediately preceding the date on which he was placed under suspension, but no gratuity or death-cum-retirement gratuity shall be paid to him until the conclusion of such proceeding and of final orders thereon.
The gratuity, if allowed to be drawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of the proceedings will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of final orders by the competent authority : Provided that where Departmental proceedings have been instituted under rule no of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 for imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of rule 5 of the said rules, the payment of the gratuity or death-cum-retirement gratuity, as the case may be, shall to (not ?)
be withheld.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-clause (i) shall be against the final retirement benefits sanctioned to such officer upon conclusion of the aforesaid proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period.
Note :- The grant of pension under this rule shall not prejudice the operation of rule 64 ibid when final pension is sanctioned upon conclusion of the proceedings."
7.
Pointed attention of this Court has been drawn to clause (2) of the aforesaid rule 22(b).
A careful perusal of the same would show that in case a departmental proceeding is to be initiated against an employee after his retirement, it cannot be in respect of an event which took place more than four years from the date when the proceeding is initiated.
It is clear that the charge sheet was issued to the petitioner in the instant case on 24111998, whereas the incident in question in respect to which he has been proceeded against relates to the year 1988 i.e. one decade prior to the issuance of the charge sheet.
It is obvious that issuance of the aforesaid charge sheet is wholly unacceptable in law, as the same is clearly barred by the provision of clause (2) of rule 22(b) extracted above.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on a decision rendered by this Court in Narinder Dev Sharma v. State of Punjab and another, 1996(2) Service Law Reporter 270 : 1996(1) SCT 623 (P&H), wherein this court has also come to the conclusion that the Disciplinary Authority is empowered to initiate disciplinary action, against an employee even after his retirement, subject to the condition, that the enquiry pertained to an incident not more than four years prior to the date of initiation of the enquiry.
We fully endorse the decision referred to above and hold that initiation of enquiry in the instant case after retirement of the petitioner in respect of the allegation which pertained to the period about 10 years prior to the initiation of the charge sheet, is barred under the provisions of clause (2) of rule 22(b) extracted above.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 24111998 is quashed.
Having hereby quashed the charge- sheet issued to the petitioner, it is directed that the petitioner shall be released all his retiral benefits within three months from the date of issue of his order.
Petition allowed.