Arun Kumar Goel, J - The petitioner has questioned the impugned transfer order, Annexure-B to the writ petition dated 851998.
In terms of the impugned order, petitioner who was working as Junior Assistant Storekeeper, Food Store, Kotranka has been ordered to be transferred and posted as Storekeeper, Food Store, Thanamandi, relieving Mohd.
Ilyas weighman and he will also work as Salesman Thanamandi.
As per the averments made in the petition, petitioner had completed one and a half year at Kotranka, when the petition in question was filed and has thus been transferred before permitting him to complete his tenure of two years.
In case it was considered necessary to transfer the petitioner before completion of his normal tenure, in the public interest, then, the Competent Authority could order so with the prior approval of the Administrative Department.
This having not been done, the so- called ex-post-facto sanction that too is of no consequence to uphold the impugned order of transfer.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the impugned order is highly arbitrary and having been passed in a mechanical manner, without application of mind and is aimed at causing harassment with a view to dislocate the petitioner from Kotranka on one hand and giving undue benefit to respondent No. 4, namely, Ghar Singh, who has been ordered to be posted in place of the petitioner.
3.
Respondent No. 2, Shri SS Jamwal, Director, Food and Supplies, Jammu has been arrayed as a party by name.
Against him allegations have been made in Ground (C) in the writ petition in the following words :-  "(C) That the order impugned is bad in the eyes of law and from this fact also because it is not in the interest of administration and in respect to the transfer of the petitioner from Kotranka to Thanamandi, whereas respondent No. 4, who stands at Item No. 1 could be directly transferred from Food Store Kotranka to Thanamandi, where the post was required to be adjusted as in Thanamandi Store, one salesman was made an Incharge of the Store by holding additional charge of Saleman.
The respondent No. 2 with ulterior motives, because the petitioner and the respondent No. 4 having close relations with each other with a wreck vengeance to the petitioner only to dislocate and harass the petitioner and to give the benefit of adjustment of the choice of the respondent No. 4.
The respondent No. 2 has passed the order without getting the approval from the Administrative Deptt.
because the transfer of the petitioner is quite premature and which is evident from the earlier transfer order dated 30.10.1996, where the petitioner at item No. 11 was transferred from Rajouri to Kotranka Food Store as a Storekeeper-cum- Salesman Kotranka.
The copy of the order dated 30.10.1996 and the copy of the order impugned dated 851998 are enclosed herewith and marked as Annexures A & B respectively to this writ petition for the perusal of the Hon'ble Court."
(Underlining supplied) 4.
Objections in this case have been filed, which are supported with the affidavit of said respondent No. 2.
Reply to the aforesaid plea is urged in para/ground (iii) in these objections is in the following terms :-  "iii) That the averments made in ground (c) are misconceived.
It is not for the petitioner to decide what is the interest of the administration.
Furthermore, the averments made in the para regarding the petitioner and respondent No. 4 being close relations do not appear to have any connection with the contents of the present writ petition.
The knowledge of the relations is also denied."
Paras 1 and 2 of the affidavit to support of these objections are also reproduced herein below :-  "1.
That being conversant with the facts of the aforementioned case on the basis of record to which I have access, I have to state that so far as the factual aspects of averments made in the accompany objection are concerned these are true and correct to my knowledge.
2.
That the legal aspect of the averments made in the accompanying objections are true and correct being based on legal advise which I believe to be true."
5.
So far matter relating to transfer of a Government Servant is concerned, it is now well settled that the transfer is an exigency of service and the Court would be very reluctant to interfere as it is purely within the domain of the administrative authorities concerned to ensure as to where an employee is to be posted and at what point of time.
6.
It is also well known that in a given situation, transfer may result in causing hardship, dislocation in the domestic affairs of a Public Servant, but his cannot be made a ground to interfere with the transfer order.
This would not mean that when it is shown that the order of transfer has been made with some ulterior motive or to wreck vengeance against an employee, the Court would not be remain a silent spectator.
7.
Further a transfer order, when demonstrated to be either arbitrary or is based on mala fide or is infraction of any professed norms governing such transfer would certainly be interfered with.
8.
Another ground on which Court would go into the question about transfer is, when it is stated to have been ordered by an incompetent authority.
9.
It may also be worthwhile to notice that the authority concerned may in an appropriate case examine the hardship, which may be the consequence of a transfer or by examining the same.
For smooth functioning as well as proper running of the administration, it is for the authority to examine each case on its own facts and then mitigate the hardship of such an employee.
But the fact remains, it is not for the Courts to assess the situation, thereby to interdict the working of the administration system by transfer of the employee to proper places.
10.
For taking this view, reliance is being placed on Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta, (1992)1 SCC.
306 : 1992(1) SCT 161 (SC), Union of India v. SL Abbas, (1993) 4 SCC.
357 : 1995(4) SCT 455 (SC), NK Singh v. Union of India, (1994)6 SCC.
98 : 1995(1) SCT 269 (SC), Rajendra Roy v. Union of India and other, JT (1992)2 SC 732 : 1993(2) SCT 65 (SC), Abani Kanta Ray v. State of Orissa, JT (1995) 7 SC 167 : 1996(1) SCT 22 (SC) and State of M.P. v. SS Kourav, JT (1995)2 SC 198 : 1995(2) SCT 195 (SC).
11.
Thus it is clear from the above discussion that unless it is shown that the transfer order is either passed by an incompetent authority or it is actuated by ill-will and malice, ordinarily the Court would be loathe to interfere with such transfer orders.
12.
Examining the present case on the touchstone of the above noted principles, which are now well settled, it is evident that the allegations of the petitioner regarding close relationship between respondents 2 and 4 have not been specifically denied by respondent No. 2, with whose affidavit (if at all the said affidavit can be termed to be legal being according to law), the objections are supported.
Petitioner had categorically pleaded about there being close relationship between both these respondents and the transfer order having been passed with ulterior motives, because of such close relationship aimed at wrecking vengeance only to dislocate and harass the petitioner and at the same time to give undue benefit and adjustment of the choice of respondent No. 4.
Reply in the objections to this ground of the writ petition firstly state that respondent No. 4 being close relation does not appear to have any connection with the contents of the writ petition and in the next breath the knowledge of relationship has been denied.
From the pleadings, it can be inferred that there is some relationship between respondent No. 2 and respondent No. 4.
Here it may also be noticed that in case there was no relationship as claimed by the petitioner, respondent No. 2 would have categorically denied the fact in that behalf.
This is not the case here.
Rather in one breath by necessary implication, respondent No. 2 admits the relationship and in the next breath he denied the knowledge of relationship and not the factum of actual relationship inter se with the concerned respondent.
That being so, in the considered opinion of this Court, impugned order, Annexure-B to the writ petition dated 851998 ordering transfer of the petitioner from Kotranka to Thanamandi cannot be sustained.
It is not in dispute that this order is issued by none else but by respondent No. 2.
13.
As already observed complete embargo cannot be put on the right of an employee, as in the present case to question the action of the administrative authority, when it is based on reasons other than administrative interest of the Government.
If this is done, it will result in putting premium on the arbitrary and mala fide acts of the authority concerned.
14.
Learned Government Advocate placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1989 K.L.J.
186, Mohammad Sikander Bhat v. State of J&K and ors., and urged that this Court will not interfere with the order of transfer having been passed by the Competent Authority in exercise of power vested in it.
It may be appropriate to mention in this behalf that there is no dispute with the proposition of law laid down in this case, but it is wholly inapplicable to the facts of the present case on the view taken by the Court.
15.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order (Annexure-B to the writ petition) Office Order No. 32-FSJ of 1998 dated 851998, so far it orders the transfer of petitioner from Kotranka to Thanamandi is hereby quashed and set aside, Consequently, it is ordered that the petitioner shall continue to work at Kotranka.
16.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.