Tirath S Thakur, J - The challenge in this petition for a writ of certiorari is directed against a Notification dated 17th May, 1997 issued by the Respondent University reserving a solitary post of Professor in the post graduate department of English for the Scheduled Tribe candidates only.
The petitioner who was at the relevant time working as a Reader in the said Department, has assailed the reservation on the ground that such a reservation was legally impermissible as the same would amount to making a 100% reservation in favour of schedule tribe candidates other category of candidates.
2.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that the question whether a single post available in the cadre could be reserved either directly or on rotational basis is not longer res integra in the light of the Constitution Bench decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association and Others, AIR 1998 SC 1767 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC).
He contended that the reservation of the only Post in the Department of English amounted to making a 100% reservation against the said post which was impermissible and violative of rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Reliance was also placed by him upon a Division Bench decision of this Court in Dr. L Krishan v. State of Karnataka and Another, ILR 1986(1) 255 in support of his argument that for purposes of reservations, the University is required to treat each subject as a different Unit and cadre.
The clubbing of posts available to different Departments of the University was not, according to learned Counsel, permissible for that would be yet another ingenious method and device meant to create a 100% reservation.
3.
The University has in the objections filed on its behalf justified the reservation on the basis of State Government orders dated 22nd February, 1994 and 20th of June, 1995.
By the first of those orders the State Government had directed that all posts of Readers/Professors as the case may be available, in the University shall be clubbed together and treated as a combined cadre for purposes of application of the roster prescribed by the latter order.
4.
The Supreme Court has in Post Graduate Institute case (supra) while reaffirming the view taken in Chakradhar's case (AIR 1988 SC 659) authoritatively stated the legal position thus :-  "In a single post cadre, reservation at any point of time on account of rotation of roster is bound to bring about a situation where such single post in the cadre will be kept reserved exclusively for the public and cent per cent reservation for the backward classes is not permissible within the constitutional framework.
The decisions of this Court to this effect over the decades have been consistent.
Hence, until there is plurality of posts in a cadre, the question of reservation will not arise because any attempt of reservation by whatever means and even with device of rotation of roster in a single post cadre is bound to create 100% reservation of such post whenever such reservation is to be implemented.
The devices of rotation of roster in respect of single post cadre will only mean that on some occasions there will be complete reservation and the appointment to such post is kept out of bound to the members of a large segment of the community who do not belong to any reservation class, but on some other occasions the post will be available for open competition when in fact on all such occasions, a single post cadre should have been filled only by open competition amongst all segments of the society."
5.
By the decision, the Court overruled its earlier decisions in Union of India v. Brijlal Thakur, AIR 1997 SC 2101 : 1997(3) SCT 356 (SC) and Suresh Chandra v. JB Agarwal, AIR 1997 SC 2487 : 1997(2) SCT 593 (SC) andUnion of India v. Madhav Gajanana Chaubal, 1995 Suppl.
(1) SCC 432 : 1997(1) S.C.T.
399.
6.
The question whether different posts in different subjects carrying similar pay scales could be treated to be a combined cadre for purpose of application of the reservation roster fell for consideration of this Court in ILR 1986 Kar 255.
While holding that the term cadre was incapable of any precise definition, the Court declared that the Reservation Policy could never intend to evisage situations where all the posts in one department or subject were filled up by those belonging to reserved categories whereas all such posts in another subject or department were allotted to the general merit candidates.
The reservations have according to the said decision to be provided for subject-wise meaning thereby that each subject would constitute an independent cadre so that if there is only one post available in a Post Graduate Department in any subject such a post could not be reserved.
That view was re-affirmed by the Full Bench in Dr. Rajkumar's case (supra).
Relying upon the Supreme Court decision is Chakradhar's case this Court declared that each one of the subjects was a distinct and separate Unit for the purpose of employment and reservation.
The following observations from the said decision are in this regard apposite :-  "The next question for consideration is about the method which should be adopted in providing reservation for the cadres of Professors, Readers and Lecturers for, though these posts are in different subjects they carry same designation and pay scale.
Therefore the question is as to whether reservation has to be worked out in respect of such cadres, separately.
This question is also no longer res interga.
This Court in the case of Dr. Krishna v. State of Karnataka has held that in the case of teaching cadres though the designation and pay-scale of the posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers in different subjects are one and the same, still having regard to the fact that the posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers in each of the subject is distinct and separate, each subject has to be treated as independent unit for the purpose of recruitment and reservation.
The said view stands confirmed by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Chakradhar."
7.
In the light of the above, it is evident that the impugned Notification insofar as the same purported to reserve the post of Professor in English for Scheduled Tribe candidates only is unsustainable and violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16.
The Notification having been issued on the basis of the earlier Government Orders ought to have been withdrawn in view of the fact that the Government had by a subsequent order dated 16th of November, 1995 Annexure-B to the Writ Petition withdrawn the earlier instructions.
8.
In the result, this petition succeeds and is hereby allowed.
The impugned Notification to the extent the same reserves the post of Professor in English in the Post Graduate Department of English in the second Respondent University shall stand quashed reserving liberty to the University to re-advertise the post in accordance with law keeping in view the observations made hereinabove.
No costs.
Petition allowed.