Bakhshish Kaur, J - Shri Sat Parkash joined the Education Department as SS Master on September 1, 1962 and retired from service on January 31, 1992 as Headmaster.
His pension was fixed as per his last drawn pay scale.
2.
After the retirement, he was granted selection grade with retrospective effect i.e. with effect from 141972 as per the general order dated 2651994, Annexure P.1 passed by this Court in CWP No. 2143 to 1994 (Attar Singh and other v. State of Haryana and others) and order dated 10111995 passed by respondent No. 2 Annexure P2.
As per orders Annexures P.1 and P2, he is deemed to have been drawing the pay and other benefits under the Selection Grade with retrospective effect, but he is entitled to the actual arrears with effect from 2631991 i.e. 38 months preceding the date of order Annexure P.1.
To comply with the order Annexure P2, respondent No. 3 vide his order dated 18.4.1996 Annexure P.3, refixed the pay of the petitioner with effect from 141972 as per revised pay scale after the grant of selection grade.
The case of the petitioners for grant of arrears and revised pension etc. remained pending.
Ultimately, it was rejected vide orders Annexures P.4 and P.5 on the ground that after the grant of selection grade, nothing due is made out and it amounts to difference in the pension only.
In fact, as per orders Annexures P2 and P.3, arrears of salary, pension, gratuity and other benefits are due to the petitioner with effect from 2631991, but respondents have arbitrarily and unreasonably held (withheld ?)
the arrears.
It has, therefore, been averred on behalf of the petitioner that orders Annexures P.4 and P.5 are illegal, unjust, unconstitutional and are against the directions of this Court given in order Annexure P.1.
3.
On behalf of the respondents, a detailed written statement has been filed.
The stand of the respondents therein is that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of award of selection grade as the revised pensionary benefits are not admissible to him in view of the instructions of Government of Haryana as contained in Annexure R1.
The order awarding the selection grade were issued after his retirement.
Thus, the arrears of 38 months will be counted from the date of issue of order or from the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. the arrears will be counted for 38 months preceding 10111995 and as for arrears of revised pension, since the petitioner had retired on 3111992, therefore, he is not entitled to the arrears of revised pension.
4.
I have heard Mr. SK Garg, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate-General for the State of Haryana.
5.
J.B.T.
teachers had approached this Court by filing writ petition No. 2143 of 1994 (Attar Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others) for issuance of a direction to the Government to grant selection grade on the basis to total cadre strength including permanent and temporary posts with all consequential benefits.
A Division Bench of this Court disposed of the writ petition observing as under :-  "While deciding L.P.A. No. 135 of 1996 on 15th January, 1990, directions as prayed herein were issued by this Court and the SLP filed against the said judgment was dismissed.
Our attention has been drawn to various judgments of this Court by which the petitioners therein were granted the relief of selection grade on the basis of total strength of the service.
It has been noticed that a number of employees of the Education Department of the State of Haryana and Punjab have been granted selection grade on the basis of the judgments passed by this Court on various occasions, forcing such employees to come to this Court in numerous petitions.
The respondents are under an obligation to comply with the directions of this Court in letter and spirit and give the benefit to all those who are similarly situated and entitled to the grant of selection grade on the basis of the judgments, rules and instructions issued in this behalf.
Under the circumstances the petitions are allowed and the respondents i.e. the States of Punjab and Haryana are directed to grant the selection grade on the basis of the total strength, including permanent and temporary posts, with all consequential benefits, to the employees in the Education Department, including the petitioners, who are eligible to the grant of selection grade, subject to the condition that all such employees who are held entitled to the grant of such relief, shall however, not be entitled to the arrears for the period exceeding three years and two months preceding the filing of the petitions/representation or date of orders.
In the case of all such employees, including those who have filed the representations or those who are entitled to the grant of selection grade but have not filed the petitions the respondents shall determine their rights in the light of the judgments already delivered by this Court from time to time as expeditiously as possible, but not later than six months under any circumstances."
6.
Pursuant to the above direction, salary due to the petitioner was revised as reflected in Annexure P.3.
The petitioner was given the benefit of selection grade as per order Annexure P2 dated 10111995 with retrospective effect i.e. with effect from 141972.
As per judgment delivered in CWP No. 2143 of 1994, the petitioner is entitled to the arrears for a period of 3 years and 2 months preceding November, 1994 i.e. he must get the benefit of the enhanced salary from September, 1991.
He retired from service on January 31, 1992.
In other words respondents are to pay him arrears of salary for five months.
7.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to pay the arrears of salary including the arrears of pension, gratuity etc. whatever is payable to him on the basis of the recommuted value after giving credit to the amount actually paid, within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, the arrears found legally due to the petitioner, as stated above, are not paid within the said period of four months, then the amount of arrears will carry interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum from the date of expiry of four months period till the date of actual payment.
For the aforesaid reasons, this petition is disposed of in the terms stated above.
Order accordingly.