VK Jhanji, J - This is plaintiff's second appeal directed against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court whereby on appeal preferred by the defendants, judgment and decree of the trial Court decreeing the suit of plaintiff has been set aside and in accordance thereof, suit of plaintiff dismissed.
2.
In brief, the facts are that plaintiff was working as Clerk under the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Kapurthala.
In year 1964-65, he was drawing Rs. 120/- in the grade of Rs. 60-80-120-5-175.
Crossing of efficiency bar was due to him on 931965.
It is the case of the plaintiff that the efficiency bar was withheld and he was not given increment due to him.
Plaintiff retired from service w.e.f.
31.12.1979.
Suit out of which the present appeal has arisen, to claim necessary relief was filed on 1671988.
Defendants contested the suit on various grounds including that it is not within limitation.
Trial Court on basis of evidence adduced by the parties to the suit, came to the conclusion that defendants were to decide the case of plaintiff for crossing efficiency bar before 931965 but it was not decided.
In regard to the contention of the defendants that the case of the plaintiff was decided on 20111972, trial Court held that the defendants have not been able to prove that the said order was ever conveyed to the plaintiff.
It also held that order regarding crossing of efficiency bar w.e.f.
931965 could not have been passed in the year 1972 and as such, order passed in the year 1972 is totally illegal and not binding on the rights of plaintiff.
In regard to the objection of the suit not being within limitation, trial Court held that order dated 20111972 being non-speaking and retrospective in nature, is without jurisdiction.
It also held that representation of the plaintiff was finally rejected by the Department on 1541988 as is evident from letter, Ex. P-17, and the suit filed on 1671988 was well within limitation from the last order passed by the defendants.
Trial Court, thus, decreed the suit and held plaintiff to be entitled to refixation of his pay at every step-in-service and in each grade considering his basic pay at Rs. 125/- on 931965.
Plaintiff was also held entitled to refixation of his pension.
Simple interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum on the amount of arrears found due too was granted.
However, in appeal by the defendants, the Additional District Judge set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and dismissed the suit of plaintiff solely on the ground that the same was barred by time.
Hence, the present second appeal by the plaintiff.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
3.
It is now well-settled that an order stopping the employee's efficiency bar should be by a speaking order and sufficient reasons should be given so that the employee, if he so desires, may make a representation against the same.
A decision not to allow the crossing of efficiency bar is also required to be taken on the basis of record of the employee concerned.
In the present case, the employee was to cross efficiency bar on 931965 and the ACR for the year 1964-65 was very relevant for this purpose.
It has further been conceded by learned counsel appearing on behalf of defendants that the plaintiff was not allowed to cross efficiency bar because his A.C.R.
for the year 1964-65 was not traceable.
During the course of hearing of this appeal, learned counsel was also unable to show from the record the A.C.R.
for the year 1964- 65.
In this view of the matter, in my opinion, in absence of the ACR for the year 1964-65, trial Court has not committed any illegality in coming to the conclusion that the action of the defendants in not allowing the plaintiff to cross the efficiency bar, on 931965, was illegal.
4.
The finding of the learned Additional District Judge that the suit of the plaintiff was time barred, cannot be sustained because of the judgment of the Supreme Court in MR Gupta v. Union of India, 1995(4) R.S.J.
502 (SC) : 1996(1) SCT 8 (SC).
In MR Gupta's case (supra), one increment from the pay was denied to the employee and representation in that regard was rejected.
The Administrative Tribunal rejected the claim of the employee being time-barred, but on appeal to the Supreme Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that "the claim to be paid the correct salary computed on the basis of proper pay fixation, is a right which subsists during the entire tenure of service and can be exercised at the time of each payment of the salary when the employee is entitled to salary computed correctly in accordance with the rules.
This right of a government servant to be paid the correct salary throughout his tenure according to computation made in accordance with the rules, is akin to the right of redemption which is an incident of a subsisting mortgage and subsists so long as the mortgage itself subsists, unless the equity of redemption is extinguished."
To receive pension on the last drawn pay being a recurring cause of action, the finding of the first appellate Court that suit of the plaintiff was time-barred is set aside.
5.
Consequently, the appeal is allowed, judgment and decree of the first appellate Court is set aside and that of the Trial court restored to the extent that plaintiff is held entitled to refixation of his pay at every step-in-service and in each grade considering his basic pay at Rs. 125/- on 931965 and is also entitled to refixation of his pension.
As regards the amount of arrears found due, decree of the trial Court is modified to the extent that plaintiff shall be entitled to arrears only for the period of 38 months prior to the date of filing of the suit.
Plaintiff shall also be entitled to simple interest at the rate of 12 per cent annum on the said arrears.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.