OP Sharma, J - Shri K Bahadur Singh, the petitioner herein was posted as Divisional Fire Officer in Fire Station Headquarter, Srinagar in October, 1989.
As he wanted to visit his sister who is settled in United States of America 50 days earned leave was sanctioned in his favour with effect from 30101989 with a stipulation that no extension will be granted.
The petitioner instead of resuming duty after expiry of leave applied for extension of leave which was refused and he was asked to resume duty.
On his failure to resume duty, a show cause notice was issued to him on 1391991 and finally his services were terminated with effect from 21121989 vide order dated 541992.
2.
The petitioner it appears returned from abroad some-where in 1995 and submitted an application for permission to resume duty, which was rejected by the Director, Fire Services, Srinagar on 2291995.
He filed a review petition which also did not find favour.
3.
The petitioner has moved this petition for quashing the termination order on the ground that the respondents failed to communicate the refusal to extend leave and the show cause notice was not served upon him, in the absence of which the order impugned is illegal being in contravention of the provisions of the J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1956 (hereinafter the CCA Rules).
4.
The stand of the respondents is that leave was sanctioned with a specific condition that it will not be extended further.
Since he failed to resume duty even after service of show-cause notice, his services were terminated.
5.
The contention of Mr. Hali is that no show cause notice was served upon the petitioner, in the absence of which order of termination is illegal.
Mr. Kapoor, learned Addl Advocate General on the other hand argued that show cause notice has been duly served and, therefore, the order impugned is valid.
6.
The respondents have produced copies of the notices including show cause notice which according to them were sent to the petitioner.
The first letter asking him to resume duty is dated 1841991 despatched on 2541991 followed by letter dated 2071991, both addressed to the petitioner.
In the last para of letter dated 2071991, it is clearly mentioned that vide letter dated 1841991 the petitioner was asked to resume duty which he failed.
In this letter, the petitioner was again asked to resume duty within 15 days, failing which action under rule 128 of the J&K CSR would follow.
Finally, show cause notice dated 1391991 was issued.
However, the petitioner has denied receipt of any of these communications as according to him these were not dispatched to him on his address in USA which he had furnished while proceeding on leave.
But respondents have pleaded that before issuing show cause notice why he should not be dismissed from service, he was asked to resume duty.
All these communications copies of which have been annexed are addressed to him on the address on which he was admittedly staying with his sister.
So it is not enough to deny the receipt of these communications, especially when these have been published in the newspapers and Government Gazette also which is a sufficient notice.
So it cannot be said that show cause notice was not despatched on the address where he was staying.
The fact that these notices bear the correct address where he was staying in USA is not denied.
So it is wrong to say that the show-cause notice was not served upon the petitioner.
In Dr. IP Kohli v. State of Jammu & Kashmir, 1990 KLJ 374 the facts of which were identical, this court observed as follows :-  "The petitioner has, in specific and categoric terms, stated in the writ petition that the notice hearing No. NE-GM-NOC/83-J dated 13.9.1983 was not received by him.
This factual assertion has remained unanswered.
It has to be treated as accepted to be true by the respondent.
However, in the interest of justice, I have perused the record.
Indeed a copy of the notice is available on the file but there is no order or noting to show that it had actually been sent to the petitioner or that the same had been revived by him.
From these meagre facts it cannot be held that respondent had issued a notice to the petitioner and the same had been received by him.
From the facts established on the file there is no escape from the conclusion that no notice was ever sent to the petitioner before passing the impugned order."
7.
After re-producing Article 128 of the CSR, the learned Chief Justice while relying upon the decision in Jai Shanker v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492 held as under :  "It has not been denied and indeed could not be denied that Rules 33 to 35 of the 1956 Rules are applicable to the present case.
These rules provide for not only the issuance of a show cause notice but framing and service of a charge- sheet, holding of an enquiry and opportunity to the delinquent to state and prove his case.
If for the sake of argument it may be accepted that a notice, as mentioned in the impugned order was issued to the petitioner, that will not satisfy the requirements of the aforesaid rules as no charge-sheet was served on the petitioners and no enquiry was contemplated or held."
However, the observations, that "If for the sake of argument it may be accepted that a notice, as mentioned in the impugned order was issued to the petitioner, that will not satisfy the requirements of the aforesaid rules as no charge-sheet was served on the petitioners and no enquiry was contemplated or held," are only an obiter dicta because the case was decided mainly on the ground that show cause notice had not been served upon the petitioner.
If that be so as it really is, then these observations were wholly un-necessary and cannot be treated as laid down of such a position of law.
I say so because these observations ignored the mandate of sub-rule (2), which is an exception of sub-rule (1) of Rule 33 of the CCA Rules, the relevant portion of which is extracted below :  "(2) This rule shall not apply where the person concerned has absconded, or where it is for other reasons impracticable to communicate with him, or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him."
8.
No doubt it is not a case of the respondents that it was impracticable to communicate with the petitioner, yet if the show cause notice had been despatched on the address where he was staying in USA, the respondents would have discharged the obligation and the principles laid down in Jai Shanker's case (supra) would have been attracted.
So framing of charge-sheet and holding of enquiry is not a rule of thumb to be followed as a ritual, even when the Government servant does not respond to she show cause notice.
The question of framing of charge arises only when the allegation made in the show cause notice is controverted, not otherwise because under law the delinquent is only to be provided a reasonable adequate opportunity of defending himself, where he refuses to reply the show cause the penultimate must follow.
The ratio decidendi of Jai Shanker's case (supra) supports this conclusion as their Lordships held :  "The Regulation involves a punishment for overstaying one's leave and the burden is thrown on the incumbent to secure reinstatement by showing cause.
It is true that the Government may visit the punishment of discharge or removal from service on a person who has absented himself by overstaying his leave, but we do not think that Government can order a person to be discharged from service without at least telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed.
If this is done the incumbent will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed and no question of reinstatement will arise.
It may be convenient to describe him as seeking reinstatement but this is not tantamount to saying that because the person will only be reinstated by an appropriate authority, that the removal is automatic and outside the protection of Art. 311.
A removal is removal and if it is punishment for overstaying one's leave an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such an order is proposed, no matter how the regulation describes it.
To give no opportunity is to go against Art. 311 and this is what has happened here.
In our judgment, Jai Shanker was entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the proposed removal from service on his overstaying his leave and as no such opportunity was given to him his removal from service was illegal.
He is entitled to this declaration."
9.
Similarly in Shahoodul Haque v. The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Bihar, AIR 1974 SC 1896 it has been held :  "After having been taken through the assertions made by both sides, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that even if the appellant was being punished, so that Article 311 could apply, he had been, in the circumstances of the case, given sufficient opportunity to explain his conduct.
He had failed to avail of that opportunity.
It could not, therefore, be said that the requirements of natural justice or of Article 311 of the Constitution had been contravened.
In any case on the facts before us, we think that it will be useless to afford any further opportunity to the appellant to show cause why he should not be removed from service.
The undenied fact that the appellant had actually abandoned his post of duty for an exceedingly long period, without sufficient grounds for his absence is so glaring that giving him further opportunity to disprove what he practically admits could serve no useful purpose.
It could not benefit him or make any difference to the order which could be and has been passed against him.
It would only prolong his agony."
10.
It follows that if a show cause notice is received by the delinquent and the facts thereof are not controverted, no formal charge is required to be framed by the appointing authority (sic) shall be at liberty to pass appropriate orders at the admitted and un-controverted facts of the case.
This view finds support in the decision in Ghulam Mohd.
v. State, LPA No. 271 of 1997 decided on 21101998 in which the Letters Patent Bench of this court held :  "x x It may be true that holding of inquiry as envisaged in Article 311 of Constitution of India, section 126 of the J&K Constitution and Rule 33(1) of J&K Civil Service (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1950 is necessary before service of an employee is terminated for absence without leave or absence after expiry of leave, as held in Dr. IP Kohli v. State of Jammu & Kashmir (1990 KLJ 374), Syed Zaffar Mohd.
v. State (1992 SLJ 143) and State v. Qamar Ali (1994 SLJ 372).
But this principle of law has no universal application.
In case facts disclose that employee had absconded or where it is for other reasons impracticable to communicate with him or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 33, J&K CS (CCA) Rules, 1956 is attracted.
Single Judge has rightly found that petitioner abandoned the employment, therefore he lost it."
11.
However, assuming that he did not receive show cause notice, which is unlikely and the order of termination is invalid, has the petitioner explained the delay in challenging the same.
The only explanation offered is that he was immobilized because of injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident.
But the certificate furnished by him reveals that it was only in April, 1993 whereas his leave expired on 21121989.
The order of dismissal was passed on 541992 when he was neither injured nor otherwise incapable of returning home.
As per his own statement he was injured in accident only in 1997.
It was thus for them to communicate with the department and remained posted with the latest development especially when in the order sanctioning leave it is mentioned that no extension of leave will be allowed.
In such a case it amounts to voluntary abandonment of the post because of the inordinate delay as observed in Bhoop Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1992 SC 1414 : 1992(3) SCT 120 (SC) holding :  "It is expected of a Government servant who has a legitimate claim to approach the court for the relief he seeks within a reasonable period, assuming no fixed period of limitation applies.
This is necessary to avoid dislocation of the administrative set-up after it has been functioning on a certain basis for years.
During the interregnum those who have been working gain more experience and acquire rights which cannot be defeated casually by collateral entry of a person at a higher point without the benefit of actual experience during the period of his absence when he chose to remain salient for years before making the claim.
Apart from the consequential benefits of reinstatement without actually working, the impact on the administrative set-up and on other employees is a strong reason to decline consideration of a stale claim unless the delay is satisfactorily explained and is not attributable to the claimant."
The ratio decidendi of the decision is that even a void order becomes valid if not challenged within reasonable time.
This principle has been reiterated in State of Rajasthan v. D.R.
Laxmi & others, 1996(6) Supreme Court Cases 445 holding :  "The question whether violation of the mandatory provisions renders the result of the action as void or voidable has been succinctly considered in Administrative Law by H.W.R Wade (7th Edn) at pp 342-43 thus : `The truth of the matter is that the court will invalidate an order only if the right remedy is sought by the right person in the right proceedings and circumstances.
The order may be hypothetically a nullity, but the court may refuse to quash it because of the plaintiff's lack of standing, because he does not deserve a discretionary remedy, because he has waived his rights, or for some other legal reason.
In any such case the `void' order remains effective and is, in reality, valid.
It follows that an order may be void for one purpose and valid for another; and that it may be void against one person but valid against another.
A common case where an order, however void, becomes valid is where a statutory time-limit expires after which its validity cannot be questioned.
The Statute does not say that the void order shall be valid, but by cutting off legal remedities it produces that result'.
The order or action, if ultra vires the power, becomes void and it does not confer any right.
But the action need not necessarily be set at naught in all events.
Though the order may be void, if the party does not approach the court within reasonable time, which is always a question of fact and have the order invalidated or acquiesced or waived, the discretion of the court has to be exercised in a reasonable manner.
When the discretion has been conferred on the court, the court may in appropriate case decline to grant the relief, even if it holds that the order was void.
The net result is that extra-ordinary jurisdiction of the court may not be exercised in such circumstances."
Again in Jagdish Lal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1997 SC 2366 : 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC), it has ruled that :  "This court has repeatedly held the delay disentitles the party to the discretionary relief under Article 226 or 32 of the Constitution.
It is not necessary to reiterate all catena of precedents in this behalf."
12.
Since the petitioner has failed to explain the delay this is yet another reason to deny him the discretionary relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India because by his un-authorised absence he is deemed to have abandoned the post he was holding.
Viewed thus, there is no merit in this petition, which is dismissed, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.