RC Gandhi, J - Petitioners have presented this petition seeking to quash Govt. Order No. 149-Agri of 1989 dated 27021989, issued by respondent No. 1 whereby two grades of Inspectors of Panchayat have been created by the respondents, which according to the petitioners are in disregard to the judgment delivered in Writ Petition No. 342/74 and is violative of the principle of "equal pay for equal work".
They further seek a writ of mandamus to enforce the principle of "equal pay for equal work" for placing the petitioners also in the pay-scale of Rs. 1760-3200 of the post of Inspector Panchayat.
2.
Respondents have filed objections which have been treated as counter- affidavit on their behalf.
3.
Petitioners are substantively holding the posts of Village Level Workers (VLW), except petitioner No. 5 who is working as Inspector Panchayat Grade-I, in the Pay-scale of Rs. 1760-3200.
The order dated 22.6.1989 came to be issued pursuant to a judgment of this court dated 2931985 delivered in Writ Petition No. 342/74 which related to the disputed of Chhajju Ram and 12 others v. State and others.
In the petition, the court passed the following directions :  "....
The respondents 1 and 2 are directed to fix the seniority of the petitioners in accordance with the directions given above with those of the respondents 3 to 11 so as to equalize them with the same scale of pay subject to their eligibility based on the basis of experience and educational qualifications, which may be equalized with the graduates as Inspectors Panchayat to bring them at par with the respondents if not done so far and to frame the rules accordingly so as not to place the petitioners on an unequal footing with the respondents for the purpose of promotion.
The benefit of the equalisation of the pay shall be given to the petitioners in accordance with the rules, which may be framed for the purpose, if not done so far...." It is evident from the aforesaid direction that the court has not directed the respondents to put whole of the category of the Inspectors Panchayat in a single particular pay scale.
The judgment has been implemented by the respondents by creating the posts of Inspectors Panchayat in two pay-scales identifying as Panchayat Inspector Grade I and Grade II.
These posts have been encadred in the service rule issued under SRO-133 of 1990, known as "Jammu & Kashmir Rural Development Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1990" (hereinafter called the Rules).
The executive cadre of the department contains the posts of Panchayat Inspectors Grade I and Grade II in the pay scale of Rs. 1150-2050 and Rs. 1300-2550 (pre-revised) respectively to be filled up in the manner prescribed thereunder which is reproduced as below :  "Class Category Designation Grade Minimum qualification Method of recruitment  I.
1. xx xx xx xx 2(a) xx xx xx xx xx (b) Panchayat Inspector Grade I 1300-2550 ... 100% by promotion from Class I. category 3(a) and 3(b) having minimum of 5 years service in the said category.
Class-II  3.
(a) Panchayat Inspector Grade II 1150-2050 ... 90% by promotion from category I with minimum academic qualification of matriculation and five years service in that category; and xx xx xx xx xx xx xx" The contention of Mr. Jhalmeria is that such a classification is not permissible since the nomenclature of the posts is the same and the duties being performed are identical.
In support of his contention he has relied upon AIR 1984 SC 541 (PK Ramachandran Aiyar v Union of India) wherein the Apex Court held :</< TD>  "The principle `equal pay for equal work' is deducible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) and may be properly applied to the cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.
AIR 1982 SC 879 followed."
He has also relied upon AIR 1993 SC 287 : 1993(1) SCT 138 (SC), State of Madhya Pradesh v. Parmod Bharati, wherein it is held :  "Equal pay for work, it is self-evident, is implicit in the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14, it flows from it.
Because clause (d), Article 39 spoke of `equal pay for equal work for both men and women' it did not cease to be a part of Art. 14.
To say that the said rule having been stated as a directive principle of State policy is not enforceable in a Court of law is to indulge in sophistry.
Parts IV and III of the Constitution are not supposed to be exclusionary of each other.
They are complementary to each other.
The rule is as much a part of Article 14 as it is of clause (1) of Art. 16.
Equality of opportunity guaranteed by Article 16(1) necessarily means and involves equal pay for equal work.
It means equally that it is neither a mechanical rule nor does it mean geometrical equality.
The concept of reasonable classification and all other rules evolved with respect to Articles 14 and 16(1) come into play whereever complaint of infraction of that rule falls for consideration.
In this context, it would be appropriate to refer to the definition of the expressions `same work or work of similar nature' contained in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, enacted by Parliament to implement Article 39(d) of the Constitution and the obligation created by the Convention concerning equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value to which India is a signatory.
It would be evident from that definition that the stress is upon the similarity of skill, effort and responsibility when performed under similar conditions.
Further, the quality of work may vary from post to post.
It may vary from institution to institution.
This reality cannot be ignored or overlooked.
It is not a matter of assumption but one of proof.
Since the plea of equal pay for equal work has to be examined with reference to Art. 14 the burden is upon the persons complaining of discrimination to establish their right to equal pay, or the plea of discrimination, as the case may be."
He has further drawn attention of the Court at AIR 1998 SC 1193 : 1998(2) SCT 293 (SC), Union of India v. Bijoy Lal Ghosh, wherein the Supreme Court held :  "In the process of winding up of Dandakaranya project (DDP) all educational institutions run under it were handed over to the State Govts.
of MP and Orissa and primary school teachers/respondents who were in excess were declared surplus and rendered to central (surplus staff) cell at same pay scale they were drawing then.
On their redeployment they were relieved of their duties from DDP for joining in different Central Govt. Offices.
They are entitled to higher pay scale as per recommendation of National Commission on Teachers headed by Prof. DP Chatopadhyay in terms of circular dtd.
12th Aug, 1987 during period from 1st Jan 1986 till 1st April 1986 ie date from which report was given effect and date on which they were declared surplus.
The stand that on date of circular i.e. 12th Aug, 1987 there could not be any consideration for primary school teachers under DDP as institution under DDP was no more in existence as it stood transferred to State or for lack of either consideration or lack of approval cannot be accepted.
That apart, the use of words "organisations like" and the word "etc." in letter dtd.
12th Aug 1987 issued by HRD Ministry according sanction to recommendations of National Commission indicates similar other organisations, institutions etc. the same was not exhaustive, and it include the teachers who were working in DDP as the respondents, if for the aforesaid reasons, their claims were not considered, this non-consideration of their legitimate claim, when all such belonging to that class received at the relevant date, is arbitrary and violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution.
Particularly when during this interim period they were Govt. servants and were drawing pay scale as per 4th Pay Commission report which was interim in nature as it awaited pay scale to be given by National Pay Commission.
And more so when Central Govt. has accepted National Commission Report and gave benefit to all its teachers working in union territory and some of its deptts.
and that all States in India have also accepted the same."
However, this judgment is not relevant to the petitioners' case and is distinguishable on facts.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents in rebuttal has urged that the classification of two grades for the category of Inspector Panchayat is permissible as the same has been made keeping in view the experience, length of service, responsibility towards the discharge of duties and the manner and method of recruitment and promotion.
The petitioners are not holding the posts of Panchayat Inspectors, except petitioner No. 5, who is already in the grade for which relief is sought.
Therefore, they are not entitled to maintain the petition being not performing the duties of Inspector Panchayat in any manner.
Apart from this, in order to make out and bring round his first argument he has sought support from the judgment in case V Markandya v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1989 SC 1308, paras 13 & 10 whereof are relevant and extracted as below :  ".... where two class of employees perform identical or similar duties and carrying out the same functions with same measure of responsibility having same academic qualifications, they would be entitled to equal pay.
If the State denies them equality in pay, its action would be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution, and the Court will strike down the discrimination and grant relief to the aggrieved employees.
But before such relief is granted the Court must consider and analyse the rationale behind the State action in prescribing two different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant rules, orders, nature of duties, functions, measure of responsibility, and educational qualifications required for the relevant posts, the Court finds that the classification made by the State in giving different treatment to the two class of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principle of equal pay for equal work is applicable among equals, it cannot be applied to unequals.
Relief to an aggrieved person seeking to enforce the principles of equal pay for equal work can be granted only after it is demonstrated before the Court that invidious discrimination is practised by the State in prescribing two different scales for the two class of employees without there being any reasonable classification for the same.
If the aggrieved employees fail to demonstrate discrimination, the principles of equal pay for equal work cannot be enforced by Court in abstract.
The question what scale should be provided to a particular class of service must be left to the Executive and only when discrimination is practised amongst the equals, the Court should intervene to undo the wrong, and to ensure equality among the similarly placed employees.
The Court, however, cannot prescribe equal scales of pay for different class of employees."
(Para 13) "....
The principle of equal pay for equal work is not abstract one, it is open to the State to prescribe different scale pay for different cadres having regard to nature, duties, responsibilities and educational qualifications.
Different grades are laid down in service with varying qualification for entry into particular grade.
Higher qualification and experience based on length of service are valid considerations for prescribing different pay scales for different cadres.
The application of doctrine arises where employees are equal in every respect, in educational qualifications, duties, functions and measure of responsibilities and yet they are denied equality in pay.
If the classification for prescribing different scales of pay is founded on reasonable nexus the principle will not apply.
But if the classification is founded on unreal and unreasonable basis it would violate Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution and the principle of equal pay for equal work, must have its way......" (Para 10) 5.
Applying the test laid down by the Supreme Court in this case, petitioners cannot be treated to be equal seeking pay-parity.
The posts of Panchayat Inspector Grade-I are to be filled up 100% by promotion providing promotional avenues to Panchayat Inspectors Grade-II.
The length of service for the post of Panchayat Inspector Grade-I is 5 years as Panchayat Inspector Grade-II.
The method of recruitment to the posts of Panchayat Inspectors Grade II and I, is materially different and distinct.
90% of the posts of Panchayat Inspector Grade-II are to be filled up by promotion from category of Panchayat Supervisors in the pay-scale of Rs. 1550-2550 (pre-revised) with 5 years service and 10% by promotion from the same category from amongst the graduates having two years service.
The principle of `equal pay for equal work' can be made applicable only where employees are equal in every respect in educational qualification, duties, functions and measures of responsibility and length of service.
From the analysis of the Rules, classification made by the State in providing two different grades thereby providing promotional avenues for the category of Panchayat Inspectors Grade-II to the posts of Panchayat Inspectors Grade-I, is permissible and is founded on rational basis in order to achieve the object of providing promotional avenues to Panchayat Inspectors Grade-II, therefore, the principle of `equal pay for equal work' cannot be applied as the petitioners have not proved to be equals.
The manner and method of recruitment and eligibility qualification for holding the post is also different.
6.
For what has been stated above writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.