RL Anand, J - By this order, I dispose of two Civil Revisions No. 2234 and 2235, of 1999, as in the opinion of this court, both the revisions can be disposed of by one order.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  Smt. Vijay Kumari, petitioner of both the petitions, was selected as a Social Studies Mistress but the appointment letter was not issued by the State as a result of which the petitioner had to file a civil suit in the court of competent jurisdiction and the said suit was decreed in her favour on 2771996.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial court, the State filed an appeal which was dismissed as withdrawn on 10101996 giving finality to the judgment and decree of the trial court.
The petitioner was given temporary ad hoc appointment on the basis of the judgment and decree dated 2771996.
She applied for permanent appointment along with the benefits of service.
She filed one more application before the Executing Court that till her execution application seeking execution of the judgment and decree dated 2771996 is disposed of, her services may not be terminated.
3.
The State contested both the prayers of the petitioner and the reliance was placed on Yashwinder Singh Rana v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SC Judgments 38, which judgment of the Hon'ble DB was confirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in AIR 1998 SC 18.
The executing court relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble DB in Yashwinder Singh Rana's case (supra) dismissed both the aforesaid applications of the petitioner as well as the main execution application.
Aggrieved by the impugned orders, the present two revisions.
4.
I have heard Mr. ML Sarin, Sr. Advocate, with Mr. PK Goklaney, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner and Mr. JS Brar, DAG, Punjab and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
There is a patent illegality in the impugned orders, Annexures P-6 of both the revisions.
The judgment passed by the Hon'ble DB which has been confirmed by the Supreme Court could only operate prospectively and not retrospectively otherwise this will create chaos and re-opening of the matter, which has already been adjudicated finally.
In these circumstances, both the revisions are allowed.
The impugned orders dated 1851998 passed by the Civil Judge Junior Division, Muktsar, in both the revisions, are hereby set aside and directions are given to the learned Sub Judge to restore the main execution application and to dispose of both the misc. applications moved by the decree holder according to law and in the light of the observations made by this court.
6.
The parties, through their counsel, are directed to appear before the executing court on 2381999.
7.
Till the final disposal of the execution application and the misc. applications, the petitioner shall continue as Social Studies Mistress and her services shall not be terminated.
Both the revisions stand allowed.
No order as to costs.
Let a copy of this order be sent to the executing court for information and compliance.
Revisions allowed.