Bakhshish Kaur, J - Smt. Manorma Rani-petitioner has invoked the extra- ordinary jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay her pension for the services rendered as J.B.T.
teacher.
2.
The petitioner joined as a JBT teacher on February 32, 1960.
Her conditions of service for the purpose of pension are governed by the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
After she had served the Department for over 20 years, she sought voluntary retirement with effect from August 31, 1980 by making an application dated May 15, 1980 to the competent authority.
Accordingly, she was granted the permission to retire from service in view of Rule 32 of the rulers read with Punjab Government letter No. 4427-2PP-78-47892 dated 761978 by the District Education Officer (Primary), Jalandhar-respondent No. 3.
She was relieved from the service on August 31, 1980.
At that time, she was drawing the salary of Rs. 550/- per month.
3.
She had sent several communications to the Department as well as the higher authorities including the Minister of Education, Government of Punjab, for finalising her pension and gratuity, but the dues were not paid to her even after the lapse of three years, nor she was intimated the reason for the delay in finalising her pensionary benefits.
She was later on intimated by letter Annexure P 4 that that Accountant-General, Punjab had rejected her pension case on the ground that her qualifying service was less than 20 years in response to the letter dated 2871983, Annexure P.3, copy whereof was sent to the then Education Minister, Government of Punjab, Shri Harcharan Singh Ajnala.
4.
On the notice of motion issued, the respondents put in appearance and filed their written statement, wherein they have taken up certain preliminary objections to the maintainability of the writ petition on the following grounds :-  (i) That the petitioner is not entitled for pension and gratuity under the Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 as she has not completed 20 years service qualifying for pension as given under rule 39 (reproduced below) contained in Punjab Government Circular letter No. 4427-2PP-78/17892 dated 7th June, 1978.
"Government have decided that a Government employee may be allowed to retire voluntarily, if he has completed 20 years qualifying service and given proportionate pension and gratuity.
Keeping in view the policy of the Government of India, the following decisions have been taken to implement this decision : (i) Government employees who have put in not less then 20 years qualifying service may, by giving notice of three months in writing to the appropriate authority, retire from service voluntarily.
The scheme is purely voluntary, the initiative resting with the Government employee himself.
The Government does not have the reciprocal right to retire Government employees on its own, under the scheme.
(ii) The Accountant-General Punjab has verified the qualifying service of the petitioner : 17 years, 7 months and 13 days."
It is pleaded inter-alia that the petitioner has been living with her husband at Delhi and she got herself relieved from the service presuming that she has completed 20 years of service after serving three months notice to the Department for premature retirement.
The petitioner has, in fact, less than 20 years of qualifying service.
She is not competent to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court as she had not completed 20 years service qualifying for pension as provided under para 5 of the Punjab Government circular No. 4427-2PP-78/17892 dated 761978.
The period of extra-ordinary leave of the petitioner i.e. for 2 years, 10 months and 2 days leave without pay does not count for qualifying service.
She was duly informed about the rejection of her pension case vide letter dated 5101983, Annexure P4 and, therefore, this petition is liable to be dismissed.
5.
I have heard Mr. Jang Bahadur, Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. HS Gill, Deputy Advocate-General for the State of Punjab.
6.
It is the admitted fact that the petitioner was allowed to retire voluntarily with effect from August 31, 1980 in accordance with Rule 30(2) of the rules read with Punjab Government letter No. 4427-2PP-78-47892 dated 761978.
The order passed in this regard is Annexure P2 and the same is reproduced as under :-  "Smt. Manorma Rani, JBT teacher, Government Primary School, Basti Danishmandan, Jullundur is hereby permitted to retire voluntarily with effect from 3181980 (AN) under Rule 30(2) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 read with Punjab Government letter No. 4427- 2PP/78/47892, dated 761978."
Now, the stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner had not completed the qualifying service so as to seek voluntary retirement as she had not completed 20 years of service.
Rule 5.32(1) of the Rules reads as under :-  "(1) Under Rule 4 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, a retiring pension is granted to a Government employee who retires or is required to retire under the aforesaid Rules."
7.
The Punjab Government circular No. 4427-2PP-78/17892 dated 761978 as reproduced in the written statement filed by the respondents 1 to 3 provides as under :-  "Government have decided that a Government employee may be allowed to retire voluntarily, if he has completed 20 years qualifying service and given proportionate pension and gratuity.
Keeping in view the policy of the Government of India, the following decisions have been taken to implement this decision : (i) Government employees who have put in not less then 20 years qualifying service may, by giving notice of three months in writing to the appropriate authority, retire from service voluntarily.
The scheme is purely voluntary, the initiative resting with the Government employee himself.
The Government does not have the reciprocal right to retire Government employees on its own, under the scheme."
A perusal of the order Annexure P2 and the Punjab Government circular reproduced as above, shows that a Government employee can seek voluntary retirement only after he has completed 20 years of qualifying service.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner has sought premature retirement on the competition of 20 years of qualifying service, which is a condition precedent before seeking retirement under the rules.
It is well- settled that the Government is vested with the absolute right to retire a Government employee compulsorily on his rendering the qualifying service by issue of a notice under the Rules.
Simultaneously, a corresponding right is also vested in the Government employee to seek voluntary retirement after 20 years of qualifying service, provided that such employee is not involved in any disciplinary proceedings nor is under suspension.
In the instant case, the petitioner on the date she sought voluntary retirement, was neither involved in any disciplinary proceedings nor was she under suspension.
Once the order Annexure P2 was passed accepting her request for voluntary retirement, it shows that the Department was satisfied that the petitioner had completed 20 years of qualifying service.
There is also nothing on the record to show that the period of 2 years, 10 months and 20 days the petitioner remained on leave, was treated as extra-ordinary leave and was excluded from her qualifying service on the assertion that she remained on leave in the said period without pay.
There is nothing on record to throw any light on this aspect of the case.
Rather, by passing order Annexure P2, her request for voluntary retirement was accepted and it shows the the Department was satisfied that the petitioner had completed the requisite qualifying service of 20 years.
Thus, the respondents are now estopped from claiming that the petitioner had not completed the requisite period of service so as to be entitled for grant of pension.
8.
In Ramesh Chand Kaushik v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) RSJ 793 : 1994(1) SCT 227, the petitioner sought voluntary retirement and the Court observed that it was the duty of the respondents to ensure compliance of the statutory rules which enjoin upon the respondents the duty to see that an employee is permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement if he qualifies twenty years' service, so that his right to pension is not adversely affected.
Once the petitioner has been permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement, and, in fact he has so retired, it is no longer open to the respondents to tell him that instead of 20 years, he has put in 19 years and 5 months service, and on that account he was not entitled to draw any pension.
My attention was also drawn to Nishan Singh v. Transport Commissioner, Haryana, Chandigarh, 1993(1) RSJ 519.
9.
Again adverting to Annexure P2 whereby the petitioner was permitted to retire voluntarily with effect from 3181980 under Rule 30(2) of the Rules, the petitioner was nowhere informed that her pension case was rejected because she had not completed 20 years of qualifying service.
She was informed only vide Annexure P4 dated 5101983, i.e. after more than three years from the date of her retirement, that her case was rejected by the Accountant-General, Punjab on the grounds that her qualifying service was less than 20 years on the date of voluntary retirement.
If any deficiency was to be found in the pension papers or that she was not entitled to the grant of pension, then it was imperative upon the Department to inform the Government servant accordingly before granting her the permission to retire.
In Deokinandan Prasad v. The State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409, the Supreme Court has affirmed the observations made by this Court in Bhagwan Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1962 Punjab 1967 and a Full Bench judgment of this Court in KR Erry v. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 Punjab 279.
It is also important to note that the judgment of this Court in KR Erry's case (supra) was ultimately upheld by the Supreme Court in the State of Punjab v. KR Erry and Sobhag Rai Mehta, 1972 SLR 836.
The Supreme Court has reiterated its earlier view regarding the nature of pension and gratuity while dismissing an appeal of the State of Punjab against the judgment of this Court in State of Punjab v. Iqbal Singh, AIR 1976 SC 667.
The same view has been taken in State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356.
In that judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held :-  "Pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but are valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty and payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment.
The liability to pay penal interest on these dues at the current market rate commences at the expiry of two months from the date of retirement."
Considering the case of the petitioner in the light of the observations as above, particularly the order Annexure P2, permitting her to seek voluntary retirement, the respondents cannot raise the objection later that she is not entitled to the grant of pension.
This petition is, therefore, accepted.
10.
There is considerable delay in the release of the retiral dues to the petitioner.
Keeping in view the law laid down by Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356 and by this Court in DS Randhawa v. State of Punjab, 1997(3) RSJ 318, I hold that the petitioner is entitled to get interest on the delayed payment of retiral dues.
11.
Hence, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the respondents to release the retiral benefits to the petitioners, whatever is found due, within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The respondents shall also pay to the petitioner interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date the retiral benefits became due till the date of actual payment.
Petition allowed.