TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of writ petition No. 486 of 1997 and writ petition No. 122 of 1998.
Both have been preferred by the same person.
2.
The petitioner is seeking regularisation.
This has been denied to him.
3.
Facts have noticed from SWP 486/1997.
4.
The petitioner was given initial appointment in the year 1988.
He continued to work in the year 1989.
He also worked in the year 1990.
He performed duties for some months in the year 1991.
As per the petitioner, he fell sick.
He remained absent for some time.
He was again given appointment as Range Officer, on 1101994.
He continued in service till the end of Nov 1996.
Thereafter, his services were discontinued.
This led him to approach this Court.
Aforementioned writ petition 486 of 1997 was filed.
This court on 1st April, 1997 passed following order :-  "Notice as above.
Reply within the same time.
Subject to hearing the other side, respondents are directed not to terminate the services of the petitioner and he be paid his dues regularly.
Past unpaid wages be paid within a month from today.
Apart from the above relief, his case be considered for regular absorption."
5.
The petitioner submits that he is continuing in service.
He seeks to regularisation.
6.
It be seen that during the pendency of the aforementioned writ petition, the respondents authorities have taken a decision on 24th December, 1997.
They have decided to not to regularise the services of the petitioner.
This order has been passed in pursuance of the interim directions given by this court in writ petition No. 486 of 1997.
This order is being challenged in writ petition No. 122 of 1998.
Therefore, the question as to whether that order is good or bad is also being examined in writ petition No. 486 of 1997.
7.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir has framed Rules known as Jammu and Kashmir Daily Rated workers/Work Charge Employees Regularisation Rules, 1994.
The eligibility for regularisation has to be considered in terms of in Rule 4.
This Rule reads as under :-  "Eligibility for Regularisation - A Daily Rated Worker/Work Charged Employee shall be eligible for regularisation on fulfilment of the following conditions; namely: (a) That he is a permanent resident of the State; (b) That on the date of his initial appointment his age was within the minimum and maximum age limit as prescribed for appointment in Government Service; (c) That he possesses the prescribed academic and/or technical qualification for the post against which he is required to be regularised : Provided that in case of eligible Daily Rated Workers to be regularised against Class IV posts, relaxation of qualification and/or age shall be considered on merits by the concerned Administrative Department.
(d) That he is not a retiree from any State or Central Government service or any local body, Public Sector Undertaking or Autonomous body in or outside the State; (e) This his work and conduct has remained satisfactory during the period he worked as Daily Rated Worker or Work Charged employee and no disciplinary proceedings are pending against him; and (f) That he has completed seven years continuous period of working as Daily Rated Worker or Work Charged Employee or partly as Daily Rated Worker and party as Work Charged Employee."
Rule 8 is also relevant, this reads as under :-  "Application of rules to existing Daily Rated Worker and Work Charged Employee.
The policy of absorption of Daily Rated Workers and Work Charged Employees shall also apply to such of the existing Daily Rated Workers and Work Charged Employees who may not have completed seven years on 3131994 but may complete by the end of subsequent financial years & their absorption shall be considered in that financial year in accordance with these rules."
8.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents submits that the petitioner is a casual worker and is not Daily Rated Worker and, therefore, his case is not covered by the Rules referred to above.
9.
It be seen that in the order passed on 24th Dec 1997 in para-2(a), the petitioner has been described as Daily Worker.
Petitioner in this capacity had worked for almost three years.
He was again re-employed.
It is at the time of re-employement, i.e. on 1101994, he has been described as Casual Labourer.
Again while passing the order dated 24th Dec, 1997, what led the authorities to not to regularise his services was not that he was Casual Worker, but the fact that he came to be appointed in breach of some direction issued by Chief Conservator of Forests.
This order is not in terms of Rule-4 referred to above.
While passing the order dated 24th Dec, 1997, the respondent- authorities have taken note of the services of the petitioner only after 1101994.
They have decided not to take note of the earlier service rendered by the petitioner.
Thus the consideration on the part of respondents is not valid.
The respondent authorities in terms of Rule-8 are supposed to regularise the services as and when an employee completes seven years of service.
This is apparent from the plain reading of Rule-8.
The words used are "but may complete by the end of subsequent financial years".
The word "years" has been used in plural.
Therefore, as and when an employee completes seven years then his services are to be regularised by the end of financial year.
This aspect of the matter has not been noticed by the respondents.
This is required to be looked afresh.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
11.
The Supreme Court of India in the case of Das Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1122 has held that Public Works Department is an Industry.
Telecommunication Department was held to be an industry in the case reported as GM, Telecom v. A Srinivasa Raio, (1997) 8 SCC 767.
The petitioner is thus a workman for the purpose of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
12.
What happens when a workman completes 240 days of service in one calendar years.
This aspect of the matter be examined.
13.
Under the Industrial law, it is well settled that if services of a workman who has completed more than 240 days of service in one calendar year are terminated he is entitled to reinstatement, if his services are brought to an end without complying with section 25-F of the Act.
As to how this period is completed is totally irrelevant.
As a matter of fact, where by arithmetical count, a workman is able to demonstrate that he had completed this period, the relief of reinstatement has to be granted.
It would be apt to notice the decisions given by the Supreme Court of India.
In the case reported as Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219, wherein the earlier view expressed in the State Bank of India v. Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111 and Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court Orissa, 1976(4) SCC 222 was approved.
The relevant observations are as under :-  "In State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, 1976(3) SCR 160, a Bench of three judges of this court consisting of Chandrachud, J (as he then was) Krishna Iyer, J and Gupta, J considered the question whether Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act was attracted to a case where the order of appointment carried an automatic cessation of service, the period of employment working itself out by efflux of time and not by an act of employer.
Krishna Iyer, J who spoke for the Court observed : "Termination... for any reason whatsoever are the key words.
Whatever the reason, every termination spells retrenchment.
So the sole question is has the employee's service been terminated.
Verbal apparel part, the substance is decisive.
A termination takes place where a term expires either by the active step of the matter or the running out of the stipulated term.
To protect the weak against the strong this policy of comprehensive definition has been effectuated.
Termination embraces not merely the act of termination by the employer, but the fact of termination howsoever produced.
True, the section speaks of retrenchment by the employer and it is urged that some act of violation by the employer to bring about the termination is essential to attract Section 25-F and automatic extinguishment of service by effusion of time cannot be sufficient.
Words of multiple import have to be winnowed judicially to suit the social philosophy of the statute.
So screened we hold that the transitive and intransitive senses are covered in the current context.
Moreover an employer terminates employment not merely by passing an order as the service runs.
He can do so by writing a composite order, one giving employment and the other ending or limiting it.
A separate, subsequent determination is not the sole magnetic pull of the provision.
A pre-emptive provision to terminate is struck by the same vice as the post-appointment termination.
Dexterity of diction cannot defeat the articulated conscience of the provision."
In Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa, 1977(1) SCR 586, the question again arose whether termination of service by efflux of time was termination of service within the definition of retrenchment in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Both the earlier decisions of the Court in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AD Divikar, AIR 1957 SC 121, and State Bank of India v. SS Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111, were considered.
There was also a request that N Sundara Money's case conflicted with the decision in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AD Divikar and therefore, required reconsideration.
Bench of three judge of this Court consisting of Chandrachud, J (as he then was), Goswami, J and Gupta, J held that there was nothing in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AD Divikar which was inconsistent with the decision in N Sundara Money's case.
They held that the decision in Hariprasad Shivshankar's case was that the words for any reason whatsoever used in the definition of retrenchment would not include a bona fide closure of the whole business because it would be against the entire scheme of the Act.
The learned judges then observed that on the facts before them to give full effect to the words `for any reason whatsoever' would be consistent with the scope and purpose of Section 25 of the Industrial Disputes Act and not contrary to the scheme of the Act.
In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhu Nath Mukerjee, (1978) 1 SCR 1978 SC S Goswami, Shighal and Jaswant Singh, JJ held that striking off the name of a workman from the rolls by the management was termination of the service which was retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act."
"The above view stands reiterated in later decisions in Karnataka SRTC v. M Baraiah, (1984) 1 SCC 225, Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Chandigarh, (1990) 3 SCC 682.
Thus once an employee completes more than 240 days of service and there is failure to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, then he is entitled to reinstatement and this relief can be granted even in a writ petition."
14.
If above be the situation then petitioner who had completed more than 240 days of service in one calendar year had some rights under the Industrial Disputes Act, also.
15.
In this regard, it would again be pertinent to refer to another decision of the Supreme Court of India reported as Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 458, wherein it has been observed that the paid holidays and Sundays are also to be counted for determining as to whether a person has completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.
16.
In the face of the above situation it can again be said that a right did accrue in favour of petitioner.
As his services were terminated without compliance of provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, therefore, his termination would be bad.
17.
There are decisions to the effect that interference can be made on writ side, if a case is made out that section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has been violated.
See Mukhtyar Singh v. Food Corporation of India, 1992 Madhya Pradesh Law Journal 902 and Mukesh Bargav v. State, 1993 Madhya Pradesh Law Journal 586.
18.
In this case the petitioner did complete more than 240 days of service.
It is also apparent that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 were not complied.
Retrenchment compensation was not paid.
Thus in view of the decision given by the Supreme Court of India same thing can be said in favour of the petitioner.
19.
These petitions are thus disposed of with the following directions :  (1) The respondents would re-consider the case of the petitioner in terms of Rules of 1994 and more particularly by Rule-8 of the Rules.
(2) If services of the petitionr are to be terminated then this should be done after due compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
(3) If any adverse order is to be passed the petitioner be heard and adverse order if any passed be kept in abeyance.
20.
Deposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.