Amitava Lala, J - The writ petition is made for the purpose of directing the respondents to act in accordance with law and to forthwith withdraw, re-call and/or rescind the Order dated 2nd August, 1999 passed by the Respondent No. 3 being Memo No. 130/1/(5)LC being Annexure `J' to the petition.
2.
Initially an interim order was passed by this Court in terms of prayer (h) till 31st August, 1999.
3.
Prayer (h) relates to an order of injunction restraining the respondents and/or their servants or agents from taking any step or further steps pursuant to the impugned decision dated 2nd August, 1999 being annexure (J) to the petition.
4.
On being served, an application for vacating and/or modifying the interim order dated 5th August, 1998 was made by the Administrator of the School before this Court.
5.
I have taken up both the applications for final disposal till interim order as already granted is operative till 31st August, 1999.
Moreover, both the applications and the interim order is, in effect, related to the main relief in respect of cancellation of the impugned order being Memo No. 130/1/(5) LC being Annexure `J' to the petition.
6.
The .contention of the petitioner is that he was a Teacher-in-Charge in a School who was directed to hand over charge to another Teacher-in-Charge by the order of the Administrator dated 14th January, 1999.
Such order is wrongful and/or illegal because the same was passed without giving any opportunity of hearing.
7.
It is to be remembered that after such order being passed, a writ petition was moved earlier being T/53 of 1999 (Gorakh Nath Dwivedi v. State of WB & Ors.) in which a Single Bench of this Hon'ble Court wherein it was resolved that by levelling charge without taking any steps to enquire into those charges and obtaining results as if the charge stands proved, if the Administrator acts the same is totally illegal being not permissible by law.
The action, if permitted to be.enforced, will be void ab initio under Section 23 of the Contract Act.
8.
An appeal was preferred from such order dated 3rd February, 1999 being GA No. 817 of 1999, APOT No. 161 of 1999, (Sri Bibuti Bhushan Chakraborty & Anr. v. Gorakh Nath Dwivedi) and when upon hearing the parties on 13th April, 1999, a Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court had ultimately held that it is admitted that the matter relating to the appointment of Teacher-in-Charge is not governed by the Recruitment Rule issued by the Director of School Education.
In this view of the matter, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the Managing Committee cannot exercise its power of appointment so far as Teacher-in-Charge is concerned except by way of temporary measure.
If the management cannot make substantive appointment of a Teacher-in-Charge, the Administrator also cannot make such appointment.
In such a situation, keeping in view that fact situation as also the lacuna in the Recruitment Rule, this Court is of the opinion that the matter should be considered by the Director of the School Education.
In Debasis Dutta v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1988(2) CLJ 1, a Special Bench of this Court held that the Recruitment Rules framed by the Director of School Education are binding upon the Managing Committee.
The committee had been conferred power to do certain acts in terms of Rule 28 thereof and thus, can only within the four corner of the said Rule.
However, the Special Bench has also held that the said Rule is directory in nature as the same may be subject to any other decision (direction ?)
which may be issued by the Director of School Education or the State of West Bengal, as the case may be.
In this view of the matter thereof, I am of the opinion that the matter should be considered by the Director of School Education who may pass an appropriate reasoned order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant, the writ petitioner and the respondent No. 5.
Such an order may be passed at an early date and preferably within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Till such order is passed, status quo shall be maintained by the parties.
9.
By consent of the parties the writ petition and the appeal were disposed of.
10.
However, that order shall not prevent the Administrator to initiate disciplinary proceeding as against the writ petitioner, if he so considers fit and proper.
11.
In such a situation, impugned order was passed by the Director of School Education under Memo No. 130/1/(5)LC dated 2nd August, 1999.
12.
It is resolved therein that there is no doubt as soon as there is an appointment of Headmaster, his claim for Teacher-in-Charge has no leg to stand.
13.
It appears that there is no specific order/rule on the issue of selection of the Teacher-in-Charge of the institution.
But there is an usual practice and convention that the School Authority can select one approved Assistant Teacher from amongst the existing teaching staff to act as Teacher-in-Charge for efficient and smooth running of the institution if the post of Head of the institution is lying vacant since it is a purely stop-gap arrangement.
It is upon the School Authority to select any of the existing approved staff for discharging the duties as assigned to him.
14.
Considering all aspects of the matter, it is decided that the action taken by the Administrator towards selection of some other person as Teacher-in- Charge to run the institution smoothly appears to be proper.
15.
Challenging such impugned, order this writ petition is made.
16.
Mr. PK Roy, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioner cited two decisions namely; 1992(4) S.C.C.
118 (152) : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC), State of Haryana & Ors. v. Piara Singh & Ors. at paragraphs 45 and 46 and 96 CWN 305, Kamal Kanti Chatterjee & Ors. v. Board of Trustees of the Port of Calcutta & Ors. at paragraph 18.
17.
From the first reported judgment it appears that the normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call for an ad hoc temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort should always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate.
The appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee.
18.
Secondly, an ad hoc/temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
19.
From the ratio of the second judgment, a Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court held that temporary employees have no right to the post, and yet the law is settled beyond all doubts that their services also cannot be terminated on the ground of any misbehaviour or incapacity without giving them reasonable opportunity of being heard.
By parity of reasons, therefore, it has got to be accepted that while a deputationist may be called back without assigning any reason, yet once it appears that such recall or repatriation is on the ground of any alleged fault or the like, the deputationist must also be given all reasonable opportunities to meet the allegation as otherwise the order shall fail.
20.
Therefore, as it stands:  (a) Regular recruitment should not be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of any ad hoc/temporary employee; (b) Temporary employee should not be replaced by any temporary employee; (c) Even if one is a temporary employee but his or her service cannot be terminated without giving any reasonable opportunity of being heard.
21.
Side by side let us find out basis of the order of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court while disposing the earlier writ petition.
The basis of the order of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court is that it is an admitted position that appointment of Teacher-in-Charge is not governed by the recruitment rules framed by the Director of School Education.
22.
Therefore, what should be the composite meaning of the same that has to be ascertained.
The composite meaning is that although there is no recruitment rules of an ad hoc temporary appointment yet his/her service cannot be terminated without giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
On top of it neither regular recruitment cannot be withheld nor any ad hoc/temporary employee can be replaced by another ad hoc/temporary till the time of filling up the vacancy permanently i.e. during the stop-gap period.
23.
In such circumstances, if I go through the actual reasoning part of the impugned order, I shall found the following:  "It appears that there is no specific order/rule on the issue of Selection of the Teacher-in-Charge of the Institution.
But there is a usual practice and convention that the School Authority can select one approved Assistant Teacher from among the existing teaching staff to act as Teacher-in-Charge for efficient and smooth running of the Institution if the post of the Head of the Institution is lying vacant since it is a purely stop-gap arrangement.
It is upon the School Authority to select any of the existing approved staff for discharging the duties as assigned to the Head of the Institution.
Considering all aspects of the matter it is decided that the action taken by the Administrator towards selection of Sri Sridhar Narain Choubey as Teacher- in-Charge to run the institution smoothly appears to be proper.
Hence no relief can be given to the writ petitioner (Gorakh Nath Dwivedi)."
24.
In the premises, can it be said the above reasoning is to be fit in the composite meaning of the Court ?
Answer is `No'.
25.
Therefore, the impugned order is under challenge being Memo No. 130/1/(5) LC dated 2nd August, 1999 stands set aside.
The authority concerned is directed to re-consider all pros and cons of this issue in the light of the judgment delivered by this Court within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order by giving fullest opportunity of being heard and by passing an appropriate reasoned order not in the manner as quoted above.
No effect and/or further effects with regard to notice of removal of the petitioner will be given till one week after passing the departmental order.
26.
The writ petition stands disposed of in view as above.
No order is passed as to costs.
Application for vacating or varying the interim order is rendered infructuous in view as above.
Therefore, no order is passed in such application being TNo.
1486 of 1999.
27.
Parties are to act on signed copy minute of the operative part of the judgment.
Orders accordingly.