RL Anand, J - The State of Punjab has filed the present appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 10111998 passed by Addl.
District Judge, Ludhiana, who set aside the judgment and decree of the learned trial Court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff with costs throughout and the plaintiff was granted declaration that he will be entitled to the grade of Rs. 120-200 from the date of his appointment with consequential benefits.
However, the first Appellate Court granted the arrears of the enhanced pay only from 2251990, i.e. three years prior to the date of the instruction of the suit.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:-  The plaintiff was appointed as Craft Instructor on 25.10.1965 in the scale of Rs. 80-200.
Chamkaur Singh and Bachna Ram also joined as Craft Instructors like the plaintiff in 1964 in the same scale, but they were given the higher scale of Rs. 120-200 from the date of their appointment by the order of the DPI issued on 7101966, whereas this scale was not given to the plaintiff.
On the ground of discrimination and disparity the plaintiff is seeking the scale of Rs. 120-200 from the date of his appointment.
The suit was contested by the department on many grounds including the one that the suit is not maintainable; that it is time barred and that the plaintiff is estopped to file the suit by his act and conduct.
On merits, the defendants admitted that the plaintiff was appointed as Craft Instructor in the trade of Moulder from the date claimed by him.
It was also admitted that Chamkaur Singh and Bachna Ram were also appointed as Craft Instructor in 1964.
The defendant-State denied that the plaintiff is similarly situated with that of Chamkaur Singh and Bachna Ram.
According to the department, Chamkaur Singh and Bachna Ram were given the scale of Rs. 80-120 with a clerical mistake which was corrected later on and proper scale of Rs. 120-200 was given to them.
It was also admitted by the State that the scale which was given to Chamkaur Singh and Bachna Ram was for a limited time upto 1111966.
Thereafter both the scales were changed to one time scale which is Rs. 125-300.
3.
From the above pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to pay scale of Rs. 120-200 and its revised pay scale and other consequential benefits from the date of his appointment alongwith compound interest @ 18% per annum ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is maintainable ?
OPP 4.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his own act and conduct to file this suit ?
OPP 5.
Whether the civil Court has jurisdiction to try and decide this suit ?
OPP 6.
Relief.
4. the parties led evidence.
The trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent, but in appeal the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside and the suit of the plaintiff was decreed in above terms as stated in para No. 1 of this order.
The State is aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court and in this manner the present appeal.
5.
I have heard Mrs. SK Bhatia, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of the appellants, Mr. Vishal Sharma, Advocate, on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
6.
It is a clear case of discrimination and, therefore, the suit of the plaintiff has been rightly decreed by the first Appellate Court.
7.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State submitted that the plaintiff has exhausted the departmental remedy.
Moreover, the cause of action, if any, arose to the plaintiff in the year 1964-65.
He has filed the suit beyond limitation and, therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief.
8.
I do not subscribe to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the appellants as the plaintiff was suffering a successive cause of action.
Every month he was deprived of his legitimate dues.
He could always seek a declaration with regard to the entitlement of his scale but the arrears were to be paid to him only for a period of three years and two months before the institution of the suit and this has been exactly done by the first Appellate Court.
The judgment and decree passed by the trial Court was not sustainable in the eyes of law.
Though this appeal has come from a judgment of reversal, but this Court is of the considered opinion that it hardly requires further scrutiny and a wrong which was done to the plaintiff by the trial Court has been rectified by the first Appellate Court.
There is no merit in this appeal.
The same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.