Ramesh Madhav Bapat, J - The first petitioner herein has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer as under :  "For the reasons stated and in the circumstances stated in the accompanying affidavit, the petitioner herein pray that this Hon'ble Court in the interests of justice be pleased to issue a writ, order or direction more particularly one in the nature of Writ of Certiorari.
(a) call for the records relating to and connected with the judgment dated 1271999 in OA No. 167 of 1998 on the file of the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad and quash or set aside the same.
(b) further declare that the order passed by the Appellate Authority No. TD/EG/Appeal/DAR/96/4, dated 1021997 as bad in law and unsustainable; (c) consequently direct the respondents to treat the petitioner as entitled to all benefits without any regard being had to the proceedings dated 1021997 of the appellate authority by granting all attendant benefits duly treating the period of this absence from duty as period spent on duty and pass such other or further order or orders as are demmed fit and proper in the circumstances of the case."
2.
The writ affidavit was filed by one Doddi Appa Rao i.e., the 1st petitioner herein with an averment that he was recruited as a Technician (Phones) on 31.3.1969.
Subsequently he was promoted as a Technical Supervisor on 31.9.1981 and he was further promoted as a Senior Technical Supervisor on 171998.
3.
It is the further case of the 1st petitioner that he was married to one Suseela alias Simhachalam on 26.3.1967 in accordance with caste, customs and traditions.
It is the further case of the first petitioner that he was married even prior to joining the service with the Government of India.
The marriage subsisted for more than two decades.
Then Smt. Suseela developed certain setbacks in health running (rendering ?)
her incompetent to continue the matrimonial relations.
Therefore, after taking treatment when all attempts failed, the first petitioner divorced his wife according to the custom prevalent in that community on 3071979.
Thereafter, the first petitioner married after obtaining the divorce from the first wife with one Venkata Ramalakshmi on 10101979.
4.
Now it is the case of the first petitioner that the then District Manager, Rajahmundry has drawn a minimum charge stating that the first petitioner contracted the marriage for the second time without obtaining legal divorce from his first wife and has violated Rule 21(2) of C.C.S.
(Conduct) Rules, 1964.
It is further pleaded that the first petitioner filed a detailed statement on 8.12.1992 denying the allegations levelled against him.
An enquiry was conducted and the first petitioner was awarded punishment with compulsory retirement from service.
Aggrieved by the said order, the first petitioner filed an application before the General Manager, Telecom District, Rajahmundry.
The General Manager considered the entire matter and passed the order in his proceedings dated 10121997 bolding that the imposition of punishment of compulsory retirement against the first petitioner is unsustainable and consequently he set aside the same, but imposed punishment of pay by two stages with cumulative effect for a period of one year and ordered the period of his absence from the duties since the date of compulsory retirement till the resumption of duty as extraordinary leave without break in service.
The first petitioner reported and joined service back in 1121999 (1998 ?).
Aggrieved by the said order, the first petitioner filed OA No. 167 of 1998 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad.
The said OA, was disposed of on 1271999 with an observation that :  "We find that even the reduced punishment meted out to the applicant appears to be harsh especially when the authorities had not acted in time.
The punishment of the appellate authority will affect his pension and pensionary benefits.
The department may take a lenient view if he submits a representation for further reduction of his punishment."
Aggrieved by the said order, the present writ petition has been filed.
5.
We have heard the learned Counsel for the petitioners and also the learned Amicus Curiae appointed by this Court to help the Court.
6.
It is brought to our notice that during the pendency of the writ petition, the writ petitioner named Doddi Appa Rao died and as per the order in W.P.M.P.
No. 30494 of 1999 his legal representjatives were brought on record and the writ petition is now prosecuted by the legal representatives.
7.
The point that now arises for consideration as the whether the first petitioner was justified in marrying the second wife, secondly whether the Ist petitioner had obtained valid customary divorce from his first wife before he contracted the second marriage and whether the punishment imposed on the Ist petitioner is legal and valid ?
8.
It is brought to our notice by the learned Counsel for the petitioners herein that when the departmental enquiry proceeded with, the Ist petitioner filed OS No. 328 of 1997 before the Principal District Munisif at Kakinda for a declaration that the marriage of the plaintiff with the defendant (Suseela) was dissolved as per the caste, custom and usage on 3071979 and the defendant is no longer the wife of the plaintiff.
9.
It further appears from the record that the said OS was allowed and the marriage of the first petitioner with Suseela was held to be validly dissolved on 3071979.
The learned counsel Sri Nuty Rama Mohana Rao appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted at the Bar that the first petitioner belonged to `Setti Balija' community and there is a practice prevalent in the said community to obtain divorce by customary rites.
Accordingly, the first petitioner herein had obtained a customary divorce on 3071979 and therefore his relation with his first wife Suseela came to an end and therefore she cannot be called as the spouse of the first petitioner after the marriage was dissolved.
10.
The learned Counsel further brought to our notice that Rule 21 of C.C.S.
(Conduct) Rules envisages that the permission of the Government is necessary when the other spouse is living and the C.C.S.
(Conduct) Rules further empower the Government to grant such permission in special cases.
In the present case, it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that there was no substance (subsistence ?)
of marriage between the first petitioner and Suseela as it was dissolved by customary rites and it was confirmed by the Civil Court in decree in OS No. 328 of 1997 and therefore the permission of the Government was not necessary and therefore the permission was not obtained by the first petitioner before he contracted the marriage with Venkata Ramalakshmi.
11.
We are in agreement with the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners herein.
Hindu Marriage Act provides the ground on which the parties to the marriage can obtain divorce.
The grounds are given in Sec. 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act.
The divorce petition can be filed in the Civil Court and if the grounds mentioned in the petition are proved then the Civil Court can divorce the parties to the marriage.
In spite of making provisions and grounds for dissolution of marriage in Sec. 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, still the Hindu Marriage Act recognizes the divorce by custom.
The said provision is contained in Section 29(2) of the said Act.
This provision is based on the very principle of Hindu Law : (vernacular matter omitted).
It means that the custom prevails over the statutory law provided the custom is ancient continues (continuous ?)
and not against the public policy etc.  12.
In the present case, the petitioner No. 1 and his first wife belong to `Setti Balija' community.
The said custom is prevalent in the said community and therefore the first petitioner had obtained divorce from his first wife according to the custom.
13.
If further appears from the record that when the departmental proceedings were instituted against the first petitioner, the Ist petitioner had filed OS No. 328 of 1997 before the Principal District Munsif, Kakinada for declaration that the marriage of the plaintiff (petitioner No. 1 herein) with the defendant (Suseela-1st wife) was dissolved as per the caste custom and usage.
The said OS was allowed by the Civil Court and it was held that the marriage between the Ist petitioner herein and his first wife Suseela was validly dissolved on 3071979.
14.
When OA No. 167 of 1998 was filed by the first petitioner herein before the Central Administrative Tribunal, it ought to have honoured the decree.
The Central Administrative Tribunal had no power of superintendence over the Civil Court.
The Tribunal was under legal obligation to honour the decree of the Court.
It could not have taken any other view than expressed by the Civil Court.
15.
Under these circumstances, we hold that the order passed by the Tribunal is totally without jurisdiction.
We further hold that there was no reason for the respondents Department to institute any departmental enquiry against the first petitioner herein.
Therefore, we quash the departmental proceedings as well as the order passed in OA No. 167 of 1998 and hold that the first petitioner herein was not under any legal obligation to seek the permission of the Department to marry Venkata Ramalakshmi as the first marriage itself was not in existence.
Under these circumstances, we direct the respondents herein to give all pensionary benefits now to the legal representatives of the first petitioner herein within a period of two months from the date of receipt of this order and the period of absence of the first petitioner herein from the date of compulsory retirement till resumption of duty be treated as period on duty and the pay for the said period be given to the legal representatives of the first petitioner herein named Doddi Appa Rao.
The entire exercise has to be made within a period of two months from the date of receipt of this order.
16.
With these observations, the writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.