R L Anand, J - The order dated 8.12.1999 is hereby recalled.
2.
The parties have been heard on merits also.
3.
This is a defendant's appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1461996 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Patiala who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 551995 passed by the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Patiala, who decreed the suit of the plaintiff for declaration as prayed for.
4.
The plaintiff, Shri Shavinder Singh, filed a suit for declaration to the effect that office order No. 2101/PD(I) dated 2531991, vide which he was removed from service and his pay and other allowances were forfeited and the order of the Deputy General Manager vide which appeal of the plaintiff was rejected, are illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void, against the principles of natural justice and against service rules and regulations governing the services of the plaintiff.
5.
The case set up by the plaintiff in the trial Court was that he joined the service of the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation on 1101982 as a Conductor.
He was allegedly involved in a false case.
He was placed under suspension and was charge-sheeted on 1921990 vide charge sheet No. 5766.
Inquiry was conducted and vide office order dated 1371990 a show cause notice was issued and vide order dated 2531991 he was removed from service and his pay and allowances and other subsistence allowance were ordered to be forfeited.
He filed an appeal before the Deputy General Manager.
His appeal was dismissed on 111992.
The plaintiff has challenged these orders alleging that these are unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void, against the principles of natural justice and against the service rules and regulations.
6.
Suit was contested by the defendant who pleaded that the inquiry was conducted against the plaintiff according to rules and all the charges levelled against the plaintiff were duly proved.
A show cause notice was also given to the plaintiff and, after giving him the opportunity to the show cause notice the plaintiff was removed from service.
His appeal was also dismissed after due consideration and the appellate authority gave him the opportunity for personal hearing.
The impugned orders have been passed by the competent authority strictly according to the rules and regulations of the P.R.T.C.
It was also pleaded by the defendant that the suit of the plaintiff was not legally maintainable in the present form and that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
Further it was pleaded by the defendant that no cause of action has arisen to the plaintiff to file the suit.
7.
The plaintiff filed the replication to the written statement in which he reiterated the allegations made in the plaint by denying those of the written statement.
8.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether office order No. 2101/PD(1) dated 2531991 and order of Dy General Manager vide which appeal of the plaintiff was rejected are illegal, ultra vires and unconstitutional ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 3.
Whether this Court has got no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
9.
The plaintiff led evidence in support of his case but no evidence was led by the defendant who simply tendered inquiry file Ex. D.1.
The learned trial Court came to the conclusion that inquiry has not been conducted according to rules so much so that along with show cause notice the report of the Inquiry Officer was not supplied.
Also the report of the inspector, who checked the vehicle, has also not been given to the plaintiff and in these circumstances, the orders cannot be sustained in the eye of law and resultantly, the suit was decreed.
10.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court the corporation filed the appeal before the first appellate Court and for the reasons given in paras No. 12 to 15 of the judgment, which are extracted below, the appeal was dismissed :-  "12.
I have carefully gone through the enquiry report Ex. D.1 and find that one Bagga Singh was examined but he did not examine any other witness to prove the charges levelled against the plaintiff-respondent.
The allegations made in the charge-sheet are that plaintiff-respondent was apprehended by Inspector Bagga Singh, with forged way bill, when he checked bus No. 7499 near Handiyya.
In order to prove the said charge, no other witness has been examined except said Bagga Singh, Inspector.
So this submission of the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent that there is no supporting evidence to prove the charges against him except for the statement of Bagga Singh, Inspector does find force.
13.
Now coming to another contention of the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent that he was put on duty by the Depot Manager in the presence of Ravinder Pal, Inspector, Gurbachan Singh, Advance Booker, Prem Sagar Driver, by saying that the Managing Director, who was the Deputy General (Manager) and Appellate Authority, had directed him that the plaintiff-respondent is assigned duty of conductor, for the period commencing from 14891 to 24.8.91, by allotting five buses, this fact also does not stand rebutted by the defendant-appellant, as no evidence contrary to the said contention has been led by the defendant-appellant.
14.
This contention of the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent that he was not supplied with the copy of the Enquiry Report also does not stand contradicted, as no contrary evidence has been led to this effect.
There is no evidence that while serving with the show cause notice, copy of the enquiry report was supplied to him.
So for want of copy of the enquiry report, the show cause notice cannot be said to be valid and legal in the eyes of law.
15.
Now coming to the submission of the learned counsel for the defendant-appellant, that this Court has no jurisdiction to grant relief to the plaintiff-respondent, it may be mentioned here that this contention of the learned counsel for the defendant-appellant has got no force because the delinquent employee could seek remedy from the Industrial Tribunal, or from the Civil Court.
He could choose one remedy, out of these two.
There is nothing on record that he availed to two remedies both from the Industrial Tribunal, and from the Civil Court.
So I do not find any force in this submission of the learned counsel for the defendant-appellant and I hold that civil Court has the jurisdiction to grant relief to the plaintiff-respondent."
11.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court, the present appeal has been filed.
12.
I have heard Shri R.S.
Ahluwalia, Advocate, for the appellant and Shri J S Yadav, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
13.
Though an effort has been made by the learned counsel for the appellant that the inquiry was conducted according to the rules and regulations of the Corporation and that along with show cause notice the report of the inquiry officer was supplied to the plaintiff-respondent yet I am convinced that the plaintiff was not supplied with the report of the Inspector and as the said report was the basis of the charge made against the plaintiff, a serious prejudice has been accused to the plaintiff when he was not supplied the foundation of the charge.
The reasons adopted by the Courts below in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff cannot be held to be erroneous, illegal or perverse.
14.
Faced with this difficulty, the counsel forthe appellant submitted that the plaintiff is not entitled to back wages as he has not worked against his post.
There is a merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
Admittedly, the plaintiff did not serve.
Relying upon the principle of "no work, no pay", it is hereby declared that the plaintiff shall not be paid the back wages.
However, the plaintiff shall be entitled to the benefit of continuity of service.
15.
In this view of the matter, the present appeal is partly allowed; the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are hereby modified and it is declared that so far as the termination of plaintiff from service is concerned, those orders are illegal and are liable to be set aside.
Directions are given to the Corporation to allow the plaintiff to join the duty within one month from today.
However, the plaintiff shall not be awarded the back wages.
He shall it the benefit of continuity of service.
16.
With these observations, the present appeal stands disposed of.
Copy of the order Dasti.
Appeal partly allowed.