KK Srivastava, J - By means of this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks quashing of award dated 1061998, copy Annexure P5, passed by respondent No. 1-Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh, vide which he declined the reference made to it by the State of Punjab (Director, Information and Public Relations Department), Punjab, Chandigarh.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Cleaner on daily wage basis vide letter of appointment dated 251994 for a period of three months.
The petitioner was a matriculate when he was appointed as a Cleaner.
A copy of the letter of appointment has been placed on record as Annexure P1 and the same was placed with reference as Ex.W/1.
The services of the petitioner were extended from time to time and was given extension vide letters dated 1081994, 29101994, 17111994, 1911995, 1741995 and 3071995.
The last extension given to the petitioner was vide letter Annexure P2 for a period of three months w.e.f.
2171995.
A copy of this letter of extension was placed before the Labour Court as Ex.W/7.
The petitioner, as per the averments made in the writ petition, worked continuously during the period upto 20101995 when his services were terminated.
The petitioner served a demand notice and the conciliation proceedings were held which, however, could not settle the dispute and ultimately a reference was made by the Government to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court, UT Chandigarh, framed the following issues:  1.
Whether the services of the workman were terminated illegally by respondent, if so to what effect and what relief, the workman is entitled ?
OPW 2.
Relief.
3.
The copy of the demand notice has been filed as Annexure P3.
Respondent No. 2-department filed reply, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P4.
The Labour Court held that the services of the workman stood automatically dispensed with after the period of extension of service expired.
It was also held that though the workman had completed service of 240 days in the preceding 12 calendar months but he was not given any further extension and the services of the petitioner stood automatically dispensed with and consequently there was no termination of the services by the management much less mala fide.
Feeling aggrieved against the award, the petitioner has approached this Court through this writ petition.
4.
Respondent No. 2 filed written statement of the Additional Director (Admn)-cum-Joint Secretary, Information and Public Relations Deptt., Punjab, Chandigarh.
In the preliminary objections it was pleaded that the petitioner was engaged on contractual/daily wage basis against the post of Cleaner in the office of respondent No. 2 and he did not complete 240 days in a calendar year.
The details of the work done by the petitioner-workman was detailed in para 1 of the preliminary objections as under :  Year Period 1994 4894 to 3.11.94 (on daily wages) 41194 to 31294 (on daily wages) 41294 to 301294 (on daily wages) i.e. 4 months & 27 days.
5.
It was, thus, contended that the case of the petitioner was not covered under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short to be referred as `the ID Act') as well as under the prevailing instructions of the Punjab Government issued vide Circular letter No. 11/18/88-4PIII/7244 dated 75..1993, copy Annexure RI.
In the reply on merits it was not disputed that the petitioner was given extension in service as under :  "From 4.8.94 to 3.11.94 (for 3 months on daily wages) From 41194 to 31294 (for 1 month on daily wages) From 41294 to 301294 (for 27 days on daily wages) From 20195 to 19495 (for 3 months on Cont.
basis) From 20495 to 19795 (for 3 months on Cont.
basis) From 21795 to 211095 (for 3 months on Cont.
basis)."
6.
It was categorically pleaded that the services of the petitioner were never terminated as alleged by him.
However, it was submitted that the petitioner left his duty finally at his own without any intimation to the competent authority and did not turn up.
It was also mentioned that the petitioner was given appointment as a Cleaner on contract basis for a period of three months vide office order No. PR(Estt-1)/96/18449-54 dated 14296, copy Annexure R2 and he was directed to attend his duty in the office of the Assistant Public Relations Officer, Ajnala.
This order was sent to the petitioner by registered post but he refused to receive it and the same was received back as undelivered with the remarks of the postal authority that the individual refused to accept.
It was reiterated that the petitioner did not work against the post of Cleaner on 240 days in a calendar year and he was not entitled to claim retrenchment compensation under the rules.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for respondent No. 2.
We have also carefully gone through the impugned award and the record of the case.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the work done by the petitioner is to be seen during the year preceding from the date of termination of his employment and if in the preceding year he has worked for 240 days, then the compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act would be mandatory on the part of the management.
He has also referred to the clear finding recorded by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court to the effect that the petitioner-workman had worked for 240 days in the preceding year.
In para 8 of the impugned award the learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court has recorded this finding which reads as under :-  ".....Although the workman had completed a service of 240 days in the preceding 12 calendar months, but as the appointment of the workman was on daily wage and contract basis, the services of the workman came to an end on 20th October, 1995.
The workman was not given any further extension and as per the deposition of MW1 Bhagwan Singh, Superintendent the workman never turned up to report for duty, after 20th October, 1995."
9.
Since the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court has recorded this clear and categorical finding, there can be now no dispute about the fact that the petitioner-workman worked from 240 days in the preceding 12 months.
Since the petitioner-workman was being given extension time and again and the last extension was upto 20th October, 1995, the question of the petitioner-workman reporting for duty thereafter did not arise unless no further extention was granted to him by respondent No. 2.
It is not the case of respondent No. 2 that the service of the petitioner was further extended after the period of service was giving to expire on 20th October, 1995.
In this view of the matter, no fault can be found on the part of the petitioner-workman in not reporting for duty either on the expiry of the extended period of service on 20th October, 1995.
The plea of the re-employment with the authority of the petitioner-workman, in our considered view, will not be sufficient to decline the claim of the petitioner as the same has to be seen with reference to the service already rendered by him when his services stood terminated in the sense that no extension of service was granted to him.
However, the fact that re-employment is alleged to have been offered to the petitioner-workman shows that the work on the post was very much there and the service of the petitioner was not terminated on the ground that the work on that post was no longer in existence.
In other words, there was continuity of the post and the person was required for the post.
In these circumstances, the non-existence of the service of the petitioner after expiry of the extended period on 20th October, 1995, would amount to unfair labour practice.
In Simla Devi v. Presiding Officer, Labour Courts, Bathinda, 1998(2) SCT 72 (P&H)(DB), a Division Bench of this Court held as under :  "Therefore, in every case of termination of service of a workman, where the workman claims that he was worked for a period of 240 days in a period of twelve months and termination of his service is void for want of compliance with the requirement of Section 25-F and where the employer pleads that termination of service has been brought about in accordance with the terms of contract of employment or termination is as a result of non-extension of term of employment, the Court will have to carefully scrutinise all the facts and apply the relevant provision of law.
It will be the duty of the Court to determine the nature of employment with reference to the nature of duties performed by the workman and type of job for which he was employed.
Once the employee establishes that he was employed for a work of permanent/continuous nature and that employer has arbitrarily terminated his service in order to defeat his rights under the Industrial Disputes Act or other labour legislations, a presumption can appropriately be drawn by the Court that the employer's action amounts to unfair labour practice.
In such a case, burden will lie on the employer to prove that the workman was engaged to do a particular job and even though the employee may have worked for 240 days such employment should be treated as covered by the amended clause because the service was terminated on the completion of the work.
A stipulation in the contract that the employment would be for a specified period of till the completion of a particular job may legimately bring the termination of service within the ambit of clause (bb).
However, it the employer resorts to methodology of giving fixed term appointment with a view to take it out of the Section 2(oo) and terminate the service despite the continuity of the work and job requirements the Court may be justified to draw an inference that the employer's action lacks bona fide or that he has unfairly resorted to his right to terminate the service of the employee."
10.
In the instant case, though the petitioner was given extension for a specified period and last such extension was given on 2171995 for a period of three months which expired on 20th October, 1995, but it is evident from the fact that the work given to the petitioner-workman was of a continuous nature and however, extension was not given to him with a view to terminate his service and take out the case out of Section 2(oo) of the ID Act which reads as under :  2[(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or [(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health;] 11.
The continuity of the job is further evident from the fact that respondent No. 2 alleges that re-employment was offered to the petitioner but he did not respond to re-employment and did not join his duties.
The case of the petitioner, on the other hand, is that he did not receive the intimation in this regard and the mere fact that his father was working as a Superintendent in the same office is per se not the proof of the communication of the re-employment to the petitioner.
In our considered view, the action of respondent No. 2 in allowing the employment of the petitioner to come to an end after the expiry of the last period of extension on 20th October, 1995, despite the fact that there was continuity of the job and employee was required to perform the job, lacks bona fide and shows that respondent has unfairly resorted to the termination of the service of the employee and it amounts to unfair labour practice.
12.
Applying the ratio of the judgment in the case of Simla Devi (supra) to the facts of this case, we allow this writ petition and set aside the award, Annexure P5 and answer the reference in favour of the petitioner-workman in so far as the issue of reinstatement with continuity of service of workman is concerned.
However, for back wages the petitioner would be at liberty to avail the remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the ID Act.
It is also made clear that as and when the petitioner makes an application for back wages, the respondent shall be free to plead and prove that he was gainfully employed during the intervening period and as such he is not entitled to whole or part of the back wages.
Petition allowed.