RL Anand, J - State of Punjab, defendant in the trial Court has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1881998 passed by the Court of Additional District & Sessions Judge, Jalandhar who accepted the appeal of Karnail Singh, plaintiff-respondent by setting aside the judgment and decree dated 2521997, passed by the Court of Civil Judge who dismissed the suit of the plaintiff for declaration as prayed for.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
Shri Karnail Singh plaintiff challenged the order of dismissal dated 2841995 passed by the Commandant, 75th Battalion, PAP, Jalandhar by seeking declaration that the said order is void, unlawful, unconstitutional, mala fide, against the provisions of law, service rules and rules of natural justice and that the Department has not conducted the inquiry.
3.
The suit was contested by the State which tried to justify the order of dismissal dated 2841995.
4.
The trial Court framed the various issues and then ultimately vide judgment and decree referred to above, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
The plaintiff filed an appeal before the first appellate Court and for the reasons given in paras No. 8 and 9 of the judgment dated 1881998, the judgment and decree of the trial Court was reversed and the suit of the plaintiff- respondent was decreed.
5.
In this manner, the present Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab.
6.
I have heard Mrs. SK Bhatia, DAG, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri KG Chaudhary, appearing on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the records of the trial Court.
7.
Before I deal with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the appellant it will be proper for me to reproduce paras No. 8 and 9 of the judgment of the first appellate Court :-  "8.
Learned counsel for the appellant Shri PL Malhotra, Advocate, has vehemently contended that the learned Civil Judge has committed error in deciding issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
He further contended that there is no inquiry report holding the plaintiff guilty in the departmental inquiry file and it, therefore, cannot be said that the plaintiff was found guilty of the charge framed against him.
He has further contended that a show cause notice was issued to the plaintiff to give reply within 10 days from the receipt of the notice and the said notice is alleged to have been received by the plaintiff on 21.4.1995 but without getting reply from the plaintiff, the disciplinary authority passed the impugned order on 28.4.95.
It shows that no opportunity of being heard was afforded to the plaintiff by the Investigating Officer and as such the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
On the other hand, learned Government Pleader has contended that copy of the inquiry report was sent to the plaintiff alongwith the show cause notice which was received by him and as such it cannot be said that there is no report finding the appellant guilty of the charge.
He further contended that since the plaintiff did not appear in the inquiry despite notice was served upon him.
The inquiry was rightly conducted ex-parte and show cause notice was duly served to which the plaintiff did not reply and, therefore, the order is legal and valid one.
9.
There is no dispute that the plaintiff absented and a departmental inquiry was initiated against him.
It is also proved from the evidence that the plaintiff failed to appear in the inquiry inspite of notice served upon him.
However, there is no inquiry report finding him guilty in the inquiry file.
The learned Civil Judge also held that there was no inquiry report on the file but he proceeded on the supposition that the copy of inquiry report was sent to the appellant alongwith the show cause notice which was received by him and as such plaintiff cannot take any advantage from the fact that the inquiry report was not on the inquiry file.
I find myself unable to agree with the reasoning of the learned Civil Judge.
The plaintiff from the beginning alleged that no show cause notice was served upon him and he was not given opportunity of being heard before passing the impugned order.
It was, therefore, for the defendants to prove that a show cause notice was served upon the plaintiff and copy of the inquiry report was sent to him.
No doubt, in the show cause notice there is mention that copy of inquiry report is being sent but as already discussed above, there is no inquiry report in the departmental inquiry file.
It is not the case of the defendants that the inquiry report has been lost.
Since, there is no original inquiry report in the file, it cannot be said that its copy was sent alongwith the show cause notice.
As already stated above, the plaintiff has denied the service of show cause notice.
It was, therefore, for the defendants to prove that the copy of the inquiry report was sent alongwith the show cause notice.
Since, there is no inquiry report, it cannot be said that copy of the same was sent to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff, therefore, cannot be said to have been given an opportunity of being heard.
Furthermore, vide show cause notice the plaintiff was asked to submit his reply within 10 days on receipt of notice.
The show cause notice is dated 18.4.95 and the same is alleged to have been received by the plaintiff on 21.4.95, the plaintiff, therefore, could reply to the show cause notice upto 1595.
However, without waiting for his reply, he was dismissed from service on 28595.
The impugned order, therefore, violates Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
In the case of Jangi Lal v.
U.O.I., 1980 Lab Industrial Cases 135, it was held that when order of removal is passed prior to the expiry of period of show cause notice, it violates Article 311 of the Contitution of India.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the impugned order is null and void and as such is liable to be set aside.
The findings of then trial Court on issue No. 1, are, therefore, wrong and are set aside."
8.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant tried to justify the order of dismissal by submitting that the plaintiff was afforded various opportunities to appear before the inquiry officer but the did not appear.
Even repeated show cause notices were given to the plaintiff but he did not reply to the show cause notices and in these circumstances the order of dismissal dated 2841995 has been rightly passed.
It was also submitted by the counsel for the appellant that since it is a judgment of reversal, therefore, this is a fit case where the appeal should be admitted.
9.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is not acceptable in this Court.
10.
For the admission of this appeal, there must be a point of adjudication.
Moreover, I have also perused the record of the trial Court.
11.
This suit was liable to be decreed on the short ground that show cause notice was given to the plaintiff calling upon him to explain within 10 days from its receipt to show cause why the proposed punishment should not be awarded to him.
This show cause notice admittedly was received by the plaintiff on 21.4.1995.
Both the Court have held so.
In these circumstances, the order of dismissal could not be passed prior to the expiry of the 10 days and the order has been passed on 2841995 i.e. before the expiry of the time granted to the plaintiff.
In this situation the plaintiff could not file reply to the show cause notice.
A great prejudice has been caused to the official.
Show cause notice is not an idle formality as this statutory right has been granted to the official to convince the punishing authority that the proposed punishment may not be awarded to him.
The punishing authority was duty bound to wait for the expiry of the time of the show cause notice.
He has not done so.
Otherwise also, both the Courts have held that no inquiry was conducted.
Also there is no report of the Inquiry Officer on the file and in these circumstances the impugned order cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
Even otherwise the first appellate Court has not deprived the Department from any remedy.
Rather, it has been stated by the Court of Additional District Judge, Jalandhar that the Department would be at liberty to initiate fresh inquiry as per Rules.
12.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any infirmity in the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court and there is no merit in this appeal.
13.
Dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.