RL Anand, J. (Oral) - This is a State appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 30.3.1999 passed by Additional District Judge, Patiala, who partly allowed the appeal of the State of Punjab by modifying the judgment and decree of the trial Court and gave directions in favour of the plaintiff-respondent declaring that he shall be considered for promotion with effect from the date as claimed by him and if he is found fit for promotion to grant him all the consequential benefits and the needful shall be done within three months from the date of the order.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  Piara Singh filed a suit for declaration against the State of Punjab and others alleging that the plaintiff was appointed as Assistant Clerk in the office of Executive Engineer, Provincial Division, PWD, Patiala on 1041956 and after working in various divisions of the department he was appointed as Legal Assistant in the office of Chief Engineer PWD B&R, Patiala on 21.12.1971.
He was promoted as Superintendent Grade-I on 2641994 with immediate effect though, according to the plaintiff, his promotion was due with effect from December, 1990 on the ground of roster point.
The suit was contested by the State and it was pleaded that the plaintiff has been rightly promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-I with effect from 2641994 by the departmental promotion committee and that the plaintiff was not entitled to be promoted before 2641994.
On these averments, the parties went to trial and the following issues were framed by the learned trial Court:-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the present suit ?
OPD 3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD 4.
Whether the notice u/s 80 CPC is illegal ?
OPD 5.
Relief.
3.
The parties were afforded opportunity to lead evidence and the trial Court straightaway decreed the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for and gave a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to be promoted with effect from December, 1990 and directions were also given to the State to fix the pay of the plaintiff from that date and that he be given all the retrospective benefits.
4.
Aggrieved by the judgment and the decree of the trial Court dated 2571998, the State filed the appeal before the first Appellate Court, which rightly modified the judgment and decree of the trial Court and gave the directions as stated in the earlier portion of this judgment.
The defendant- State is not satisfied with the judgment and decree dated 30.3.1999 passed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala and it has come in the present appeal.
5.
I have heard Mrs. SK Bhatia, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of the appellants, Mr. MS Talwar, Advocate, on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants submitted that the departmental promotion committee considered the case of the plaintiff as to whether he was entitled to promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-I and if so, from what date.
The plaintiff was promoted with effect from 2641994 as per rules.
The plaintiff has already retired from service and he has filed the present suit after about 20 months of his retirement.
He never complained about the date of his promotion and a futile exercise is being made by him by filing the present suit.
7.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the department has not taken note of the fact that the post was open for reserve category for the plaintiff in the month of December, 1990 and by ignoring the rights of the plaintiff, he has been promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-I with effect from 2641994.
The learned counsel also submitted that by the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court no vested right has been created in favour of the plaintiff.
Only a direction has been given to the State to consider as to whether the plaintiff is entitled to be promoted from the back date prior to 2641994.
8.
I find merit in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the respondent.
The learned trial Court gave a straightaway declaration in favour of the plaintiff that he is entitled to be promoted with effect from December, 1990.
It is the basic law that no person has the right to be promoted.
He has only the right of consideration to be promoted.
Even if the plaintiff has any right to be considered for promotion with effect from December, 1990, he cannot straightaway ask for the promotion from that date because when an employee is to be promoted, is within the domain of the appointing authority.
This law has been relied upon by the first Appellate Court.
Therefore, I do not see any illegality in the impugned judgment.
The appeal is disposed of with the observations and directions to the State to consider if the plaintiff is entitled to promotion earlier to 2641994, as represented by him in his various representations, and if he is found suitable, the State may also consider the claim of the plaintiff to be promoted from the back date.
Compliance of this order be made by the State within six months from the date of the receipt of copy of the order.
No order as to costs.