RL Anand, J - This Civil Revision filed by the Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter to be called as the "Board") has been directed against the order dated 2871999 pased by the Additional District Judge, Rupnagar dismissing the Board's application under s 5 of the Limitation Act for condonation of delay as also dismissing its appeal being barred by time.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:  Amarjit Singh, a Clerk working in the Board filed a suit for declaration that the order dated 3.4.1992 conveyed to him on 941992 passed by the defendant-Board and the order dated 2961993 passed by the Chairman of the Board dismissing his appeal filed against the order stopping his four annual grade increments with cumulative are illegal, null and void and based on mala fide and without jurisdiction.
3.
The trial court decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the defendants filed appeal which was hopelessly barred by limitation and consequently the defendants also filed an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act for condonation of delay which was dismissed for the reasons stated in para 7 of the impugned order which reads as under :-  "After going through the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that the appellants have failed to show that the delay in filing the appeal had occurred in spite of their due diligence.
The suit was decided on, 10th August, 1996 in the presence of the learned counsel for the parties.
The certified copy of the judgment and decree was applied on 12th August, 1996.
The same was prepared on 24th August, 1996 but the delivery was taken on 18th December, 1996.
Thereafter the appeal has been filed on 1121997.
I am conscious of the fact that a liberal approach has to be adopted while dealing with an application for condonation of delay so that a case should be decided on merits, but there has to be some justification for the delay in filing the appeal.
A valuable right had accrued to the plaintiff as the appeal was not filed within time.
There is no explanation as to why the appeal was not filed immediately after getting the delivery of the certified copy.
The plea of the plaintiff is that he had approached the defendant to implement the judgment of the trial Court.
The plea taken by the appellants is that the counsel had informed them on 821997 regarding the decision of the suit.
The affidavit of the counsel in this regard has not been placed on record.
There is no explanation as to why the department had not been perusing the case.
In the absence of any satisfactory explanation with regard to the delay in filing the appeal, the application for condonation of delay in filing the appeal is dismissed and consequently the appeal is dismissed as time barred."
Aggrieved by the said order, the present revision petition has been filed by the defendants.
4.
In this case the suit of the plaintiff was decreed on 10.8.1996 and it was decreed in the presence of the counsel for the parties.
Certified copy of the judgment and decree was applied for on 1281996 and the same was prepared on 2481996.
But the delivery thereof was taken by the petitioners on 18121996.
Still the appeal was filed on 1121997.
As I have stated above, the certified copy of the judgment and decree of the trial Court was prepared by the Copying Branch on 2481996, the appeal could be instituted on or before 2191996, but nobody bothered to take delivery of the certified copy of the judgment and decree and the delivery was taken only on 18121996.
Even if 30 days period is calculated from this date, still the appeal could be instituted on or before 1711997, but the appeal was filed on 1121997.
In these circumstances, there was no sufficient cause on the part of the petitioners as to why the appeal was filed beyond the period of limitation.
5.
This Court is conscious of the fact that while disposing of the application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, a liberal approach should be adopted and if the party is able to show a sufficient cause for the delay, it should be condoned.
In the present case, it appears that the petitioners were never interested in filing the appeal before the first appellate Court and that was the reason that the delay occurred solely on the part of the petitioners as they did not get the delivery of the certified copy of the judgment and decree of the trial Court in time and consequently did not file the appeal within the period of limitation.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners have a very good case on merits.
This aspect of the matter has also been examined by me with the assistance of the counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners.
Suit of the plaintiff had been decreed by the trial Court for the reasons stated in para 9-A of the its judgment which can be reproduced as under :-  "The main allegations of the plaintiff which are brought within four corners of the rules of the Education Board Act, 1978 are that the plaintiff was subjected to face the enquiry twice in the case.
When Shri TS Kahlon had declined to further conduct the enquiry proceedings and Shri Sardara Singh, IAS, retired, conducted de novo enquiry proceedings.
He was not given notice for the penalty imposed on him nor any representation was invited from him before inflicting the punishment.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that as per the rule 10(3)(a)(b)(ii) of the punishment and appeal rules, punishing authority was required to supply a copy of the report of the enquiry held, give a notice to the employee stating the penalty proposed to be imposed upon him and the punishment authority was also required to consider representation if any made by the reply (employee ?)
before passing the order.
The learned counsel for the defendants, however, argued that there is no illegality in passing the impugned order against the plaintiff.
Infusion of the rule 10 in the punishment and appeal rules under the Act, certainly carry a meaning that before inflicting any punishment by the punishing authority, an employee has to be given an opportunity of being heard.
In the absence of said compliance of the rules any order passed by the punishment authority is against the principle of natural justice as such impugned order passed in violation to the rules is not likely to be sustained.
Hence this issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants holding that the impugned order dated 3.4.1992 conveyed to the plaintiff on 941992 and appeal order dated 2961993 are bad in the eyes of law."
A reading of the above para would show that under the statutory rules, before a penalty is to be imposed on the delinquent employee, he must be given an opportunity of hearing.
There was non-compliance of the statutory rules by the defendants.
In these circumstances, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the principles of natural justice had been complied with as would be evident from a fact that the respondent had admitted that he was supplied a copy of the inquiry report along with the show cause notice and in these circumstances the suit of the plaintiff could not be decreed by the trial Court.
This argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be accepted.
There is no prima facie evidence to indicate that the respondent was ever heard before passing of the impugned order of penalty.
In these circumstances, there is a violation of the statutory rules and as such the orders impugned in the suit could not be sustained in the eye of law.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in the appeal which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.