VS Aggarwal, J - The petitioners are students of Jind Institute of Engineering and Technology, Jind.
They have filed the present writ petition invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the decision of (sic) of Technical Education, Haryana) allowing respondent No. 5 (The Principal/Director, Jind Institute of Engineering and Technology, Jind) to fill up the seats on paid basis from the students who did not appear in the Regional Engineering College Examination or any other examination or could not qualify the same.
It was prayed that a direction should be issued to the abovesaid respondents first to do the sliding in the allotment of branches to the candidates who had been admitted after passing the Regional Engineering College examination either against free seat or against the paid seat and after adjusting of these candidates to allow respondent No. 5 to fill up the rest of the seats in any manner.
2.
The facts alleged are that the Jind Institute of Engineering and Technology, Jind, is a private Engineering College duly recognised by the All India Council of Technical Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development, New Delhi.
It is affiliated to the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
It is governed by the rules and regulations framed by the All India Council of Technical Education, New Delhi.
Respondent No. 6 (The Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra) is entrusted with the job of co-ordinating the admission of Engineering Courses in all government and private Engineering Colleges located in the State of Haryana.
Respondent No. 6 issued an Admission Brochure 1998-99 for admission to 4 Years Engineering and 5 Years Architecture Courses.
A Common Entrance Test was held and based on the ranks i.e. merit position in the test and preference exercised by the candidates, admissions were granted to different branches.
Admission Brochure in this regard had been issued.
Jind Institute of Engineering and Technology, Jind, is one of the affiliated Institutes.
After the test, successful candidates were required to submit their applications and the petitioners also submitted the same.
After scrutiny of the applications, the candidates were to be present for counselling before the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
The same was held in three sessions.
As per the rules, the candidates admitted through first counselling are given institutions and branches.
The branches can be upgraded if vacancies are available in better branches.
In the second and third counselling, only institutions are allotted at the first instance and depending upon the vacancies after upgradation, all students admitted through first counselling, the other students are allotted branches by the Institutions in the presence of the representatives of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
The Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, has been controlling the examination.
It is alleged that in between 2391998 and 11111998 some of the colleges had filled up the vacant seats through open advertisement and allotted these vacant seats in certain better branches.
The result is stated to be that the Haryana candidates who passed the CEET-98, have paid annual fees and have been allotted low priority branches like Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering.
While low ranking candidates who did not pass the said test or did not take the said test had been given higher preference branches like Computers Engineering, Electronics Engineering and Telecommunications Engineering.
Asserting that this method adopted is unjust, unreasonable and illegal, the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
Needless to state that the petition had been contested.
In the short reply filed by the All India Council for Technical Education, it was pointed out that the All India Council for Technical Education has no direct role to play in the admission matter.
It had framed guidelines for admissions to Engineering Degree and Engineering Diploma programmes.
The petitioners have not pointed out that any of the regulations/guidelines framed by the All Indian Council for Technical Education had been violated.
4.
Respondent No. 5 filled a separate reply.
It was asserted that all the admissions to 175 seats filled up in the Institute have been made following the rules and regulations laid down in the Admission Brochure issued by the Director Technical Education Haryana through the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
They are in conformity with the scheme contained in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Unni Krishnan, JP and others etc. etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others etc. etc., AIR 1993 SC 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) The Common Entrance Test for admission to the Engineering/Architectural courses in various government and private Engineering Institutes located in Haryana was held on 661998.
Thereafter admissions to the various courses in these Institutes were made by the Admission Committee of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, through four rounds of counselling.
The total intake of the answering respondent institute was 180 seats.
It comprised of 90 free seats, 81 payment seats and 9 seats of NRI quota.
The branches/disciplines had to be allotted by the Admission (Committee) of the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
After the third round of counselling, some seats were still lying vacant in the unaided private colleges.
There was a fourth round of counselling but no seat in the answering respondent Institute could be filled up.
To save the seats from going abegging, it was decided by the Admission Committee of respondent No. 6 to allow the unaided Engineering Colleges to fill up the remaining vacant seats on their own.
The decision by the Admission Committee was approved by the Commissioner of Technical Education Haryana.
Thereupon, respondent No. 6 invited applications for the vacant seats, 34 seats were filled upto 30101998.
Thus, it was asserted that no rule or regulation has been violated.
5.
Respondent No. 6 also filed the written statement.
The plea offered was that the time when the Admission Brochure for the year 1998-99 was issued, the Jind Institute had not received the approval of all the concerned authorities.
The name of Jind Institute was not mentioned in the Admission Brochure.
However, the necessary approval had since been accorded by the time the first counselling started.
The admissions are stated to have been made as per schedule of counselling given in the Admission Brochure.
The Jind Institute had received the approval, as mentioned above, on 381998.
Thus, out of 180 seats, 40 seats were kept for Computer Engineering; 40 seats for Electronics Engineering; 60 seats for Mechanical Engineering and 40 seats for Electrical Engineering.
In the first counselling, admission for 122 seats could be made in free and payments seats.
49 seats were vacant after the first counselling.
In the second counselling, only 11 admissions could be made.
Thereafter, several more vacancies became available.
Likewise, in four other private Engineering Colleges seats could not be filled up.
Notice of fourth counselling was issued.
No vacancy could be filled up in the fourth counselling held on 7101998.
Since the admissions were over and vacancies could not be filled up even after affording opportunity to all the students who appeared in CEET-98, the vacancies could be filled up by the Management as laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Unni Krishnan, JP and others etc. etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others etc. etc., AIR 1993 SC 2178.
The Admission Committee had made certain suggestions.
The proposal was approved by the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. of Haryana, Technical Education Department.
The private Engineering Colleges were allowed to fill up the tentative seats by issuing an advertisement.
The seats were filled up as per merit.
6.
The private respondents No. 9 to 36 also filed their separate reply.
They pointed out that at the time of re-adjustment/sliding, firstly the up- gradation of the 1st counselling students as per merit is to be made.
The second and third counselling seats could be allotted, the branches keeping in view in mind condition B-6 of the Admission Brochure.
The petitioners could not get the branches better than that in which they were now placed.
It was further alleged that, as per Admission Brochure, 95% seats are to be filled up by RECK from candidates who passed the CEET examination and 5% seats are to be filled up by the college/Institute.
These 5% candidates need not pass the CEET examination.
Rest of the pleas offered were repetition of what the other respondents had stated.
7.
On behalf of the respondents, it had been pointed out that besides private respondents there are large number of other candidates who had been admitted in a similar fashion.
They had not been arrayed as a party.
Immediately the question arises whether non-joinder of all the affected parties would prove fatal to the writ petition or not.
But in this connection, reference can well be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The General Manager, South Central Railway, Secunderabad and another v. A.V.R.
Siddhanti and others, AIR 1974 SC 1755, wherein it was held that when a policy is under challenge and no specific challenge has been made to individual appointment, it would suffice if only the initiators of the policy were arrayed as a party.
In such proceedings, the necessary parties are against whom the relief is sought and in whose absence no effective decision can be rendered by the Court.
8.
In the present case also, what is assailed is the policy of the respondents whereby certain seats which were unfilled were allowed to be filled up by an advertisement.
If the policy to this extent is quashed or held to be arbitrary, in that view of the matter, all the candidates need not to be so impleaded, particularly when substantial representation had been put up by some of the private respondents.
9.
In the present case in hand, the facts are not in controversy and, in fact, are admitted.
By now the position of law is well settled and without referring to a large number of precedents, reference can well be made to the decision of this Court in the case of Subhash Chandra v. The Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and another, 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 346.
In the cited judgment, it was concluded that the brochure/prospectus must be read as written.
It is not possible to add or subtract words from the brochure.
The parties are bound by the terms and conditions.
The findings of the Division Bench of this Court were as under :-  "The brochure must be read as written and it will not be permissible to add or subtract words from the language of such clause and on the basis of which not only the petitioner but the public at large has acted upon.
The respondent would be bound by the terms and conditions of the brochure, as they have declared to the public and cannot be permitted to amend or alter them at any subsequent stage and especially in absence of reservation of such a power."
10.
In this backdrop, one can refer to the Admission Brochure that had been issued.
With the passage of time, large number of private Engineering Colleges had cropped up in the State of Haryana.
The participating Engineering Colleges have been mentioned in the Admission Brochure.
The Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra holds a joint entrance test.
The basis of admission is as under :-  "The admission to the 4-year Engineering/Technology/5-year Architecture Courses at the Institutes (listed at A-2) in the year 1998-99 will be made on the basis of CEE conducted by Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, on 661998 and subject to the fulfilment of academic and other eligibility conditions as laid down by the respective institute as given in this Admission Brochure.
The inter se merit of the candidates securing equal rank in the CEET will be determined by the following criteria : (a) A candidate getting higher marks in aggregate of percentage in PCM in the qualifying examination (10+2 or equivalent) after giving equal weightage to each subject shall rank higher in order of merit.
(b) In case of a tie in criterion (a) above, a candidate older in age shall rank higher in order of merit."
11.
Counselling and Admission had also been dealt with in detail in the Admission Brochure and the same read as under :-  "(i) Candidates who apply for admission on the prescribed form given at the end of this Brochure must present themselves in person along with original documents, fees etc. for admission on the date and time of the counselling as per schedule.
If a candidate fails to report to the Admission Committee with necessary documents at the time of his/her turn for counselling on the scheduled date, he/she shall forfeit his/her turn, but he/she may be considered against the seats available at the time of his/her reporting to Admission Committee with original documents on that scheduled date only.
(ii) Depending upon the availability of seats in various Colleges/disciplines and the preferences indicated in the Choice Pro forma submitted by the candidates, efforts would be made to allot the discipline/college in order of preference indicated by the candidates.
However, depending on the merit the candidates may not be getting their first few preferences and they should come prepared to make up their mind at the time of counselling and no subsequent change in the college/discipline will be allowed.
The candidate should, therefore, come prepared and should exercise his/her option with due care.
(iii) In case a candidate withdraws his/her admission, he/she will not be considered in the subsequent counselling.
(iv) Candidates who are selected will be required to deposit all original certificates at the time of counselling and these will subsequently be sent to the concerned Colleges.
These will be returned only on the cancellation of admission.
(v) The candidates, if selected, will be required to deposit fees, securities etc., on the spot in cash for non-payment seats and by Bank draft drawn in favour of Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, payable at the State Bank of India, REC Kurukshetra (Code 6260) for payment seats.
Fee in any other form will not be accepted.
(vi) After the admissions are over, the candidates will be governed by the rules and regulations of the College concerned and its affiliating University.
All matters relating to the admitted candidates will be dealt with by the respective Institute/College only.
(vii) Candidates who are absent on the day/date of their scheduled counselling will be considered only on the subsequent counselling for the vacant seats."
12.
As regards the vacant seats and re-adjustment of the branches, Admission Brochure prescribes as under :-  "(i) Seats falling vacant subsequently may be filled up on merit, from amongst the candidates having got no admission/declined admission earlier, in subsequent counselling(s) keeping in view the last date of admission of the concerned Institute and the joining period required.
(ii) Admission against such vacant seats will be made without branch allocation.
The branch to such candidates would be allotted later on by the RECK in respective category in order of merit on the criteria with which they were admitted.
(iii) The admission against vacant seats in the Colleges having payment seats will be made as payment seats only.
The readjustment of branches and shifting from payment to free seats, if required, may be allowed on merit as per rules by the RECK, after the counselling."
13.
A conjoint reading of the relevant provisions clearly shows that provision has been made for admitting the students only from amongst those candidates who took the entrance test.
There is no provision for admitting the students who did not take the entrance test.
The sliding would be effective upto a particular level but if still seats remained vacant it has to go the students, who got no admission/declined admission earlier, in subsequent counselling.
14.
With this backdrop, one can proceed with respect to the contentions (a) whether the petitioners have a better right to take those seats which had fallen vacant and remained unfilled in branches like Computer Engineering etc; and (b) whether the admission granted to the private respondents is valid.
15.
Strong reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Anand S Biji v. The State of Kerela and others, Judgments Today 1993(3) Supreme Court 130 : 1993(3) SCT 763 (SC).
In the cited case, a certain percentage of seats in the post graduate medical course were to be filled up on the basis of All India Competition.
The percentage was determined at 25%.
The Supreme Court has impressed upon the concerned authority the necessity of adhering to the time-frame.
According to the system in vogue, a candidate who applied for admission in the All India quota was required to indicate eight medical colleges and six subjects, in the order of preference, to which he sought admission.
There were seventy medical colleges/institutions and forty specialities.
After the results of the examinations were published, admissions were made on the basis of merit-cum- preference-cum-eligibility.
Many of the candidates did not turn up to join the course.
A second list was issued followed by third.
The Supreme Court noted that by the time second and third lists were communicated, half the course was over, The counselling system, in any case, was held to have come to stay.
The appellant in the cited case had appeared for All India Competitive examination.
He was not allotted any seat in any college.
His grievance was that the students with lesser marks were being admitted to college in Kerala.
The Supreme Court, keeping in view certain procedural delay and problems, gave certain directions and held as under :-  "Now coming to the relief to be granted to the appellant, we regret, we are not in a position to make any positive direction.
The appellant had appeared for All India competitive examination.
He was not allotted any seat in any college according to the merit-cum-preference-cum-eligibility.
His grievance now is that students with lesser marks than him are being admitted to colleges in Kerala.
He says that he may be given a seat in any subject in any of the colleges in Kerala or for that matter anywhere else.
We are afraid we cannot do so at this stage.
After the first, second and third lists pertaining to All India seats were published, the remaining vacant seats have been surrendered to the State Government already.
The State Government has already filled almost all of them.
We cannot withdraw one seat from the State Government, at this stage - the course has begun in the month of September, 1992 itself - and given it to the appellant.
Even otherwise it is not certain that there are no other candidates (who had appeared in the All India competitive examination) who may have scored higher marks than the appellant.
We cannot also give any direction for his being considered against the 1993 vacancies because he has not appeared for the 1993 examination.
The only observation we can make is this : if, in case, any seat is lying vacant in any of the medical courses in Kerala, the second respondent, Director of Medical Education, Thiruvananthapuram shall consider admitting the appellant against such seat relating to the year 1992."
16.
A similar question had been considered by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Anil Jain and others v. The Controller of Examinations, MDU, Rohtak and others, 1997(4) SCT 777 (P&H) : 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 88 (Pb.
& Hry.).
Herein, certain petitioners were successful in the entrance examination for admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses.
At the time of interview, they exercised their option.
Two seats in MS Orthopaedic fell vacant.
These seats were not offered to the petitioners.
These were filled up as per the option given.
It was held that the prospectus decides the rights of the candidates for admission to the course.
They could not put forth claim for admission to the additional seats which were created or to the seats which had fallen vacant subsequently.
17.
The position herein is also identical.
As per prospectus, once the admission after counselling has been completed, change in the discipline, indeed, would not be permitted.
This is for the added reason that from the time the admissions take place, the petitioners must have studied in a particular discipline.
Changing the discipline at this late stage would not be in their own interest.
Keeping in view the aforesaid facts, indeed the petitioners cannot ask that there should be a continuous process irrespective of the delay.
Once the admissions had taken place and they had taken a particular discipline, at this stage, the said request cannot be considered.
18.
However, as regards the private respondents, the matter should not be allowed to rest here irrespective of the fact whether the petitioners got their respective relief or not.
Once it has come to the notice of the Court that admissions have not been made in accordance with the Admission Brochure, the Court will not turn its back and shut its eyes to a fact that has come to its notice.
It was also the claim in the petition.
19.
Admittedly, the private respondents had not taken the entrance test.
Even if they had taken the test, they were not qualified.
Some seats in various disciplines, including certain very much sought after disciplines in the Engineering Colleges, which had fallen vacant had been offered to them.
On behalf of the private respondents, it was pointed out that they had scored well in 10+2 examination and are meritorious.
This Court is not expressing any opinion.
Indeed, merit, as per the Admission Brochure, is the sole criteria but the merit is in the entrance test.
As noted above, the basis of selection is on the basis of CEET conducted by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
There is no provision for admitting any other person.
Any other person so admitted by any other decision which is not as per Admission Brochure must be spurned and struck down to be arbitrary.
It violates the fundamental right of many others.
It violates Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.
20.
On behalf of the respondents, a plea was raised that if certain seats were not filled up, it would cause great harm to the private Engineering Colleges.
Indeed, if that be so, certain administrative measures can be taken.
Seats cannot be permitted to be filled up contrary to the method adopted in the Admission Brochure.
This Court is aware that the private respondents too have studied for almost a year in their respective colleges but when their admission by itself is void ab initio, allowing them on compassion would be perpetuating the illegality.
The same cannot stand scrutiny.
Instructions in this regard had been issued.
The copy of the same is Annexure R5/1.
It reads as under :-  "The last counselling was held on 7101998 to admit students to various unaided Engineering Colleges in Haryana.
In this counselling all the students who after appearing in CEET-98 and had applied to REC Kurukshetra for admission in various Engineering Colleges were called to take admission.
The candidates so called were from Haryana and from other States also.
Still in the following five unaided Engineering Colleges, all seats could not be filled up when every candidate whosoever had applied to REC Kurukshetra for admission was given a chance to take admission on 7101998.
The representatives of these colleges met the Principal, REC Kurukshetra and other officials of the Haryana Govt. Technical Education Deptt.
Based upon the approval of CTE, Haryana on the suggestions made by members of the Admission Committee, REC Kurukshetra, the following tentative seats may be filled up provisionally by the following Engineering Colleges as per guidelines by the Govt. of India and the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court : Sr. No. Name of the College CO EC&CE EC M E I&C PE 1.
HCTM, Kaithal 7 10 - 15 10 - - 2.
JIET, Jind 5 9 - 15 10 - - 3.
NCCE, Israna - 8 - 14 - - - 4.
HEC, Jagadhri - - 9 - - 15 - 5.
LIMT, Faridabad - - - 8 8 - - The sliding of the students other than the above shall be done by RECK after these admissions.
The above colleges are advised to make the admission on payments seats of their own keeping in view the minimum eligibility conditions as laid down by the concerned affiliating Universities."
21.
As noted above, this decision is obviously contrary to the Admission Brochure.
The decision per se, therefore, in allowing the admission to the candidates who had not taken the entrance test must be held to be invalid.
22.
For these reasons, the writ petition of the petitioners vis-a-vis to their claim to better disciplines is dismissed.
The admission of private respondents is also quashed.
It is directed that the private respondents shall be refunded their fees within 10 days from today.
Certain other private persons have not been impleaded as parties.
Relevant instructions shall be issued and after giving a necessary show cause notice and giving reasonable opportunity, decision be taken as per decision above.
If necessary, fees of all those students, who are similarly situated as private respondents in the present writ petition, shall be refunded.
Petition dismissed.