V Gopala Gowda, J - The petitioner has challenged the impugned orders at Annexure `F' and `J' dated 1331998 and 1971998 passed by the second respondent and further sought for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to admit the petitioner as an Advocate pursuant to his application submitted to the first respondent on 531998.
He has further sought for a direction to treat him as having been admitted as such from the month of March 1998, urging various factors and legal contentions.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that, he is a Bachelor of Law (Spl.)
from the Karnataka University and he claims that he is qualified for being enrolled for pre-enrolment training to become an Advocate.
Accordingly, he submitted an application to the first respondent on 531998.
The first respondent vide its letter dated 261998 informed the petitioner that the application of the petitioner is rejected and the matter is referred to the second respondent.
Along with the said letter, the impugned order at Annexure-F was sent to the petitioner.
3.
In the said impugned order, reliance was placed on Section 24-A of the Advocates Act, 1961 (in short "the Act") and held that the petitioner suffers from disqualification, therefore the first respondent has recommended to the 2nd respondent stating that the petitioner cannot be enrolled as an Advocate for a period of two years from 27101997.
According to the petitioner the charges against him in the disciplinary proceedings were grossly blown up and not properly gone into by the first respondent while holding that he suffers from disqualification for enrolment under Section 24-A of the Act.
It is further contended that, the first respondent has misdirected itself in holding that the petitioner suffers from disqualification even though the penalty of compulsory retirement was imposed that would not involve moral turpitude which is a question of fact.
Therefore, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioners the first respondent was not justified in holding that the petitioner has been involved in the charge of moral turpitude without hearing him.
Therefore, the impugned order passed by the first respondent is vitiated contending that Section 24-A has no application to the facts of the case.
After receipt of the letter and the impugned order, the petitioner has submitted representations on 561998, 1771998 vide Annexures `G' and `H' to the first and second respondents.
The 2nd respondent has confirmed the view taken by the first respondent on 1971998 itself.
Therefore, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner Sri PS Rajagopal that the first respondent has acted without authority of law, as it has not applied its mind and further the second respondent without examining the facts of the case independently it has endorsed the view taken by the first respondent by passing the impugned resolution.
The said resolution is also impugned in this writ petition.
He places reliance on Section 24 of the Act and the Rules which prescribes the qualification of a person to acquire the eligibility to enroll as an Advocate on the rolls of the first respondent-Council.
4.
Per contra, the first and 2nd respondents have filed a detailed counter, contending that, the petitioner while working as Divisional Commercial Superintendent under the Indian Railways at Bangalore he was subjected to the Disciplinary Enquiry and ultimately he was found guilty of misconduct and action was initiated against him for having the assets disproportionate to his known source of income.
It is further stated that a criminal case was registered in Crime No. 53/87 - BLR dated 31.12.1987 - and his residence was raided, ultimately by an order dated 3071997 as per Annexure-C an order of compulsory retirement was passed against him.
Further, the learned Counsel appearing for the respondents submits that the averment made by the petitioner in the Writ Petition that the petitioner was not subjected to moral turpitude is not tenable.
He further places reliance in the judgment of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1985 SC 1486 at para 151 for the proposition that, whenever the order of compulsory retirement is passed as a measure of penalty such order in substance amounts to removal of an employee or an Officer from service.
Therefore, the compulsory retirement amounts to penalty.
Therefore, in substance it amounts to removal of the petitioner from his service.
Therefore, the case of the petitioner will fall within the disqualification clause enumerated under Section 24-A of the Act.
Further, the appeal against the said order of compulsory retirement may be pending before the authority, until and unless the said order is either stayed or quashed, the order will be in force.
Therefore, the disqualification as prescribed under Section 24-A of the Act will be subsisting against the petitioner therefore, he is not entitled to be enrolled as an Advocate by admitting him on the Rolls of the Karnataka State Bar Council.
5.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner Mr. PS Rajagopal places strong reliance on the judgment of the apex Court reported in 1998 L & S 1156 with regard to the basic rules of interpretation of the statutes, wherein the Apex Court has held that, when the language used in the statute is unambiguous and on a plain grammatical meaning being given to the words in the statute, the end result is neither arbitrary, nor irrational nor contrary to the object of the statute, then it is the duty of the Court to give effect to the words used in the statute because the words declare the ntention of the law-making authority best.
In support of the said proposition of law, he has placed reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1994(5) SCC 110 and also judgment reported in AIR 1984 SC 505 for the proposition that the provisions of the statutes which would entail serious penal consequence shall be strictly interpreted by the Courts and the Statutory Authorities.
6.
The arguments of the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and the respondents were heard at length.
The question for consideration for this Court is (i) whether the order of compulsory retirement passed by the employer of the petitioner comes within the meaning of disqualification enumerated under Section 24-A of the Advocates Act of 1961 ?
and (ii) whether the impugned order passed and the resolution passed by the respondents 1 and 2 are in conformity with Section 24-A of the Act.
7.
To consider the first point, Section 24-A of the Advocates Act, 1961 s extracted as hereunder :  "24-A : Disqualification for enrolment :- (1) No person shall be admitted as an Advocate on a State roll :- (a) if he is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; (b) if he is convicted of an offence under the provisions of the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955); (c) if he is dismissed or removed from employment or office under the State on any charge involving moral turpitude."
8.
It is an undisputed fact that the petitioner's employer has initiated disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner with regard to the charge of acquiring assets disproportionate to his known source of income.
In the Departmental Enquiry proceedings, the petitioner has participated.
After affording fair and reasonable opportunity to him, the Enquiry Officer submitted the Enquiry report and in the enquiry report it has been held that the charges of misconduct of acquiring assets disproportionate to his known source of income has been established.
The relevant portion of the order at Annexure-C passed by the Joint Secretary (E), Railway Board which is extracted as herein below to appreciate the case of the petitioner :  "That Sri M.B.
Inamdar, while functioning as a public servant in various capacities in the Railways during the period from 28th November, 1961 to 8th January, 1988 has committed official misconduct inasmuch as he had acquired assets to the extent of Rs. 2,73,16752 which is disproportionate to his known source of income as detailed in the imputation of misconduct, and thereby violated Rule 3(1)(i) and (iii) of the Railway Services (Conduct) Rules, 1966."
9.
By reading a portion of the order referred to above, it is clear that the petitioner's services have been terminated by his employer by passing an order of compulsory retirement on the proved act of misconduct of acquiring assets disproportionate to his known source of income.
Whether the order of compulsory retirement would amount to dismissal or removal from employment as enumerated under Section 24-A of the Act to disqualify the petitioner for enrolment as an Advocate under the Act is required to be answered by this Court.
10.
The object of Section 24-A of the Act is to see that the persons who are dismissed or removed from employment on any charge of misconduct which involve moral turpitude shall not be permitted to be enrolled as Advocates on rolls of the first respondent.
The object of the Act is a laudable one to see that the persons who have fair and good record of service during their tenure of employment are permitted to be enrolled as Advocates as they appear before the Court of law for parties as their Agents to prosecute their cases.
It is pertinent to mention here at this stage that, the legal profession is a noble profession.
Having regard to the object of the Act, in the legal profession, the persons who have got bad track of service record shall not be admitted on the rolls of the first respondent-Council.
The Supreme Court dealing with a similar case in a case reported in AIR 1984 SC 1486 paragraph 151 has laid down the law in this regard.
The law laid down in the said case with all fours is applicable to the facts of this case.
The order of compulsory retirement passed against the petitioner would also tantamount to dismissal order for the purpose of Section 24-A of the Act.
11.
In this case, as I have already held, there is no ambiguity in Clause (c) of Section 24-A of the Act.
The order of compulsory retirement is passed on the basis of proved misconduct as stated earlier.
Further, by perusing the order of compulsory retirement, the petitioner has been removed from service as stated in Clause (c) of Section 24-A of the Act.
Therefore, this point has to be answered against the petitioner.
Therefore, the reason given by the first respondent is perfectly legal and valid hence, the same is well founded.
Further, the second respondent's resolution at Annexure-A is also legal and valid.
12.
In my considered view, this is not a fit case for this Court to exercise its discretionary power as the petitioner has suffered disqualification under Section 24-A of the Act.
Therefore, the petitioner must fail.
Accordingly, the Writ Petition is rejected.
Petition rejected.