SR Venkatesha Murthy, J - These two revisions are consolidated for purpose of disposal of a common order.
2.
By an order on IA III in OS No. 177 of 1988 the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Koppal, directed the revision petitioner-defendant to furnish security to the claim made in the two suits for Rs. 28,275/- and Rs. 35,950/- respectively.
Being aggrieved by the order, the revision petitioners have filed these Revisions.
The trial Judge in para-8 of the order found that the revision petitioner owned no immovable property within the jurisdiction of the Court.
All that the revision petitioner possessed was admittedly certain pensionary benefits received by him which were found to be unattachable under Section 60 CPC.
The trial Judge, however, while disposing of IA III called upon the revision petitioner to furnish security as aforesaid.
3.
Order 38 Rule 5 CPC enables a Court to attach property of a defendant before judgment on the ground that the defendant with intent to obstruct or delay the execution of the decree that may be passed against him, is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property or is about to remove the whole or part of his property from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.
In such a situation, the Court could call upon the defendant to furnish security in such a sum as may be specified in the order or to produce or place at the disposal of the Court as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish security.
Order 38 Rule 5(3) enables a Court to pass a conditional order of attachment of the whole or any portion of the property so specified.
4.
What was sought to be attached in these cases was unquestionably the pensionary benefits accruing at a future point of time which were exempt under Section 60 CPC.
Order 38 Rule 5 CPC postulates property belonging to the defendant which is capable of being attached.
If by law property sought to be attached is exempt, as in these cases, the Court would have to exclude such property from consideration while considering an application for attachment.
In other words, the word `property' occurring in Rule 5 Order 38 CPC would have been construed as `property' not exempt from attachment under any law.
Necessarily Section 60 CPC and such others laws as exempt property from attachment would have to be read into Rule 5 of Order 38 CPC, being consistent with the principles of interpretation of statutes.
If there is no property of the defendant, other than the one that is exempt of law from attachment, it is clear that Order 38 Rule 5 CPC cannot apply at all.
Muchless can it be said that dealing with such property exempted from attachment as an act of defeating or delaying the execution of a decree.
5.
An order made under Rule 5 of Order 38 CPC must be capable of being put into effect, where the defendant, being called upon to furnish security to cover the amount claimed in the plaint, fails to do so.
A conditional order under Order 38 Rule 5 CPC requires the defendant to either to furnish security for the suit claim or suffer attachment of his property which is legally attachable.
When there is no property of the defendant capable of attachment under law, an order calling upon the defendant to furnish security or suffer attachment of property becomes incapable of obedience rendering the order of the Court ineffective.
Existence of some of property of the defendant which is capable of being attached is a necessary condition for invocation of Order 38 Rule 5 CPC.
6.
Section 94 CPC which is the empowering provision relating to supplemental proceedings to prevent the ends of justice being defeated, reads as follows :  "94.
Supplemental proceedings : In order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated the Court may, if it is so prescribed :- (a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the court to show cause why he should not give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply with any order for security, commit him to the civil prison; (b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property; (c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to the civil prison and order that his property be attached and sold; (d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and selling his property; (e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient."
(emphasis supplied) It is clear that in respect of the enumerated situation, rules could be and are required to be, framed to enable the Courts regulating the exercise of that power.
7.
Section 94(b) is the source of power and the relevant rules are laid down in Order 38 Rule 5 CPC and allied rules.
If Rule 5 of the Order 38 CPC becomes inapplicable, as in this case, there is no other provision in the CPC, which could be invoked to call upon a defendant who is not shown to possess any property capable of attachment, to furnish security for the claim made in the plaint and the mode of enforcing compliance with such an order.
8.
The other enabling provision is Section 94(e) of the CPC.
But there is no rule in the first schedule to CPC, enabling a Court to pass such order as could cover situation like the one on hand.
9.
The only other source of power that could be thought of is Section 151 CPC.
The limits of the exercise of the power under Section 151 CPC, is clearly defined M/s. Ram Chand and Sons Sugar Mills Pvt. Limited v. Kanhaya Lal, 1966(3) SCC 856 : AIR 1966 SC 1899 and the relevant portion reads as follows :  "Having regard to the said decisions, scope of the inherent power of a Court under Section 151 of the Code may be defined thus : The inherent power of a Court is in addition to and complementary to the powers expressly conferred under the Code.
But that power will not be exercised if its exercise is inconsistent with, or comes into conflict with, any of the powers expressly or by necessary implication conferred by the other provisions of the Code.
If there are express provisions exhaustively covering a particular topic, they give rise to a necessary implication that no power shall be exercised in respect of the said topic otherwise than in the manner prescribed by the said provisions."
It is clear that where the property of a defendant is exempt from attachment under 60 CPC and when there is no other property capable of being attached, there is no way by which the defendant could be called upon to furnish security for the claim made in the plaint by invoking Section 151 CPC, without infraction of the protection under Section 60 CPC.
10.
In these circumstances, the orders of the trial Court merely calling upon the defendant to furnish security for amounts claimed in the respective plaints are without jurisdiction.
The revisions are entitled to succeed and are allowed setting aside the direction to the defendant to furnish security for the amounts claimed in the concerned plaints.
Revisions allowed.