VM Jain, J - The petitioners who are employees of the Haryana State Electricity Board (now Haryana Vidyut Parsaran Nigam) were employed as Boiler Operators.
On January, 15, 1996, their designation was changed from Boiler Operators to Thermal Supervisors Grade-II.
On February 9, 1981, the respondent-Board issued an office order, copy Annexure P-1, to the effect that "henceforth Line Superintendents; Technical Assistants; Substation Operators; Sectional Officers (Civil); Thermal Supervisors; Thermal Operators; Telephone Supervisor Test Inspectors and Installation Inspectors etc. will be uniformly designated as Junior Engineers in their respective fields of specialisation".
It was further provided that the existing Engineers will be designated as Junior Engineers, Grade-I All the petitioners are presently posted at Panipat with the Haryana Power Generation Corporation Ltd, a sister concern of Haryana Vidyut Parsaran Nigam.
2.
Some of the Boiler Operators/Turbine Operators namely Dharamvir Sharma etc. who were working in the Thermal Plant, Faridabad took the matter to the Labour Court with regard to their designation as Junior Engineers.
The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Faridabad, vide award dated August 2, 1996 held as under :-  "I hold that the present claimants are entitled to be treated at par with other Operators who were re-designated as Junior Engineers and they are entitled to the pay scales available to those Junior Engineers from time to time, from the date when those others were given these benefits."
A copy of the said award has been annexed as Annexure P-15.
The Haryana State Electricity Board, challenged the said award dated August 2, 1996 in this Court by way of civil writ petition No. 7952 of 1997.
The same was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated May 30, 1997, copy Annexure P-16, by holding that "the award is well reasoned.
No interference is .......... in writ jurisdiction".
Dissatisfied, the Haryana State Electricity Board filed a special leave petition before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the same was also dismissed on November 10, 1997 copy Annexure P-17.
3.
Since no order was passed on various representations filed by the petitioners for being re-designated as Junior Engineers, they filed civil writ petition Nos. 15541 of 1998 in this Court and a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated September 29, 1998 directed respondent No. 2 in the said writ petition to deal with the representation dated April 21, 1998 (which is Annexure P-18 in the present writ petition), and pass appropriate orders as expeditiously as possible preferably within two months from the date a copy of the order is received by him.
In pursuance thereof, the Chief Engineer, Panipat Thermal Power Station, vide office order dated December 1, 1998, copy Annexure P-25, rejected the representation of the petitioners dated April 21, 1998 vide which they had requested for the change of their designation from Thermal Supervisors-II to Junior Engineers.
It is this order dated December 1, 1998 which is under challenge on behalf of the petitioners in the present writ petition.
4.
While rejecting the claim of the petitioners vide order dated December 1, 1998 the Chief Engineer had taken the stand that on February 9, 1981, when the instructions were issued, the petitioners were working as Boiler/Turbine Operators on work charge basis and it was only subsequently with effect from January 15, 1986, that their services were regularised as Thermal Supervisor-II.
It was also found that the other Boiler/Turbine Operators of Faridabad Thermal Power Station who were designated as Junior Engineers under the orders of the Labour Court which was upheld upto the Hon'ble Supreme Court (sic) were working as Boiler/Turbine Operators on regular basis as on February, 9, 1981.
It was also found that at the time when the petitioners were regularised as Thermal Supervisors-II with effect from January 15, 1986, it was done on the recommendation of the Screening Committee which has relaxed the minimum qualification of Diploma in their case.
5.
In the written statement, the respondents have taken a similar stand as was taken by the Chief Engineer in the order dated December 1, 1998.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
A perusal of the office order dated February 9, 1981, Annexure P-1, would show that after this date, various Supervisors/Operators, Installation Inspectors etc. would be uniformly designated as Junior Engineers.
The said office order dated February 9, 1981 was operative prospectively.
If the petitioners were working as Boiler Operators on work charge basis as on February 9, 1981, as alleged by the respondents and were regularised as Thermal Supervisors-II, the petitioners in the case in hand were entitled to be re-designated as Junior Engineers with effect from January 15, 1986, the day their services were regularised.
The plea taken by the Chief Engineer in the order dated December 1, 1998 that since the present petitioners were not working as Boiler Operators on February 9, 1981, they could not be re-designated as Junior Engineers, appears to be without any basis.
As referred to above, the office order dated February 9, 1981 is operative prospectively and after this date, all Line Superintendent; Technical Assistant; Substation Operators, Sectional Officers, Supervisors/Operators and Inspectors etc. were to be uniformly designated as Junior Engineers in their respective field of specialisation.
Once the minimum qualification of Diploma was relaxed in the case of the petitioners while regularising them as Turbine Supervisors-II, with effect from January, 15, 1986, it could not be said that the petitioners were not eligible to be redesignated as Junior Engineers.
8.
By denying the designation of Junior Engineers, the petitioners have been discriminated with those Boiler/Turbine Operators who were working in the Thermal Plant, Faridabad, and in whose case the Labour Court had given a direction that they are to be redesignated as Junior Engineers.
In our opinion there is absolutely no difference between the case of the petitioners and the case of Boiler/Turbine Operators who have been designated as Junior Engineers.
9.
In view of the above, the office order dated December 1, 1998, copy Annexure P-25, is quashed and it is directed that the petitioners shall be redesignated as Junior Engineers with effect from the date their services were regularised.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.