Dr.B S Chauhan, J - The instant writ petition has been filed for restraining the Rajasthan State Mines & Minerals Ltd from giving appointment to any person on the post of Helper without making proper advertisement of the vacancies, or without following the procedure prescribed under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (for short, "the Act, 1961").
2.
The facts and circumstances giving rise to this case are that petitioner completed apprenticeship in 1991 and his grievance is that respondents have adopted a very unusual method of giving appointment to the wards of the employees without advertising the vacancies after giving some sort of training which is not according to the Act, 1961 and the names have not been called from the Employment Exchange as is mandatory under the provisions of the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification) Act.
3.
Respondent No. 1 is an instrumentality of the State and may be a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, but at the same time, as it is performing the non-regal/non-sovereign function which can be alienated in favour of private persons, it is an `industry' also.
Therefore, the issue of appointment/employment must be governed by the Certified Standing Orders.
As per the petitioner, every public undertaking is required to convey its need to the concerned District Employment Exchange.
The District Employment Officer, in his turn, is required to recommend the names of eligible candidates strictly in order of seniority in the ratio of 1 :20.
Necessary instructions issued in this regard by the Government of India in the National Employment Service Manual (Vol.
I), in para 916 run as under :-  "A candidate should be submitted, from the Annual List strictly, in order of seniority in the ratio of 1 :20 in case of public sector vacancies.
The State Directors may, however, have discretion to raise this ratio, in case it is considered necessary, in case of local conditions if so demanded.
However, in each case, a scheme of selection should be preferred on the basis of prescribed qualifications, experience, age etc. and the applicant is to be selected in order of seniority from the Annual List fulfilling the criteria in the scheme of selection."
As the Standing Orders have not been placed on record, it is not possible to hold whether Certified Standing Orders provide for any kind of employment to the wards of the employees and for that, reference can be made to Section 2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, "the Act, 1947"), which includes disputes regarding employment or non-employment or terms of employment of the conditions of labour of any person.
Therefore, whether `any person' includes the wards of the employees, is required to be considered.
4.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Workmen of Dimakuchi Tea Estate v. Management of Dimakuchi Tea Estate, AIR 1958 SC 353, considered the issue whether `any person' includes a person who is not a workman, and held that `any person' means not necessarily a workman but must be one in whose employment, non-employment, terms of employment or conditions of labour, the workman has a close, direct or substantial interest.
5.
The issue raised herein is whether the posts can be filled-up without issuing advertisement or without calling the names from employment exchange ?
In view of the law laid down in Excise Superintendent v. K B N Vishweshara Rao, (1996) 6 SCC 216; Raj Kumar & Ors. v. Shakti Raj & Ors., (1997) 9 SCC 527 : 1997(2) SCT 76 (SC); Arun Trivedi v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak Sangh, AIR 1998 SC 331, the ratio is that in urgent situation, even the names can be called from employment exchange but in general, vacancies should be advertised in addition to calling the names from the employment exchange, also.
In case of grave urgency, names may be called from employment exchange only.
In the instant case, the grievance has been raised that neither the names are being called from the employment exchange nor vacancies are being advertised.
6.
In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, AIR 1992 SC 2030 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that a post, even ad-hoc or temporary, must be filled-up by issuing an advertisement or sponsoring the names from the employment exchange by adopting some appropriate method consistent with the requirement of Article 16 of the Constitution, meaning thereby that there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto, should be considered fairly.
This view has further been reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ram Kumar (supra), Prabhat Kumar Sharma & Ors. v. State of UP & Ors., (1996) 10 SCC 62 : 1997(1) SCT 340 (SC); JAS Inter College, Khurja, UP & Ors Lv.
State of UP & Ors., (1996) 10 SCC 71.
7.
In reply, Mr. RP Dave has submitted that the wards have been given a training though not exactly under the Act, 1961 but in a similar manner and giving this kind of employment, even if not consistent with the Standing Orders, is permissible as per the law laid down Hon'ble Supreme in UPRSRTC and Anr. v. U.P.
Parivahan Nigam Sushikshit Berozar Sangh & Ors., AIR 1995 SC 1115.
I am afraid, the ratio of the said judgment is not applicable in this case at all.
What the Hon'ble Supreme Court has stated therein is that in absence of any agreement under Section 22 of the Apprenticeship Act, Trade Apprentice may be given preference in employment `other things being equal.'
The judgment speaks only for preferential right, therefore, there can be no preference amongst unequals.
It is only when all conditions/qualities/qualifications are equal, the preference can be given to those persons.
8.
In Mitrangshu Roy Choudhary v. Union of India, (1999) 3 SCC 649 : 1999(2) SCT 676 (SC), the Apex Court held that in absence of an agreement under Section 22 of the Act, 1961, even if the Rules provide for 25% posts to be offered to the successful trade apprentices, they cannot claim the same as a right.
9.
In Executive Officer v. E Tirupalu & Ors., (1996) 8 SCC 253 : 1996(2) SCT 851 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that where rules provide for preference to a particular class of candidates, that preference under the Rules cannot be applied irrespective of the merit of candidates, the inmates have to be given appointment.
It means that the merit of the candidates being equal, preference would be given to the inmates of the class which is to be given preferential right and it certainly does not mean an automatic appointment without considering the cases of other candidates.
Therefore, even if it is provided for a preferential right, they have a preferential right only when they compete with other candidates and are found on equal footings, otherwise not.
10.
There is no force in the submission made by Mr. Dave that the agreement reached with employees union is to maintain the industrial peace for the reason that this kind of agreement amounts to holding the society on ransom.
In a public sector undertaking, the agreement, if any, must be in consonance with law.
Such agreement is violative of the mandatory provisions enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
11.
It is settled proposition of law that there is not much difference in the case of employment in public sector undertakings or in the State Government or State Instrumentalities.
A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kripal Singh M.L.A.
v. Uttam Singh, AIR 1986 SC 300, has dealt with the case of employment in Life Insurance Corporation of India and the Court observed that employees of public corporations cannot be treated differently from employees of the Government.
Though the Court did not decide the issue at the threshold but these observations are enough to show the nature of employment in public sector undertaking and because of the expanding horizon of the public sector undertakings, the employees of public sector undertakings have to be treated as Government employees for various purposes if not for all.
12.
Thus, in view of the above, respondents are restrained to have any kind of reservation/preference for the wards of its employees either for providing training/apprenticeship or for employment; as the first one will be violative of Article 14 and the another one of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It there is any agreement or certified standing order to the said effect, it is to be ignored being illegal and invalid and, hereinafter, neither the training nor appointment shall be made to any person without calling names from the Employment Exchange in addition to public advertisement, without, giving any preferential right to any person whatsoever except those who are covered by the reservation policy implemented by the Central Government/State Government/respondent undertaking, if any.
13.
In view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, the persons appointed already by the respondents in contravention of the law, may not be disturbed as they are not party before the Court though the interim order was modified to the extent that their appointment shall be subject to decision of the writ petition and the petitioner, if he has become over-aged, shall be given relaxation in age, to be considered for appointment whenever the next advertisement is made.
14.
With these observations, the writ petition stands disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.