DP Sarkar-II, J - This FMA is directed against the Judgment and Order passed by Hon'ble Mr. Justice SK Hazari on 9.7.92 in the writ petition No. C.O.
3788(W) of 1992 filed by the Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 as petitioners.
2.
The learned Trial Court allowed the prayer of the petitioners and directed the State-Appellants to release their salaries.
3.
On being aggrieved, the State-Appellants have filed this Appeal, inter alia, on the grounds that the Ld.
Trial Judge ignored the relevant rules and facts.
Thus, in short, the only question to be decided by this Appellate Bench is whether the order passed by the Ld.
Trial Judge suffers from any illegality or not.
But in order to assess the merit of the Appeal it is necessary very much to look at the background which is delineated below.
4.
The petitioner-respondents Nos. 1 & 2 were appointed as Assistant Teachers by the Managing Committee of Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary situated at 25, LN Kabiraj Road, Garifa, 24-Pgs.
(North).
The respondent No. 1-Smt. Gitashree Chatterjee was appointed w.e.f 1.3.76 and respondent No. 2-Smt. Santwana Chakraborty was appointed w.e.f.
1976 against vacancies caused by the resignations of two other Assistant Teachers who were approved teachers of that school.
The school was started initially at 106, AT Ghosh Road, Garifa with four Organiser teachers viz. Smt. Kayani Mukherjee, Sri Suresh Pandey, Sri Bikram Pandey and Smt. Gayetri Roy.
When the school was functioning from that address it had applied for recognition of the school and approval of those four teachers.
Due to rise in the roll strength of the students there was paucity of accommodation and then MLA of that locality Mr. Tarapada Mukherjee by his letter Ext.
B requested the Managing Committee to shift the school to any other place having better accommodation and assured the Managing Committee to assist them in obtaining the recognition of the school.
In pursuance to that assurance, the school was shifted to 25, LN Kabiraj Road, Garifa.
At that time the order of approval of those four teachers was received from the District Inspector of Schools (Primary Education) and it was mentioned that the school was recognised w.e.f.
1.1.1973.
But those letters were addressed to the old address i.e. 106, AT Ghosh Road, Garifa.
The school authority approached the State-Appellants specially the DI of Schools (Primary Education) seeking permission ex post facto for shifting of the school from the old address i.e. from 106, AT Ghosh Road to 25, LN Kabiraj Road with the request to make future correspondence to the new address i.e. 25, LN Kabiraj Road.
The DI of Schools (Primary Education) intimated that the matter would be considered after inquiry by an Officer of his department.
It appears from Ext.
I that the Deputy Assistant Inspector of Schools, Naihati Circle by his Memo No. 77 dated 2831974 submitted a report to the DI of Schools (Primary Education), 24-Parganas with reference to the DPI's Recognition Memo No. 6932-SC/B dated 22.11.1973.
It appears further from the report that the Deputy AI of Schools inspected the Institution at 25, LN Kabiraj Road and examined the original approval letters of Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee, Sri Suresh Pandey, Sri Bikram Pandey and Smt. Gayetri Roy.
He also examined the Resolution Book and also examined the owner of the building i.e. at 25, LN Kabiraj Road and also enquired of the local people who all certified to the Officer concerned that Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary was running regularly and smoothly at 25, LN Kabiraj Road, Garifa since January, 1974 which was earlier located at 106, AT Ghosh Road, Garifa and he came to the conclusion that the Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary which was earlier situated at 106, AT Ghosh Road and the Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary which he found situated at 25, LN Kabiraj Road both were identical institutions.
But no response was given to the letter of the Managing Committee seeking permission for such shifting of the venue of the school.
In the meantime, another school under the same name was found to function at Gouripur Line and that Institution was also given recognition w.e.f.
1875.
5.
But the trouble started when those four recognised teachers viz. Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee, Sri Suresh Pandey, Sri Bikram Pandey and Smt. Gayetri Roy were not receiving their salaries from the DI of Schools.
Several representations were made by those teachers.
The Managing Committee also requested the DI of schools to release the salaries of those four approved teachers but to no effect.
Under these circumstances, Smt. Gayetri Roy and Sri Suresh Pandey had resigned and against those two approved vacancies the present petitioner-respondents were appointed as Assistant Teachers by the Managing Committee.
But Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee and Sri Bikram Pandey still continued in service as teachers in that Institution and were working at 25, LN Kabiraj Road.
Meanwhile, Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee filed a Writ Petition having failed to receive her salaries and ultimately Sri Bikram Pandey and Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee were directed to be absorbed in any other institution within that circle.
During the Writ Matter filed by Smt. Kalyani Mukherjee it was disclosed by the State-appellants that the Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary situated at 25, LN Kabiraj Road was de-recognised w.e.f.
5.1.76 and on that ground the approved teacher were not given any salary as they were working in an un-recognised Institution.
It appears from the record that the letter of de-recognition was never received by the Managing Committee of Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary situated at 25, LN Kabiraj Road.
Because the Managing Committee requested the DI of Schools (Primary Education ultimately for a duplicate copy also.
But even no duplicate copy was issued to the Managing Committee.
The act of such concealment is not far to seek of.
6.
It is clear from the facts admitted by the State-appellants that Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary was given recognition w.e.f.
1173 and according to them that recognition was withdrawn w.e.f.
5.1.76.
Thus, we find that the recognition of the said Institution continued from 1173 to at least 4176.
Side by side we find that another Institution under the same name at Gouripur Line was given recognition w.e.f.
1875.
Thus, we find, that from 1875 till 4176 two Institution by the same name in the same locality were working as recognised Institutions which is not permissible under the Rules.
Therefore, the old one of the original one was necessary to be hanged at the nearest light post and that was done by the State-appellants by withdrawing the recognition of the original Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at 25, LN Kabiraj Road w.e.f.
5.1.76 without giving any chance to that Institution to be heard, without assigning any ground for such withdrawal or asking the Managing Committee to show-cause as to why the Institution should not be de-recognised, and also without making any provision for existing teachers and students of that institution.
At this stage, it is clear that to protect the interest of the school under the same name viz. Nanda Shiksha Sadan was running parallel at Gouripur Line, the original Institution was de-recognised in order to cover up a partisan act of the State-appellants and to create a semblance of regularity by wiping out the recognition of one institution i.e. at 25, LN Kabiraj Road, and thus to justify the subsequent recognition to the Institution at Gouripur Line.
7.
The present respondent Nos. 1 & 2 also could not face any better luck than their predecessors in office so far as the payment of salaries is concerned.
Repeated correspondences and representations for salaries of those teachers were made before the State-appellants i.e. DI of Schools, D.P.I and so on by the petitioner-respondents Nos. 1 & 2 and also by the Managing Committee of the School where they were working since their appointment but to no effect.
The respondent Nos. 1 & 2 thus being disappointed in 1992 filed the present Writ Petition which passed through the hands of about half a dozen senior Judges of this Court.
First, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sushanta Chatterjee, as His Lordship was then, directed the DI of schools to consider the prayer sought for in the Writ Petition.
It appears that then DI of Schools did not find any wrong with the appointment of those two respondents and the services of those respondents were approved from the date of their appointment.
But the decision of the DI of Schools was not accepted by the Director of School Education (Primary) and after giving chance of hearing etc. that order was kept in abeyance until further orders on the ground that there was, prima facie, reason to believe that the School was not recognised one.
Thereafter, the present respondent Nos. 1 & 2 filed a petition for stay of that order and Hon'ble Mr. Justice KM Yusuf was pleased to grant the stay order thereby staying the operation of the order of the Director of School Education (Primary) keeping in abeyance the order of approval of the respondent Nos. 1 & 2.
8.
Ultimately, the Writ Matter was heard and disposed of by Hon'ble Mr. Justice SK Hazari passed the impugned order against which the State- appellants have filed Appeal.
The Appeal was first moved before Hon'ble Mr. Justice UC Banerjee.
His Lordship being a Judge of the Hon'ble Supreme Court now, sitting along with Hon'ble Mr. Justice Kalayanmon Ganguli and Their Lordships were also pleased to pass an order directing the State-appellants to release some amount towards salaries of the respondent Nos. 1 & 2.
Then due to change of determination, the Appeal went to the Bench of Hon'ble Mr. Justice BP Banerjee and Hon'ble Mr. Justice NN Bhattacharya.
The State-appellants made a prayer before that Bench for stay of operation of the order of payment as passed by the Ld.
single Judge but that prayer was outright rejected by the said Division Bench and the present Division Bench is the 3rd Division Bench to deal with this matter.
Against this background of facts and circumstances which unfailingly disclose a partisan attitude on the part of the State- appellants and also a clear tendency to violate the principle of natural justice, equity and reasonableness to perpetuate their ulterior motive of showing favour to the Institution at Gouripur Line.
9.
The principle of natural justice stands at the core of the administration of Justice.
The Judicial courts are not in existence to enforce the tenor of technicality of the Rules and Laws.
Its prime duty is to mete out natural justice to the aggrieved persons on the facts and circumstances of each case.
It is laid down by the Apex Court in Kapoor v. Jagmohan reported in (sic) 1981 SC at page 136 (para 16), the denial of opportunity of service of notice or hearing and also failure to furnish the affected person with information on which the action is based, amounts to violation of the principle of natural justice and equity.
It is true that hearing opportunity cannot be given in every case due to involvement of public interest and the security of the State.
But in the absence of such exceptional circumstances, the impugned order would be vitiated if there is no opportunity of being heard before the order is made.
Similar views have been laid down by the Apex Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Kamal reported in 1985(1) SCC page 234 (para 20) and also in the case of Ganapati v. A.D.M.
reported in 1985(1) SCC page 307 (para-10).
10.
It is further laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that presence of bias also attracts the principle of natural justice reported in the case of Andhra Pradesh SRTC v. Satya Narayan reported in AIR 1965 SC page 1303 (1306).
11.
Against this background of Decisions of the Supreme Court of India it is necessary to examine whether in the present case under Appeal there was any violation of the principle of natural justice.
12.
The first point that strikes me is that admittedly no notice was given to the Managing Committee and also no chance of hearing was given before derecognition.
This particular aspect clearly shows that the natural justice was violated by the State-appellants.
Again, from the facts it appears that the State-appellants acted against the original Institution situated at present at 25, LN Kabiraj Road with a bias.
Their consideration tilted towards the other Institution under the same name, which got recognition w.e.f.
1875.
I have already discussed above that for a particular period two Institutions under the identical name functioned in the same area with recognition given by the State-appellants and to meet this anomaly and irregularity the recognition of the original Institution which shifted to 25, LN Kabiraj Road was withdrawn violating the Rules and principles of natural justice and without assigning any reason.
The bias has becomes more evident from the fact that no alternative arrangements about the future of the students and teachers were made at the time of de-recognition.
At the time of argument it has been submitted by the Ld.
Advocates for the State-appellants that the recognition was withdrawn as there was fall in the roll strength of students.
But this fact has not been asserted by filing any affidavit in opposition.
Moreover, affidavit filed by the Deputy AI of Schools of the said circle viz. Ms. A Ghosh that the School was bifurcated for disputes in the Managing Committee of the original School.
Thus, the reasons stated for such withdrawal of recognition as given by the Ld.
Advocates at the time of argument and as mentioned in the affidavit of the Deputy AI of Schools are conflicting and contradictory.
Therefore, in effect no reasonable ground is found behind that act of withdrawing the recognition.
Ms. A Ghosh has stated in her affidavit that the School at 25, LN Kabiraj Road had no existence and it was non-functioning for a good long period.
But unfortunately the subsequent act of the State-appellants makes it clear that all the four organised teachers were there for a good long period although two of them resigned in 1976, the other two worked in that School even upto 1989 along with the respondent Nos. 1 & 2.
Thus, it is clear that the report of the Deputy AI of Schools Ms. A Ghosh is absolutely biased.
So, from all these facts there is hardly any doubt that the State-appellants violated the principle of natural justice.
13.
Let us now consider what would be the effect of the violation of principle of natural justice.
It is laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Chinta-Pallia Society v. Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh reported in AIR 1977 SC page 2313 that an order or a Decision passed in violation of the principle of natural justice is void ab initio.
Similar view has been reported by the same Apex Court in another Judgment in the case of Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India reported in AIR 1981 SC 818 (para-92).
Therefore, relying on those two decisions there is no other alternative but to hold that the order withdrawing the recognition of the School at 25, LN Kabiraj Road is an order void ab initio.
14.
It appears further that in pursuance to the direction given by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sushanta Chatterjee as His Lordship then was, the DI of Schools considered the matter very seriously and recommended for the approval of the respondent Nos. 1 & 2 as Assistant Teachers and he also recommended for the release of their salaries but as ill luck would have it, the Director of School Education by a subsequent order as mentioned above kept in abeyance the operation of the order of approval and release of salary only on the ground that the School at 25, LN Kabiraj Road was not recognised.
But this ground cannot stand the weight of reason because, admittedly, that Institution was the only Institution under that name at the relevant time i.e. 22.11.1973 on which the order of recognition was issued w.e.f.
5.1.76.
I have already discussed elaborately that the effect of such order of withdrawal, in the eye of law is nil as that order according to the law pronounced by the Apex Court of the country should be held as void.
15.
Although before the Ld.
Trial Court, this particular issue was not canvassed properly, nor the Trial Court dealt with that point clearly in its order but the implication of the impugned order leaves no scope for doubt that this question of recognition and de-recognition was at the root of all consideration by all the Judges through whose hands the matters passed since 1992 as discussed earlier in this Judgment.
16.
It may be argued that this particular point of recognition and de- recognition not being agitated by the respondents clearly and pointedly in their writ petition and this point not being clearly covered by the impugned Judgment the Appellate Court should not consider the point.
But the point of release of salary in favour of the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 depends absolutely on the question of their approval as assistant teachers and again the question of their approval depends on the question of recognition of the Institution by which they were appointed as assistant teachers and where they have been working as assistant teachers since 1976 till date.
The respondents have also produced xerox copies of the Attendance Register of the Institution which clearly show that the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 have been working in that Institution since their appointment without any break.
17.
It was the responsibility of the Managing Committee of the School at 25, LN Kabiraj Line to challenge the order of de-recognition on the background of facts and law discussed above.
The failure on the part of the Managing Committee to take such action in proper time should not debar the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 from claiming their share of justice.
For laches on the part of the Managing Committee these two innocent petitioners should not be penalised or allowed to suffer.
The point of recognition and de-recognition should not incidentally come in order to grant relief to the petitioner-respondents as prayed for.
The interim stay order granted by Hon'ble Mr. Justice KM Yusuf against the order of the Director of School Education keeping in abeyance thereby the order of approval issued by the DI of Schools should be made absolute and the order of approval passed by the State-appellants i.e. the DI of Schools, in favour of the petitioner- respondent Nos. 1 & 2 be also made absolute.
The petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 henceforth be treated as approved teachers duly approved by the appellant authority.
The recognition to the original Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at 25, LN Kabiraj Road should be restored from the date of alleged de- recognition.
At this stage, it is pointed out that the Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at Gouripur Line not being a party to the Writ Petition or to this Appeal in their absence the question of restoration of recognition to the Nand Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at Gouripur Line not being a party to the Writ Petition or to this Appeal in their absence the question of restoration of recognition to the Nand Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at 25, LN Kabiraj Road should not be considered.
I do not find any substance in this argument.
The recognition already granted to that Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at Gouripur Line w.e.f.
1875 is not going to be affected, because, it appears that it was fresh recognition to that Institution.
The term `fresh recognition' does not carry any meaning when the original School also enjoyed recognition at the time of passing of that order in August, 1975.
It should be treated as new recognition without reference to the recognition granted to the School at 25, LN Kabiraj Road w.e.f.
1173.
18.
In this connection, the observation of the Supreme Court in the case of Rabin Narayana Mahapatra v. State of Orissa, AIR 1981 SC 1286 is very much relevant.
In that case, the educational authorities refused to approve the appointment of the teacher inspite of the fact that the teacher had been working there for years being appointed by the Managing Committee and inspite of the repeated requests by the Managing Committee for approval of his appointment.
The Apex Court has laid down that under the Constitution the State is committed to ensure right to education for all citizens.
Bulk of population is yet illiterate and till the time the illiteracy is effaced from the country, irresolution enshrined in the preamble to the Constitution cannot be fulfilled.
Education is the dire need of the country.
There are neither enough schools nor teachers to teach.
Insecurity is writ large on the face of the teaching community, because of the nebulous and unsatisfactory conditions of service.
In order to make the existing educational set up effective and efficient, it is necessary to do away with ad hocism in teaching appointment.
19.
In the result, the Appeal is dismissed on contest but without cost.
The DI of Schools (Primary Education), 24-Parganas (North) and Director of School Education, District Council of Primary Education and the other appellants are hereby directed (i) to approve the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 as assistant teachers w.e.f.
their appointment, (ii) to regularise the service of the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 either to Nanda Shiksha Sadan Girls' Primary at 25, LN Kabiraj Road if and when its recognition is restored, otherwise to provide those two teachers to some other primary schools within Naihati Circle, or any other Circle nearby Naihati Circle, whichever is available earlier, (iii) to extend notional benefit of service w.e.f.
the date of their approval and also to release their salaries from the date of their posting or absorption.
20.
The petitioner-respondents by a petition relinquished their claims for arrears salaries.
Of course, considering the financial position of the State, such relinquishment of claim for arrears salaries will be a great relief to the State-exchequer.
Therefore, the State-appellants are hereby exempted from the liability of payment of lakhs of rupees as arrears salaries to these petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 provided the other directions given above and hereby be complied with within three weeks from the date of re-opening of this Court after long vacation or from the date of communication of this order to the State-appellants whichever is later.
21.
The petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2 shall not be asked by the State- appellants to refund the money they have already received from the State- appellants as their salary or arrears salary in pursuance to the order of the Court specially the order passed by the Ld.
Trial Judge.
The State-appellants are hereby restrained from making any attempt to realise the said amount from the petitioner-respondent Nos. 1 & 2.
The petition filed by the Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 is also hereby disposed of accordingly.
Appeal dismissed.