Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This matter has a chequered and long history.
The petitioner Dr. SN Chugh was transferred as a Lecturer to the Government Medical College, Rohtak on 31st October, 1980 on ad hoc basis.
His services were regularised as a Lecturer w.e.f.
Ist Decemeber, 1983, vide order dated 16th August, 1989.
The petitioners, thereafter, filed a suit for mandatory injunction against the State Government and the Medical College, Rohtak, on 7th October, 1991 seeking an order that his ad hoc services be taken into account while determining his seniority.
Dr. Nitya Nand-respondent No. 3 got himself impleaded as a defendant in the suit and filed a counter claim challenging the very transfer of Dr. Chugh to the Government Medical College, Rohtak.
2.
The trial Court after hearing the parties by its order dated 23rd March, 1994 on an application made under Order 39 Rule 2 CPC directed as under :-  "Resultantly, the present application is allowed and it is ordered that the Government i.e. defendant Nos. 1 and 2 shall maintain status quo regarding seniority, designation/re-designation between the plaintiff and the defendant No. 3.
The present application is disposed of accordingly."
Dr. Chugh, thereafter, preferred an appeal against this order.
This too was dismissed by the learned Addl.
District Judge, Rohtak on 12th August, 1995.
In the meanwhile, by order of the State Government issued on Ist December, 1994, the petitioner was re-designated as an Associate Professor from the post of Reader.
The order was in the following terms :-  "Order In pursuance of the provisions of Rule 9(i)(g)(ii) (Proviso) of Haryana Medical Service Rules, 1980 the Government of Haryana is pleased to re- designate Dr. SN Chugh, Reader in Medicine Department, Medical College, Rohtak, as Associate Professor in the pay-scale of Rs. 3000-5700 (of Teachers) in the same department with effect from 8121993.
Dated : Chandigarh  the December 1, 1994  Sd/- Raghibir Singh Commissioner & Secretary to Government Haryana, Health & Medical Education Department."
Defendant No. 3 Dr. Nitya Nand, thereafter, made an application under Order 39 Rule 2-A of the CPC praying that the respondents be punished for having violated the interim order dated 23rd March, 1994, whereby status quo had been ordered.
The trial Court vide its order dated 23rd March, 1996 observed that the aforesaid order had been grossly violated by the State Government, Dr. SS Yadav, the Director Principal of the College and by the plaintiff Dr. Chugh.
The Court, accordingly, directed Dr. Yadav to suffer 15 days civil imprisonment for violation of the injunction order dated 23rd March, 1994 and further directed that the order dated Ist December, 1994 be reversed.
Three separate appeals were filed against the order of the trial Court and these too were dismissed by the learned District Judge, Rohtak.
Two revision petitions are stated to have been filed in this Court i.e. one by Dr. Chugh and the other by Dr. SS Yadav.
Ony one petition is being disposed of by this judgment.
3.
It is the conceded position that as a consequence of the order of the trial Court in the application under Order 39 Rule 2-A of the CPC as affirmed by the learned lower Appellate Court, the State Government issued order dated 4th April, 1996 in the following terms :-  "In pursuance of the order passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Rohtak in Civil Suit No. 738 of 1991 dated 23rd March, 1996, the order regarding re- designation of Dr. SN Chugh from Reader to Associate Professor w.e.f.
8121993 issued vide number 1/91/93-IHB-IV dated 8121994 is hereby withdrawn.
However, such withdrawal would become automatically ineffective in case operation of the Civil Judge's order is stayed by some superior Judge."
It is, therefore, evident that the benefit, if any granted to the petitioner has been undone by the aforesaid order.
It is also the conceded position that while the present matter was still pending in this Court, the Civil Suit filed by Dr. SN Chugh the present petitioner as also the counter claim made by Dr. Nitya Nand have both been withdrawn and there is no litigation pending between the parties as of now.
4.
Mr. RS Mittal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has raised only one argument in the course of the hearing.
He has pointed out that the interim order dated 23rd March, 1994 had been misread by the trial as also by the lower Appellate Court as the order of the State Government dated Ist December, 1994 did not, in any manner, violative the Court's order.
To my mind, the argument raised by Mr. Mittal has merit.
A reading of the interim order dated 23rd March, 1994 would reveal that status quo regarding seniority, designation/redesignation was to be maintained between the plaintiff (Dr. SN Chugh) and defendant No. 3 (Dr. Nitya Nand).
It is evident from the order dated Ist December, 1994 that no change with regard to any of these factors inter se Dr. SN Chugh and Dr. Nitya Nand had been made as Dr. Nitya Nand was a Professor in the Medical College, whereas Dr. Chugh had been redesignated as an Associate Professor.
To my mind, no cloud or obstacle had been created in the way of Dr. Nitya Nand as a consequence of this order.
It is also to be borne in mind that the litigation between the two doctors has since been withdrawn and Dr. Nitya Nand respondent No. 3 is presently continuing as a Professor in the Medical College, Rohtak, whereas the petitioner continues to languish as a Reader as a consequence of the orders passed in the present proceedings, they being independent of the proceedings in the suit.
5.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed, the orders of the Courts below are set aside and the application filed by Dr. Nitya Nand under Order 39 Rule 2-A of the CPC is dismissed.
The authorities will now consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion etc. without being influenced by any observations made in this order as the same have been made only for the purpose of the disposal of this revision petition.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.