G S Singhvi, J - Whether the State Government can compel the private colleges to implement the policy of reservation of seats in favour of the candidates of Scheduled Castes, Backward Class etc. is the question which arises for adjudication in these petitions.
2.
The facts relevant to the decision of these petitions are that Technological Institute of Textile, Bhiwani which was taken over by petitioner-Technological Institute of Textile and Sciences, Bhiwani in 1961- 62, was established in 1943.
At that time, it was a privately managed unaided institute, a character which it has retained till today.
Presently, it is affiliated with Maharishi University, Rohtak (hereinafter described as `MD University') and is approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (for short described as AICTE).
3.
BRCM College of Engineering and Technology, Bhiwani (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 11050 of 1999) was established in 1997 by Balram Hanuman Dass Charitable Trust, Bhiwani.
The Director, Technical Education, Haryana has issued `no objection certificate' to the setting up of new Engineering college and AICTE has granted its approval in accordance with the provisions of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') read with All India Council for Technical Education (norms and guidelines for fees and guidelines for admissions in professional colleges) Regulations, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as `the Regulations').
It is also affiliated provisionally with MD University.
4.
The grievance of the petitioners is that even though being privately managed unaided institutions, they are not under any legal compulsion to make reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes etc., the Government of Haryana is compelling them to do so.
In this respect, reference has been made to the instructions circulated by letter No. 22/34/98-3GIII issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana to all Heads of Departments, Haryana State and the Educational Institutions.
They have prayed that the impugned circular be declared ultra vires to the provisions of the Act and the Regulations and respondent Nos. 1 to 3 be restrained from giving effect to the same.
5.
In the written statements filed by them through Shri K. M. Nath, Joint Director (Admn.
), Directorate of Technical Education, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have made reference to Section 10(e) of the Act.
Regulation 9 of the Regulations, the conditions subject to which `NOC' was granted by the Director, Technical Education and affiliation granted by MD University to show that the petitioners have voluntarily accepted the condition that they will follow the State Government policy for admission of Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of the society.
They have pleaded that after having agreed to abide by the policy framed by the State Government, the petitioners cannot turn around and challenge the directions issued by the Government for reservation of seats for the candidates of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and other reserved categories.
6.
Section 10(e) of the Act and Regulation 9 of the Regulations on which reliance has been placed by the respondents read as under :  "Section 10(e) of the Act.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  Functions of the Council 10.
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards and for the purposes of performing its functions under this Act.
The Council may : xx xx xx xx  (e) formulate schemes for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and weaker sections of the society;  xx xx xx xx  "Regulation 9 of the Regulations.
9.
Reservations :- (i) it shall be open to a professional college to provide for reservation of seats for candidates belonging to weaker sections of society in accordance with the rules of the Central Government or the State Government as the case may be.
(b) Admission to reserved seats shall be made on the basis of merit."
7.
Condition No. 8 incorporated in the letter dated 2241997 (Annexure R.2 in C.W.P.
No. 9945 of 1999) issued by AICTE, Clause 4 of the `NOC' issued by the Director, Technical Education in favour of BRCM College of Engineering and Technology and clause (xii) of the letter dated 281999 (Annexure R.5 in C.W.P.
No. 11050 of 1999) issued by Dean, College Development Council, MD University are also extracted below :  "Condition No. 8 of the letter dated 2241997  8.
The State Government policies for admissions of SC/ST, other weaker sections of society etc., shall be followed by the Institution."
"Clause 4 of the `NOC' 4.
The Management will follow the conditions laid down by the State Government regarding reservation for weaker sections of the society towards free seats as well as paid seats."
"Clause (xii) of the letter dated 281999  (xii) The college shall follow the mode of selection of candidates for admission as approved by the State Government/University/CEET."
8.
Shri Narottam Kaushal argued that respondent Nos. 1 to 3 cannot compel the petitioners to implement that policy framed by the State Government for making reservation of seats in favour of the candidates of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes etc. because the petitioners are neither managed/controlled by the Government nor they are receiving grant-in-aid and the provisions of the Act and the Regulations do not contain any mandate for reservation of seats for the candidates of reserve categories.
He invited our attention to the observations made by the Supreme Court in paragraph 170 of the judgment in Unni Krishnan J. P. & Others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others, AIR 1993 SC 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) and argued that the insistence of the Government that the petitioners should give effect to its policy of reservation is based on misreading of those observation.
Shri Kaushal submitted that the Apex Court had given liberty to the privately managed colleges to make reservation for the candidates of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and there is nothing in the said judgment which can be treated as a mandatory direction for implementing the policy of reservation by the privately managed unaided institutions.
In support of his argument, learned counsel also relied on the judgment of the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 11915 of 1998 - Educate India Society (Regd.)
v. State of Haryana and Others, 1999(3) SCT 452 (P&H).
Shri Jaswant Singh argued that the petitioners cannot wriggle out of their obligation to reserve the seats for the candidates of Scheduled Castes/Backward Class and other categories in terms of the instructions issued by the Government because they had voluntarily agreed to abide by the policy to be framed by the Government for weaker sections of the society.
He further argued that even as per Section 10(e) of the Act and Regulation 9 of the Regulations, the petitioners are bound to reserve the seats for Scheduled Castes etc.  9.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and have carefully perused the judgment of the Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra) and of the learned Single Judge in Education India Society Regd.
's case (supra).
Paragraph 170 of the judgment of Unni Krishnan's case contains the scheme evolved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court for admissions in the professional courses.
Clause (2) thereof reads as under :  "It shall, however, be open to a professional college to provide for reservations of seats for constitutionally permissible classes with the approval of the affiliating University.
Such reservations, if any, shall be made and notified to the competent authority and the appropriate authority at least one month prior to the issuance of notification calling for applications for admission to such category of colleges.
In such a case, the competent authority shall allot students keeping in view the reservation provided by a college.
The rule of merit shall be followed even in such reserved categories."
10.
In our view, the above extracted observations of the Apex Court could not be read as anything else than enabling the privately managed unaided professional colleges to provide for reservation of seats for constitutionally permissible classes with the approval of the affiliating University and by no stretch of imagination, the same can be read as imposing a mandatory duty on such institutions to make reservations for the candidates of specified classes.
Section 10(e) of the Act empowers AICTE to formulate scheme for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and weaker sections of the society.
This means that AICTE can formulate appropriate policy and make it mandatory for the privately managed unaided college to reserve certain percentage of seats for women, handicapped and weaker sections of the society which may include Scheduled Castes, Backward Class etc.
However, there is nothing in the language of the said section from which it can be inferred that even in the absence of a scheme framed by AICTE, such institutions are bound to provide for reservation in favour of women, handicapped and weaker sections of the society.
Any doubt in this respect must be treated as cleared by Regulation 9 of the Regulations which begins with the words "it shall be open to a professional college to provide for reservation of seats..." This shows that AICTE has given an option to the professional colleges to provide for reservation of seats and has not imposed any obligation upon such colleges to make reservation of seats.
If the intention of AICTE was to make it obligatory for the privately managed unaided professional colleges to provide for reservation, then the language of Regulation 9 would have been altogether different.
11.
The learned Single Judge has, while dealing with this aspect of the matter in the case of Educate India Ltd (Regd.)
(supra), observed as under :  "To my mind, Regulation 9(1) is a mere derivative of the parent paragraph of the judgment and cannot, therefore, be read in isolation.
The learned Advocate General's argument that Regulation 9(1) was to be read as giving only a limited choice to a private college, inasmuch as, it could accept the Central Government Rules or the State Government Rules on the issue would, thus, be doing violence to the very clear directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
It needs to be reiterated that the petitioner is a wholly unaided and self- financing body and it is to such Institutions that the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case have been made applicable.
The learned Advocate General has finally pointed out that the petitioner had been granted approval by the Council vide letter dated 18th July, 1996 Annexure R3 in terms of General Conditions for approval and condition No. 8 specifically provided that the State Government Policy for admission of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes categories and other weaker sections of the society, was to be followed by it.
He has also argued that Annexure R.4 dated 25th April, 1996, by which the Guru Jambeshwar University, Hissar, had granted affiliation to the petitioner also stipulated (in clause 17) that admissions would be made as per the policy of the Government and that if any condition was violated, affiliation could be withdrawn.
Special reference has, however, been made by the learned Advocate General to Anexure R.5, the undertaking dated 1391995 given by the chairman of the petitioner society that admissions would be made as per the State Government instructions.
The learned Advocate General has also relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court on Gulmohar Estates Limited and Others v. State of Haryana and Another, 1997(3) RCR(Civil) 415 (P&H) : 1997(2) P.L.R.
547 in support of his case to contend that once having accepted certain conditions of approval and affiliation, the petitioner could (not)be permitted to wriggle out of them.
Mr. Sarin has, however, controverted the arguments advanced and had pointed out that conditions for approval or affiliation being contrary to the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court could not bind the petitioner.
There appears to be merit in Mr. Sarin's assertion in the light of the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court quoted above and Regulation 9(1).
It is apparent therefrom that it was not open to the respondents to even impose such a clause before approval or affiliation or a `No Objection Certificate (as the case may be) could be granted' to the petitioner and, in fact, such a condition if enforced, would have the effect of violating the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra), is wholly inapplicable on facts and does not advance the respondents' case.
The learned Advocate General has finally argued that paragraph 170 of the report itself postulated that in addition to the guidelines laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment, it was open to the appropriate Government and the authorities granting recognition and affiliation to impose such other conditions in addition as may be appropriate.
He has, accordingly, urged that it was open to the State Government to lay down at policy of reservation in the light of the liberty granted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
This argument, to my mind, is also without substance.
After sub-paragraph (9) of paragraph 170, it has been further clarified that it would be open to the appropriate and the competent authority "to issue such further instructions or directions, as they may think appropriate not inconsistent with the scheme by way of elaboration or elucidation".
These words, crystal clear as they are, grant liberty to issue directions which are not inconsistent with the scheme and only if such directions are by way of elaboration or elucidation.
The interpretation suggested by the learned Advocate General is, to my mind, contrary to the explicit directions in Unni Krishnan's case (and not in elucidation or elaboration thereof) and if accepted would make the order of this Court inconsistent with the observations and guidelines of the Hon'ble Supreme Court."
12.
We fully endorse the views expressed by the learned Single Judge and hold that respondent Nos. 1 to 3 cannot compel the petitioner to reserve the seats for the candidates of specified classes as indicated in the instructions circulated vide letter dated 1931999.
13.
For the reason mentioned above, the writ petitions are allowed.
It is declared that the petitioners are not under obligation to make admissions by reserving seats in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular dated 1931999.
The consequential direction given by the Director, Technical Education, Haryana requiring the petitioners to make reservation of seats of the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes etc. are declared illegal and quashed.
However, it is made clear that this order of ours shall operate prospectively, i.e, for the session 2000-2001 and the admissions already made shall not be disturbed.
It is also made clear that AICTE shall be free to issue guidelines for making reservation of seats for woman, physically handicapped and weaker sections of the society including Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes etc. in accordance with Section 10(e) of the Act and in that event, the petitioners shall be bound to reserve the seats in accordance with such guidelines.
Petition allowed.