RL Anand, J - Unsuccessful plaintiff Nafe Singh has filed the present appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 1511980 passed by Addl.
District Judge, Karnal, who accepted the appeal of the State of Haryana and set aside the judgment and decree dated 30.5.1979 passed by Sub Judge IInd Class, Karnal, who decreed the suit of plaintiff Nafe Singh for declaration as prayed for.
2.
The brief of the case are that Nafe Singh filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 221976 passed by the Director of Agriculture, Haryana by which the services of the plaintiff were terminated was illegal and the said order had been passed by way of punishment casting a stigma upon him and against the rules of natural justice and as such the said order is void ab initio.
The case set up by the plaintiff before the trial Court was that he was appointed as Stipendiary Junior Scientific Assistant on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana by the order of Director of Agriculture, Haryana dated 26101973.
On completion of training, he was appointed as temporary Junior Scientific Assistant against a temporary post which was sanctioned upto 2821975, but this post was likely to continue vide order dated 7.10.1974 passed by the Director of Agriculture, Haryana.
The post was never abolished and the plaintiff continued in service after 2021975 on the same post.
In the year 1976 he was posted at Soil and Water Testing Laboratory, Ambala.
A complaint touching upon the conduct of the plaintiff was received in the office of Deputy Director Research, Karnal, who recommended the termination order of the services of the plaintiff vide his DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976.
In pursuance of this recommendation, Director Agriculture, Haryana passed the termination order of the plaintiff vide order dated 221976.
The Deputy Director forwarded the termination order to the plaintiff vide his endorsement dated 421976.
3.
The plaintiff has assailed the order dated 221976 passed by Director of Agriculture, Haryana on the ground that the plaintiff has right to hold the post because he was selected for the post through Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana and although he was appointed against the temporary post but the post has not been abolished as yet and he has a right to hold the same.
He further alleged that the impugned order was passed by way of punishment, because the punishing authority passed the order with reference to DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 written by the Deputy Director Research, Karnal, but the order was not communicated to the plaintiff directly and the same was communicated through the office of Deputy Director of Research, Karnal, which shows that the impugned order was passed on account of complaint made against the plaintiff regarding his conduct.
The conduct of the plaintiff has nothing to do with the official duty of the plaintiff and the impugned order has resulted in discrimination against him as the person junior to him in service had been retained and no reason for such discrimination has been assigned by the punishing authority in the impugned order.
4.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendant-State, which filed the written statement and took certain preliminary objections such as that the suit was not properly valued for the purposes of Court fee and jurisdiction; that the suit was not maintainable; that no valid notice under Section 80 CPC was served upon the defendant.
On merits, it was admitted by the State that the plaintiff was appointed as officiating Junior Scientific Assistant on 4111976 after completing stipendiary period against temporary post and he continued to work as such after 2821975.
It has also been admitted that the post has not been abolished.
The fact that a complaint was received against the plaintiff by the Deputy Director Research, Karnal from the Assistant Soil Testing Officer, Ambala on 511976 and termination of the services of the plaintiff was recommended on 2211976 has also been admitted.
It has been further alleged by the State that the services on the plaintiff were terminated after giving him one month's notice as per terms and conditions of his appointment order dated 11.10.1974.
It has been further urged that the post against which the plaintiff was appointed was a temporary post of Junior Scientific Assistant and the plaintiff has no right to hold the post.
It is further contended that the order was not passed by way of punishment and the communication of order through Deputy Director of Research, Karnal suffers from no legal infirmity.
5.
From the above pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the order of dismissal of the plaintiff dated 421976 is illegal and void for the reasons detailed in Para 5 of the plaint ?
OPP 2.
Whether the valid notice under Section 80 CPC was served before filing the present suit ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is properly valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction; if not what is proper valuation ?
OPP 4.
Relief.
6.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their respective cases.
After conclusion of trial, issues No. 1, 2 and 3 were decided in favour of the plaintiff and resultantly the suit of the plaintiff was decreed and a declaration was granted that the order dated 221976 passed by Director of Agriculture, Haryana terminating the services of the plaintiff was illegal, by way of punishment, casting stigma and against the rules of natural justice.
The reasons decreeing the suit by the learned trial Court are given as follows :-  "ISSUE NO. 1 : To prove this issue the plaintiff has examined PW1 Bhagwan Dass and has appeared in evidence as his own witness as PW2.
He has also produced in evidence copy of order of appointment Ex.P1, copy of forwarding letter Ex.P2, copy of termination order Ex.P3, copy of DO letter from Deputy Director of Research, Karnal No. 734 dated 2011976 Ex.P4, copy of recommendation letter from Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana Ex.P5 and copy of order appointing the plaintiff as stipendiary Junior Scientific Assistant Ex.P6.
On the other hand, the defendant State has examined DW1 Sat Pal Malhotra and produced in evidence copy of order dated 221976 Ex.DW1/C, notice under Section 80 CPC Ex. DW1/D, copy of DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 from Sh. OP Mittal, Deputy Director Research, Karnal to Sh. MD Asthana, Director of Agriculture, Haryana Ex.DW1/B, copy of order of appointment of plaintiff as stipendiary Junior Scientific Assistant Ex.DW1/A, copy of notice under Section 80 CPC Ex.DW1/E 7.
As regards the appointment of the plaintiff as a stipendiary Junior Scientific Assistant vide order dated 26101973 Ex.P6 and further appointment of the plaintiff as temporary Junior Scientific Assistant against the temporary post on 7.10.1974 Ex. P1 and there is no dispute between the parties.
There is also no dispute that the plaintiff continued to work as a temporary Junior Scientific Assistant against the same post after 2821975 and the post held by the plaintiff has not been abolished.
The defendant has also not denied that the persons junior to the plaintiff in service have been retained by the department.
It is also the common case of both the parties that the services of the plaintiff were terminated as a consequence of DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 Ex.P4 written by Sh. OP Mittal, Deputy Director Research, Karnal to Sh. MD Asthana, Director of Agriculture, Haryana in which the allegations were levelled against the plaintiff on the basis of report of Assistant Soil Testing Officer, Ambala, that the plaintiff was having illegal affairs with some girl.
Some allegations of theft the details of which were not given in the letter Ex.P4 were also levelled against the plaintiff.
Perusal of the letter Ex.P4 also shows that some allegations of misbehaviour allegedly made by the plaintiff towards Deputy Director Research Ambala, absence from duty without leave and not taking interest in the laboratory work has also been alleged against the plaintiff in letter Ex.P4.
This letter also recommends termination of the services of the plaintiff.
Pursuant of this letter the services of the plaintiff were terminated by Director of Agriculture, Haryana vide his order dated 221976, a copy of which is Ex.P3, after giving him one month notice of the termination of services.
The forwarding letter Ex.P2 contains a reference to DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976.
The learned Govt Pleader Sh. NS Chaudhry has also agreed that the services of the plaintiff were terminated on account of the complaint touching upon his conduct.
The learned Govt Pleader has, however, contended that the termination of services of the plaintiff does not cast any stigma.
He has also contended that since the plaintiff was appointed as a temporary Junior Scientific Assistant against the temporary post and the terms and conditions of his appointment provide for termination of the services of the plaintiff after giving him one month notice, the plaintiff had no lien against the post and the department was within its right to sack the plaintiff from service after giving him one-month notice.
As regards the contention of the learned Govt Pleader that the termination order dated 221976 casts no stigma against the plaintiff and the order dated 221976 was not by way of punishment, it carries no conviction.
I am unable to appreciate the logic of the learned Govt Pleader.
The DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 from Sh. OP Mittal, Deputy Director Research, Karnal to Sh. MD Asthana, Director of Agriculture Haryana clearly shows that the termination of the services of the plaintiff were recommended on account of the alleged mis-conduct of the plaintiff as a major punishment.
The forwarding letter of termination dated 221976 Ex.P2 also shows that the services of the plaintiff were terminated pursuant to the recommendations of Sh. OP Mittal, Deputy Director Agriculture vide his letter dated 2211976.
The forwarding letter contains a reference to the DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976.
What more proof can there be that the services of the plaintiff were terminated by way of punishment.
The allegations in the letter No. 734 dated 2211976 are of a very serious nature and they carry on a stigma on inefficiency, misbehaviour, absence from duty and above all regarding the illicit relations of the plaintiff with a girl.
The letter also carries a stigma of theft against the plaintiff.
If these serious allegations do not cast a stigma against a person then what more allegations are required to cast a stigma on the character of a person ?
I do not appreciate the logic of the Govt Pleader.
In may view the services of the plaintiff have been terminated by way of punishment and the termination casts a stigma against the character and conduct of the plaintiff.
These allegations required a thorough inquiry and an opportunity to the plaintiff to explain his conduct.
No such inquiry was ever made and no opportunity was given to the plaintiff as is clear from the pleadings and the evidence of both the sides.
Now the other contention of the learned Govt Pleader that the Govt was within its right to terminate the services of the plaintiff in the manner it did since the plaintiff was holding a temporary post and he has no right to be retained on that post and that under the terms and conditions of his appointment letter, the services of the plaintiff could be terminated after giving him one-month notice has also no force in it.
The protection of Article 311 of the Constitution of India is available equally to the temporary employees as well as the permanent employees.
The termination order dated 221976 Ex.P2 although appears to be innocuous and does not show any stigma on the face of it but the forwarding letter dated 421976 Ex.P2 under which the termination order was conveyed to the Deputy Director Research, Karnal has reference to DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 which contains serious allegations of mis-conduct against the plaintiff.
The rules of natural justice and the principles of equal opportunity enshrined in the Constitution of India require that nobody shall be condemned unheard.
In the present case the department appears to have not given any opportunity to the plaintiff to explain his conduct and any show cause notice before terminating the services of the plaintiff, on the basis of allegations contained in DO letter No. 734 dated 1111976.
The perusal of order dated 221976 Ex.P2 shows that no reasons have been assigned for terminating the services of the plaintiff in the order itself.
The wording of the order that the services of the plaintiff Nafe Singh, Junior Scientific Assistant, Office of the Deputy Director Research, Karnal are hereby terminated in terms of his employment are vague.
The order becomes complete with reference to the forwarding letter dated 421976 containing reference to DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976.
In my view the order dated 221976 terminating the services of the plaintiff in the context of DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 is not an innocuous order and it is hit by Article 311 of the Constitution of India as no opportunity of showing cause and no inquiry on the allegations against the plaintiff has been given and made.
Since the post against which the plaintiff was working still exists in the department and the juniors in service to the plaintiff have been retained in service, the order of termination is hit by Articles 14 and 161 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff has referred me to authority of the Hon'ble Supreme Court report in All India Services Law Journal 1979 at page 233 in case Manager, Govt Branch Press and another v. DB Belliapa.
In the case referred by the learned counsel for the plaintiff- respondent Belliapa was appointed as temporary Junior Compositor in the Govt Branch Press.
His employment was temporary and was to continue until further orders.
The Branch Manager, Mercara, Respondent No. 1, served a notice on the respondent on Dec 29, 1966 stating that the respondent had taken outside the Press some copies of the ballot papers relating to the Director's election of Coorg Cardamom Co-op.
Societies, Mercara.
The respondent was required to show cause before 200 PM of Dec 30, 1966 as to why disciplinary action be not taken against him as per rules.
It was further stated in the notice that failure to comply with the notice will result in the respondent's suspension and further disciplinary action against him.
Thereafter an order was served on the respondent terminating of his services informing the respondent that his appointment was purely temporary and terminable at any time without any previous notice and without reasons being assigned therefor and that his services were thereby terminated with cumulative effect.
In para 15 of the judgment it has been observed inter alia there is always some reason or cause of terminating the services of a temporary employee.
It is not necessary to state that reason in the order of termination communicated to the employee concerned.
But where there is a specific charge or arbitrary discrimination, or some hostile motive is attributed to the authority terminating the service, it is incumbent on the authority making the impugned order to explain the same by disclosing the reason for the impugned action.
In the instant case, the appellant intransigently withheld that information from the court.
There is no escape from the conclusion that Belliapa was picked out for the impugned action, whimsically without any special reason which could put him in a class separate from that of his three juniors who have been retained in service."
The facts of the present case are to some extent similar to the facts of the case referred to by learned counsel for the plaintiff inasmuch as no reasons have been assigned in the order of termination of the services of the plaintiff, but these reasons have been made clear in the evidence of the parties during the trial of the case.
The principle that the court can look into the reasons behind the order apparently innocuous but based to upon serious allegations of mis-conduct.
Had the services of the plaintiff been terminated on account of unsuitability or insufficiency, there was no need for asking the plaintiff to show cause for terminating his services, but when the services of the plaintiff are terminated as a result of serious allegations of misconduct, the department should have ordered inquiry into the conduct of the plaintiff and given an opportunity to the plaintiff to explain his conduct and to defend himself and also to show cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
The failure of the department to comply with these requirements has resulted in denial of an opportunity to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff has been condemned unheard and in a most arbitrary manner while the juniors in service to him have been retained in service.
For the reasons discussed I hold that the order dated 221976 passed by the Director of Agriculture, Haryana by which the services of the plaintiff were terminated and which was served through Deputy Director Research, Karnal vide endorsement dated 421976, is illegal, by way of punishment casting a stigma, against the rules of natural justice and the rules of punishment and appeal and the Constitution of India.
This issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant."
7.
The State was not satisfied with the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
It filed Civil Appeal No. 106/13 in the year 1979 in the Court of Addl.
District Judge, Karnal, which for the reasons given in paras Nos. 8 to 11 of its judgment accepted the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and dismissal the suit.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 1511980 passed by Addl.
District Judge, Karnal, the present appeal by he unsuccessful plaintiff.
8.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be appropriate for me to quote the relevant paras which have been incorporated in the judgment of the first Appellate Court:-  "8.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has referred to the State of Bihar and others v. Shiva Bhikshuk Mishra, A.I.R. 1971 Supreme Court 1011.
In this ruling it has been held by the Supreme Court that the circumstances attendant on the impugned order are relevant and that the impugned order need not necessarily refer to stigma attributable to conduct of the Government servant.
The supreme Court has held that the distinction has to be drawn between a case where the misconduct of the Government servant is a mere motive for the action and between a case where the misconduct is the very foundation of the order The learned counsel for the respondent has not attempted to show that the facts of the present case are similar to the facts of the case in which the observations were made by the Supreme Court.
As against this, the learned Government Pleader has referred to Ramesh Chandra v. Director of Harijan and Social Welfare, 1976(1) Services Law Reporter (Allahabad) 32 in which it has been held that the mere motive in passing a particular order is not relevant and that the order must be passed by way of punishment.
It has been held that termination on account of complaints cannot be characterised to be an order of punishment.
It has been held further that it is open to the Court to see the substance of the order.
However, on the facts of that case, it was held that the order in question was passed by way of punishment.
The facts of that case are not similar to the facts of the present case.
9.
The learned Government Pleader has also placed reliance upon Raj Kumar v. Union of India, 1975(1) Services Law Reporter 774 (Supreme Court) where it has been held that termination of an employment in accordance with relevant rules while juniors retained will not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The last ruling of which the learned Government Pleader placed reliance is Shankar Lal v. Union of India, 1975(1) Services Law Reporter 826 (Rajasthan).
The facts in that case were that the appellant was a temporary officiating employee.
The charge sheet was served upon him and his explanation was called for in respect of his misconduct.
However, no evidence was recorded and no conclusion was arrived at the enquiry.
The services of the appellant were terminated by a simple order.
It was held that it could not be held that the misconduct was the foundation of the order by which the service has been terminated.
It was held that Article 311 of the Constitution of India was not applicable.
10.
In the present case, it is undisputed that when the action against the respondent was taken the period of probation had not expired.
It is also undisputed that the service of the respondent could be terminated by giving him one month's notice as was laid down in the terms and conditions of service contained in his appointment order.
However, the dispute is whether in the circumstances of the present case the misconduct, reported against the respondent was the very foundation of the termination order or whether it was simply a motive for exercising the powers available to the appointing authority to terminate th service after giving a month's notice.
In my view the facts in Rajasthan case were worse.
In that case a charge sheet had been served upon the employee and his explanation was obtained.
In the present case, the intention to take disciplinary action is altogether missing because no charge sheet was served upon the respondent and he was not even called to file a reply to the charge sheet to explain this conduct.
I am of the opinion that the view of the learned Subordinate Judge is not correct that the order in question was passed by way of punishment.
I am of the view that the alleged misconduct on the part of the respondent served as a motive for the exercise of the powers to terminate the services by giving one month's notice and the misconduct alleged against the respondent is not the very basis or the foundation of the action taken against the respondent.
I, therefore, hold that the order in question has not been passed by way of punishment.
This finding of the learned Subordinate Judge that the order has been passed by way of punishment is reversed.
11.
The only ground pressed on behalf of the respondent to challenge the termination order was this that the order was passed by way of punishment.
The learned counsel for the respondent did not argue that any malice against the parties concerned was proved on record.
The learned Subordinate Judge has not found the existence of malice.
In view of the fact that the finding of the learned lower Court has been reversed and it has been held that the order in question was not passed by way of punishment, the appeal succeeds and the judgment and decree of the Court below are set aside.
The suit of the plaintiff is dismissed, but it is ordered that the parties will bear their own costs throughout."
9.
I have heard Mr. JB Tacoria, Advocate, on behalf of the appellant, Mr. CR Dahiya, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, on behalf of the State and with their assistance I have gone through the records of this case.
10.
The order of appointment of the plaintiff as Junior Scientific Assistant is Ex.P1.
It is clearly mentioned in it that though the plaintiff has been appointed against a temporary post, which has been sanctioned upto 2821975, but it is likely to continue in the play scale of Rs. 110-225 besides usual allowances.
Further it has been stated that the services of the plaintiff could be terminated on notice of one month on either side.
Also it was the condition of service that the plaintiff will be on probation for a period of two years from the date he joins his duty.
The record further shows that on 2211976 Shri OP Mittal, Deputy Director Research, Karnal wrote a DO letter to Shri MD Asthana, IAS, Director of Agriculture, Haryana and brought to his notice about the alleged state of affairs at the Soil Testing Laboratory, Ambala which was located in House No. 663 of the Haryana Housing Board Colony, Ambala City.
It was alleged by Shri Mittal that Nafe Singh plaintiff had created a peculiar situation.
Shri Mittal also relied upon the letters written by Assistant Soil Testing Officer, Ambala along with the admissions of Nafe Singh plaintiff about the illegal affairs with a girl as well as theft from the laboratory.
Also it was stated by Shri Mittal in the letter dated 2211976 that earlier the plaintiff had been found guilty of mis-behaviour and on one occasion Mr. Virk, the then Deputy Director of Agriculture, Ambala, had caught him when he marked his presence one day in advance.
Also it was stated that plaintiff did not show any interest in the laboratory work and remained absent and took leaves on false pretext.
So many times the laboratory was inspected and the plaintiff was found absent.
Finally, a request was made by Shri Mittal to the Director of Agriculture, Haryana that since the plaintiff had not completed two years probation, therefore, in the interest of the government work his services should be terminated by giving one-month notice or pay after going through the papers in order to avoid disrepute to the Agriculture Department.
11.
Ex.P2 is the letter dated 221976 from the Director of Agriculture, Haryana to the Deputy Director Research, Karnal, which clearly shows that the Director of Agriculture had made a reference of the DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976 written by Shri OP Mittal.
The contents of Ex.P2 can be quoted in the following manner :  "Please find enclosed herewith termination orders of Shri Nafe Singh, Junior Scientific Assistant Soil and Water Testing Laboratory, Ambala.
It is requested that these orders may be delivered to Shri Nafe Singh, Junior Scientific Assistant under proper receipt.
His acknowledgement may please be sent to this office for record.'
The order dated 221976 Ex.P3 reads as follows :-  "The services of Shri Nafe Singh, Junior Scientific Assistant, office of the Deputy Director, Research, Karnal are hereby terminated in accordance with the terms of his employment.
The order will take effect from one month from the date it is served on him.
Sd/- Date : 2-2-1976 Director of Agriculture, Haryana."
12.
Thus the combined reading of the above documentary evidence Ex.P2 and Ex.P3 would show that the DO letter dated 2211976 was the foundation of the order dated 221976 which was conveyed to the Deputy Director Research, Karnal.
It is also a fact that the services of the plaintiff were on probation and as on 221976 the plaintiff was on probation.
The point for determination is whether the order is stigmatic and punitive in nature or not.
If the order is stigmatic and cast a stigma on the conduct of the plaintiff, then the principles as enshrined under Article 311 of the Construction of India are attracted.
The rules of natural justice are supposed to be complied with.
It is the admitted case of the parties that no show cause notice was given to the plaintiff before passing the impugned order dated 221976 and that there was no inquiry whatsoever against the plaintiff.
The entire action was initiated on the DO letter dated 2211976 and the final order was passed on 221976.
The learned Addl.
District Judge had accepted the appeal of the State by mainly relying upon the terms of the appointment letter and by holding that the services of the plaintiff could be terminated by giving him one-month notice.
Also it was observed by the learned Addl.
District Judge, Karnal that the impugned order has been passed by way of punishment.
I have already given the reasons given by the first Appellate Court above.
In my opinion, the judgment of the first Appellate Court cannot be sustained in the eyes of law as the termination order has cast a stigma upon the plaintiff.
The letter written by Mr. Mittal clearly shows that the services of the plaintiff were terminated pursuant to his recommendations.
If the contents of DO letter dated 2211976 are read with serious thought, even in that situation the trio would agree that a stigma has been cast upon the plaintiff with regard to his conduct, misbehaviour etc.
The very serious allegations have been levelled against the plaintiff that he was carrying with a girl.
So much so, he had stolen certain articles of the laboratory.
He remained absent on several occasions and that he committed serious illegalities.
In such a situation an inquiry was called upon and since no inquiry has been conducted nor any opportunity has been afforded to the plaintiff to explain his conduct, therefore, the impugned order dated 221976 Ex.P3 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
13.
It was contended by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State that the order Ex.P3 which was communicated to the plaintiff does not indicate that any stigma or aspersion was conveyed to the plaintiff.
The order is simplicitor in terms of the appointments and, therefore, by no stretch of imagination it can be held that the order was punitive in nature.
I do not accept the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent.
The DO letter written by Mr. Mittal leaves no manner of doubt that on his initiation and on his action the order Ex.P3 was conveyed.
Even the letter Ex.P2 makes a clear mention of DO letter No. 734 dated 2211976.
14.
It was then submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent that the plaintiff was only working against a temporary post and that he was a probationer and in these circumstances the principles of natural justice are not required to be adopted.
There is a fallacy in the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondent.
Had the order was simple without any previous background, I would have accepted the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent.
But in the present case the order terminating the services of the plaintiff is by way of punishment and in these circumstances the principles as enshrined under Article 311 of the Constitution of India would be attracted.
It was held in The State of Punjab v. Parkash Singh, 1975(2) S.L.R.
85 that even in the case of a temporary employee or an employee who is on probation, if his services had been terminated by way of punishment, Article 311 of the Constitution of India would be attracted.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further stated that form of the order is not conclusive but sentence of the matter is to be looked into.
In Parkash Singh's case (supra) the impugned order was as follows :-  "In terms of the conditions of your services you are hereby given one months's notice whereafter your services shall stand terminated."
This type of order was interpreted by all the Courts as punitive in nature in view of the allegations which became the foundation leading to the termination of the employee.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held "An order terminating the services of a temporary servant or a probationes, if it is by way of punishment, will attract Art. 311 of the Constitution; the form of the order is not conclusive, it is the substance of the matter that has to be looked into.
Whether or not an order of termination is by way of punishment would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case."
15.
I have already spelled out the background which led to the passing of the order dated 221976.
It has been held in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab and anr., 1974(2) S.L.R.
701 that form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way of punishment.
Even an innocuously worded order terminating the service may in the facts and circumstances of the case establish that an enquiry into allegations of serious and grave character of misconduct involving stigma has been made in infraction of the provisions of Article 311.
In such a case the simplicity of the form of the order will not be of any sanctity.
16.
In the opinion of this Court, the reasons which have been advanced by the learned trial Court in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff are more weighty, convincing and cogent.
In this view of the matter, I set aside the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court dated 1511980 and grant a decree to the plaintiff for declaration to the effect that the order dated 221976 passed by the Director of Agriculture, Haryana vide which the services of the plaintiff were terminated is illegal, by way of punishment and is against the principles of natural justice.
17.
The incidental point which survives for determination is whether the plaintiff should be granted any back wages or whether he should be granted the benefit of service in the matter of seniority or not.
Since the plaintiff has not worked from 221976 onwards, therefore, he will not be entitled to the back wages.
Of course, he will be entitled to the minimum of the revised time scale of Junior Scientific Assistant as on the date when he will join the service in pursuance of this judgment.
The plaintiff shall also not get the benefit of seniority from the date of the termination of his services upto the date of his fresh joining.
The appeal stands allowed in above terms.
Appeal allowed.