Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner the Regional Institute of Management and Administration, started the Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA) and Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) courses in the year 1997- 98 with the approval of the Punjab Technical University (hereinafter referred to as the University) with an authorised intake of 30 students in each course; the first batch of the students 1998-99.
The University issued an advertisement for holding the Entrance Test for admissions to the Course.
The petitioners in the connected writ petition No. 3218 of 1999 (Simarjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) which too is being disposed of by this judgment, appeared in the test and successfully cleared the same but on account of low merit were not granted admission at the time of the initial counseling.
The petitioner-Institute had in the meanwhile made an application to the University vide Annexure P-1 dated 1221998 pointing out that as it had the requisite capacity to accept more students, the sanctioned intake of the Institute be enhanced by another 30 students in each course.
As no decision had been taken on the request, the petitioner sent another representation, Annexure P-3 dated 24111998 to the University pointing out that as numerous representations had been received from parents and students, who were seeking admission in the current session (1998-99), it be permitted to increase the number of seats to accommodate these students and that extra classes would be conducted for the fresh candidates to enable them to cover their syllabi.
Vide annexure P-4 dated 9.12.1998 the University advised the petitioner to assess the number of candidates available and also to intimate as to how the academic deficiency of these students would be made up.
It is the petitioner's case that this communication amounted to a virtual assurance that the seats would be increased and it accordingly issued an advertisement, Annexure P-5, in the Tribune dated 10121998 inviting applications to the BCA course which was "likely to receive approval for additional payment seats" and that admission would be made on the basis of merit in the joint entrance test which had been conducted by the University.
It appears that 30 students in all applied in response to this advertisement as would be evident from Annexure P-7 dated 15121998, and this information was duly conveyed to the University.
The petitioner vide Annexure P-8 dated 15121998 also submitted the detailed proposal as to how the academic deficiency of the students to be admitted in the new batch was to be made up.
Vide Annexure P-9 dated 21121998, the University was also informed that the students had been attending classes regularly with effect from 17121998 as per the academic schedule submitted to the University earlier.
It appears, however, that the University noticed that out of the 30 students, who had sought admission to the Institute, 8 had been admitted to other Institutions and were thus transferee students.
The University accordingly wrote a letter Annexure P-10 dated 22.12.98 to the Institute that these 8 students could not be allowed a transfer but the case of 18 others was under consideration.
The University also, vide its communication, Annexure P-11 dated 26121998, informed the Institute that it had not been authorised to admit any additional students in the 1998 batch and that the additional admission had been made unauthorisedly and the only advise that had been given earlier was to assess the response to fresh admissions and to get back to the University.
The Institute however informed the University that it had granted admission to 18 students on its assurance that the strength would be increased.
The petitioner, however, received letter dated 821999, Annexure P-19, from the Registrar of the University in which it was stated that the Vice Chancellor had taken a very serious view of the activities of the Institute and in particular to the admission granted to 18 students without the approval of the University and a warning was held out that such irresponsible behaviour in future would invite severe disciplinary action but that the Vice Chancellor had nevertheless accorded approval to the admission of 18 eligible students to the BCA Programme against payment seats.
The petitioner, however, received communication, Annexure P-25 dated 921999 from the Registrar withdrawing the approval granted by the Vice-Chancellor vide Annexure P-10.
Aggrieved, the petitioner has come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
The writ petition was admitted to a final hearing on 1751999 for today on account of the emergency involved as the supplementary examination of the Ist semester to which the 18 students had been admitted is to start on June 7, 1999.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the University in which it has been highlighted that the University had accorded sanction for admission to 30 seats in the BCA and BBA courses for the session 1997-98 and this strength had been retained for the sessions 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
It has also been pleaded that before the sanctioned strength could be increased, a proper assessment of the facilities available with the Institute had to be made and that even this exercised had not been carried out so far.
It has also been further pleaded that the first counselling for the session 1998-99 (which is the one in dispute in the present petition) had been held between 19.8.1999 and 21.8.1999 and the second on 26101998 and the admissions had been made exclusively on the basis of merit in the entrance test and that the additional admissions made to the Institute in December, 1998 initially of 28 students, which number was reduced to 18 students, was wholly contrary to the stipulated procedures.
The petitioner's reliance on Annexure P-4 with regard to the assurance held out by the University to increase the number of seats has been challenged and reference has, in this connection, been made to the letters, Annexures R-2/1 to R-2/6 dated 22121998, 26121998, 29121998, 1111999, 1811999 and 27.1.1999 respectively wherein it had been clearly pointed out that no permission had been granted to make any further admissions.
It has also been highlighted that the Minister of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab under orders, Annexure R-2/8-A and R-2/8-B dated 22121998 and 7.1.1999 respectively, had sought a report from the University as to the manner in which the Institute had been making admissions beyond the sanctioned strength and that these reports were duly submitted by the University vide Annexure R-2/7 dated 30121998 and Annexure R-2/8 dated 1911999, pointing out that no such permission had been accorded to the Institute to admit the additional students and if any admission had been made, it was wholly unauthorised and that the Institute had been warned time and again on the issue.
It has also been pleaded that the letter dated 821999, Annexure P-19, had been withdrawn by the University within 24 hours of its issuance vide the fax message dated 921999, Annexure P-25(R-2/9) and that this information had been conveyed simultaneously to the Principal Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab-cum-Chairman of the University, who happened to be in Delhi on the relevant date.
It has been explained that the letter, Annexure P-19, had been ordered to be withdrawn by the Chairman of the Board of Governors because there was no justification for the grant of approval to the creation of additional seats and that before making the order, the Chairman had taken note of the impropriety on the part of the Vice Chancellor as he had in the meanwhile (on 4.2.1999), tendered his resignation and the question of his relief was under process.
3.
The Institute had also filed an additional affidavit alongwith Annexures P-27, P-28 and P-29 to show that though the fresh students had been admitted belatedly, it has still possible to make good the deficiency in their instruction, as per the details given in these Annexures.
4.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length and the record produced by Mr. Anupam Gupta in Court has been perused by the Court as also by Mr. Navkiran Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner.
5.
Mr. Navkiran Singh has raised a number of arguments during the course of the hearing.
He has first and foremost argued that the additional students had been granted admission on the assurance held out by the University that the sanction to the creation of additional seats was in the pipeline and would soon follow.
He has urged that this feeling flowed from a reading at the various documents referred to above and it was in this situation that an advertisement had been issued inviting applications for those seats.
He has pleaded that the Institute could not be faulted on account of a delay on the part of the University as the application Annexure P-1 for the sanction of the additional seats had been made way back in February, 1998 and no decision had been taken on this application so far.
He has also pointed out that the Vice Chancellor, who was the competent authority to create the additional seats, had passed the order, Annexure P-19, whereas the Registrar of the University, who had conveyed the order, Annexure P-25 had no authority of doing so being a subordinate official.
In addition it has been argued that even assuming that the order, Annexure P-25, had been passed under the instructions issued by the Chairman of the Board of Governors, this too was without authority of law as the said powers could be exercised not by the Chairman alone but by the Board of Governors as a body and as no decision had been taken by the Board.
The said order deserved to be quashed.
It has further been pleaded that even assuming further that the Chairman of the Board of Governors had the authority to make the impugned order, yet as no reason had been spelt out in the written statement or on the file produced in Court as to the circumstances that had compelled its making, the order could not be sustained.
It has also been pointed out that the assertion of the respondents that the order if the Vice Chancellor was bad for the reason that he had tendered his resignation, which was under consideration, and this was a factor that had weighed with the Chairman was also wrong as the decision to enhance the number of seats and had been taken on 221999 and had been conveyed on 821999 vide Annexure P-19, whereas the resignation had been accepted a month later.
It has then been submitted that as no decision had been taken by the respondents on the application of the petitioner for the enhancement in the number of seats, Annexure P-1, a direction be issued by this Court that the needful be done within a certain and time bound frame.
Mr. Navkiran Singh has finally fallen back on the magnanimity of the Court to plead that the students-petitioners in the connected writ petition had already spent time and money in joining the Course and that they should be dealt with sympathetically.
6.
Mr. Anupam Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the University has controverted Mr. Navkiran Singh's arguments.
He has first argued that it was evident from the file that no permission had been granted to the Institute prior to 821999 to make additional admissions to the course in question and even presuming for a moment that the order Annexure P-19 was a valid one, it could not operate retrospectively.
It has also been pleaded that the factors which led the Chairman of the Board of Governors to make the order Annexure P-25 had been spelt out in the written statement and also from the file produced in Court.
He has also pointed out that this order of the Chairman had been duly conveyed to the Vice Chancellor, who happened to be in Delhi at the relevant time and after some initial hesitation, he had accepted the same when it was explained to him that it had been made by the Chairman.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition must fail.
8.
It is evident that no permission had been granted to the Institute at any stage prior to 821999 to increase the number of seats.
To my mind merely because the matter was under the consideration of the University did not give the Institute a right to presume that permission had been granted and to grant admission against these seats on 17121998.
It has been pointed out in the written statement that there could be no increase in the number of seats till such time that a proper assessment of the facilities available with the Institute had been made and it is the conceded position that no inspection has been carried out so far.
It is also evident from the documents on the file that the University had warned the Institute time and again that its conduct was undesirable and its action in admitting students against the additional seats from qualified (though unadmitted) candidates and to lure others who had got admission in other Institutions was not proper.
It is also significant that in the correspondence between the University and the Institute, it had been intimated to the latter time and again that the matter was yet under consideration and the list of the applicants be submitted to the University; and that those students, who had been granted admission to other Institutions should be sent back as their candidature for fresh admissions could not be considered by the Institute.
It is also clear from the note dated 221999 of the Vice Chancellor that the issue of approval for the additional seats had been delayed due to the serious and improper activities of the Institute.
The Vice Chancellor had, nevertheless in the note, aforesaid while directing that the Institute be admonished, accorded permission to increase the number of seats and to admit 18 students (who are the petitioners in the connected writ petition).
To my mind, this action of the Vice Chancellor was wholly unjustified.
It is the conceded position that the first counselling had been held from 1981998 to 2181998 and the 2nd counselling on 26101998.
The classes for the Ist semester started soon thereafter, whereas the examination was held on 16.1.1999.
It is evident, therefore, that the permission accorded by the Vice Chancellor for admission of the additional students to the Ist Semester was unjustified as the 1998 batch had taken the examination for the Ist semester by that time.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with a somewhat similar situation had adversely commented on the propensity of private institutions to make money by making admissions unauthorizedly.
In State of Tamil Nadu and others v. St Joseph Teachers Training Institute and another, JT 1991(2) SC 343 and CBSE and another v. P Sunil Kumar and others, JT 1998(4) SC 105 : 1998(2) SCT 788 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the admissions taken by the student to unrecognizable Institutes gave them no right to appear in the examinations held subsequently and that a sympathizing view taken with regard to such students was not only misplaced but was destructive of the rule of law.
Admittedly, the petitioner-Institute is a recognised one but only for admission to 30 students in each course as per the sanction granted to it and any admission beyond that number would be wholly without authority and therefore unrecognised.
Likewise the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gurdeep Singh v. State of J & K and others, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2638, dealt with an admission to the MBBS Course wherein candidates belonging to the sports quota had been granted admission contrary to the rules.
This is what the Court had to say :  "What remains to be considered is whether the selection of respondent No. 6 should be quashed.
We are afraid, unduly lenient view of the courts on the basis of human consideration in regard to such excesses on the part of the authorities, has served to create an impression that even where an advantage is secured by stratagem and trickery, it would be rationalized in courts of law.
Courts do and should take human and sympathetic view of matters.
That is the very essence of justice.
But consideration of judicial policy also dictate that a tendency of this kind where advantage gained by illegal means is permitted to be retained will jeopardise the purity of selection process itself; engender cynical disrespect towards the judicial process and in the last analyses embolden errant authorities and candidates into a sense of complacency and impunity that gains achieved by such wrongs could be retained by an appeal to the sympathy of the court.
Such instances reduce the jurisdiction and discretion of courts into private benevolence.
This tendency should be stopped.
The selection of respondent No. 6 in the sports category was, on the material placed before us, thoroughly unjustified.
He was not be entitled on the basis of his marks, to a seat in general merit category.
Attribution of eligibility long after the selection process was over in our opinion is misuse of power.
While we have sympathy for the predicament of respondent No. 6, we should not lose sight of the fact that the situation is the result of his own making.
We think in order to uphold the purity of academic processes, we should quash the selection and admission of respondent No. 6.
We do so though, however, reluctantly."
To my mind, the observations of the Supreme Court apply fully to the facts of the present case.
The additional students had been granted admission on 17121998 and it is the conceded position that they have been attending classes.
A presumption must also be drawn that the Institute would have charged a fee from the students and this would be a substantial amount, as the sanction had been accorded on 821999 for admission to the payment seats.
As observed by the Supreme Court above, the court is faced with an unfortunate situation but it is of the making of the Institute and the students in the connected writ petition but public policy demands that those who have got admission by resorting to unfair practices should not have the sympathy of the Court.
9.
Mr. Navkiran Singh's argument with regard to the authority of the Chairman of the Board of Governors to make a direction leading to the passing of the order, Annexure P-25, must now be dealt with.
This aspect appears insignificant for the reason that once it is found that the order of the Vice Chancellor, Annexure P-19, was without authority of law and was unjustified, the action of the Chairman would not really come under scrutiny.
This matter nevertheless has been examined independently in the light of the arguments raised by the counsel.
It is the admitted position that the question of the creation of additional seats or recognition granted to a college would be a matter to be governed under Regulations framed under Section 19(r) of the Punjab Technical University Act, 1996.
As the regulations have not yet been framed, Mr. Navkiran Singh has argued that the Chairman of the Board of Governors was only one member and he could not take a decision to cancel the order, Annexure P-19.
He has, however, conceded that the Vice Chancellor, who had made the order, Annexure P-19, could amend, vary or cancel the same.
It this connection, it is to be noticed from the reply filed by the respondents and more particularly from Annexure P-25(R2/9) dated 921999, that the Registrar had been directed by the Chairman of the Board of Governors to withdraw the letter issued to the Institute increasing the number of seats by 18 and that this information had been conveyed to the Vice Chancellor in Delhi the same day i.e. 921999.
The Registrar also noted that he had discussed the matter with the Vice Chancellor and he had been advised by the latter to wait for some time as no written orders had been received from the Chairman and this information too had been conveyed by the Registrar to the Chairman, who had directed him to record his orders on the file and thereafter to withdraw the order, Annexure P-19, under intimation to him (the Chairman) and this order had been made and complied with.
The Vice Chancellor thereafter raised no objection to the action that had been taken.
To my mind, the action taken by the Registrar on the direction of the Chairman of the Board of Governors had the implicit approval of the Vice Chancellor and in the absence of any Regulations having been framed, this action would be fully in consonance with law.
10.
It has also been argued by Mr. Navkiran Singh that the reply of the University had sought to cause some aspersions on the Vice Chancellor inasmuch as it had been hinted that the order was mala fide as it had been made shortly before his resignation from office.
The respondents have pleaded that the Vice Chancellor had submitted his resignation on 4.2.1999 and had made the order on 821999 while his resignation was under process.
To my mind, this suspicion of the respondents is ill-founded.
The file shows that the facts on which the order had been made on 821999, had been recorded by the Vice Chancellor on 221999 before he had submitted his resignation and that even the resignation had been accepted after a month.
It would be, therefore, improper to suggest that the Vice Chancellor had made the order shortly before he had ceased to hold office.
11.
Mr. Navkiran Singh's argument with regard to the consideration of the Institute's case for the increase in the number of seats must, however, be considered in a different perspective.
It is the conceded position that the Institute had made an application, Annexure P-1 way back on 1221998, pointing out that it had the necessary infrastructure to increase the seats from 30 to 60 seats in each of the two courses.
It has been pleaded by the respondents that it was essential that the Institute's facilities be examined in order to see whether the claim was justified but as of now no such inspection had been made.
To my mind, the stand of the respondents is palpably unfair to this extent.
It is evidence that the University itself had given a feeling to the Institute that some action was being taken for the creation of additional seats for the session 1998-99 but it remained silent about the action proposed to be taken on Annexure P-1.
The institute is certainly entitled to make a claim that its application should be considered and a decision on merits be taken with regard thereto.
12.
This petition is accordingly dismissed with a rider that the University will take a decision on the Institute's application Annexure P-1 dated 1221998, preferably within three months from today and to convey the same to the petitioner.
The Institute is also directed to refund the fee charged from the 18 additional students and to return their original certifications forthwith.
No costs.
Dasti Order.
Petition dismissed.