RL Anand, J. (Oral) - State of Haryana has filed the present appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 28111979, passed by the court of Sr. Sub Judge, Chandigarh, with enhanced powers, who set aside the judgment and decree dated 2951979 passed by the Sub Judge Ist Class, Chandigarh, who dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent.
2.
The brief facts of the case can be noticed in the following manner :-  3.
Harbans Lal Dua, Superintendent in the office of Chief Medical Officer, Rohtak filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the penalty of stoppage of four annual grade increment with cumulative effect is void, illegal, unwarranted by law, violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India, capricious, mala fide and in derogation of the powers conferred upon the authorities and against the principles of natural justice and fair play, the order dated 30.4.1975 is against the provisions of the Haryana Govt. Employees Conduct Rules, 1966 and the plaintiff is entitled to restoration of all benefits which had been withheld to him by virtue of the order dated 30.4.1975.
4.
The case of the plaintiff was that he was permanent Haryana Govt. employee and was holding the post of Superintendent in the office of Chief Medical Officer, Rohtak under the Director Health Services, Haryana, Chandigarh.
He constructed a house in the year 19971 at Rohtak and desired to obtain a temporary loan from his relatives to meet the expenses to be incurred on the construction of the house.
He obtained prior sanction of the Chief Medical Officer, Rohtak, for obtaining the loan for the construction of the house.
The defendant No. 2 charge-sheeted the plaintiff under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, on the ground that the plaintiff secured a huge amount as loan from his relatives and, thus, acted against the provisions of rule 164(i) of the Haryana Govt. Employees Conduct Rules, 1966.
The plaintiff gave explanation to the charge-sheet which according to him was not examined properly and was declared unsatisfactory illegally.
The defendant No. 2 awarded the penalty of stoppage of four annual grade increments of the plaintiff vide the impugned order dated 30.4.1975.
He filed an appeal before defendant No. 1 on 7.5.1975.
He also served a notice under Section 80, CPC on 831976.
According to the plaintiff, the impugned order dated 30.4.1975 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law because it amounts to a major penalty and such a penalty could not be imposed upon him without any proper inquiry.
5.
The suit was contested by the defendants mainly on the ground that since it is a minor penalty, therefore, a regular inquiry was not required.
Only a show cause notice was required to be given to the plaintiff and such compliance was made by the defendant before passing the impugned order.
6.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial court :-  "1.
Whether the order dated 30.4.75 is illegal, unconstitutional and void ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the notice served under section 80 CPC on the defendants is invalid ?
OPD 3.
Relief."
7.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence and on the conclusion of the trial, the trial court vide the judgment and decree dated 2951979 agreed with the contentions of the defendants and dismissed the suit.
8.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial court, the plaintiff filed an appeal before the court of Sr. Sub Judge, who at that time was enjoying the enhanced appellate powers, and the learned Sr. Sub Judge, vide judgment and decree dated 28111979 allowed the appeal of the plaintiff and decreed his suit by setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial court and this time, the State of Haryana is aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the first appellate court.
9.
I have heard Mr. CR Dahiya, DAG, Haryana, for the appellant and Mr. CM Chopra, counsel for the respondent and with their assistance gone through the record of this case.
10.
The short point which involves in this case is that when the punishing authority awards the punishment by awarding the stoppage of increments with cumulative effect, whether it amounts to a major penalty or a minor penalty ?
If the answer of this court is that it is a major penalty, then, before imposing such a penalty it was obligatory on the part of the punishing authority to order for a regular inquiry which, admittedly, has not been done in the present case.
11.
This proposition has been answered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1991(1) RSJ 413 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC), wherein it was held that the impugned order, if imposes the stoppage of increments with cumulative effect, in such a situation, it amounts to a major penalty and rule 5(v) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, will come into play and in such a situation, by virtue of rules 8 and 9, a regular inquiry is required.
The observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court are applicable to the facts in hand as I have stated above, no regular inquiry was conducted against the plaintiff, as a result of which the suit has been rightly decreed by the first appellate court.
12.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this appeal and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.