V Gopala Gowda, J - The Petitioner has challenged the impugned award passed by the second respondent Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court (in short `the Labour Court') in case No. CR 61/88 dated 2271991 at Annexure-C urging various legal contentions.
2.
The second respondent-Labour Court has passed an award answering the points of dispute referred to it holding that the petitioner-Management was not justified in terminating the services of the first respondent-workman therefore, the award of reinstatement, backwages and continuity of service was granted in favour of the workman.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner Mr. NS Prasad vehemently submits that the findings recorded by the Labour Court are contrary to exception to Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (in short `the Act').
Therefore, the findings recorded by it holding that, action of the petitioner-Management in terminating the services of the workman amounts to retrenchment and non- compliance of the mandatory requirement under Section 25F Clauses (a) and (b) of the Act are not legal and valid for the reason that, Labour Court has not taken into consideration the documentary evidence produced by it before the Labour Court as per Ex.M1.
As per the said exhibit he was medically unfit which comes within the exception to Section 2(oo) of the Act (Annexure-C) namely termination of the workman on the ground of ill-health cannot be construed as retrenchment.
This important aspect of the matter has not been taken into consideration by the Labour Court.
For this, he has relied upon the Judgment of Supreme Court reported in AIR 1991 SC 1003 and further, the Judgment of Supreme Court reported in 1993(3) SCC 259 at page 265 (DK Yadav's case) for the proposition that, if the termination order comes within the excluded clauses of Section 2(oo) of the Act action would not amount to retrenchment.
He further places reliance on Para 2 of the said Judgment in support of his case.
3.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner further places reliance on the relevant rules contained in the Indian Railway Establishment Manual which have statutory force may also exclude the applicability of the principles of natural justice for issuing notice prior to termination order passed against the first respondent-workman.
Further, he places reliance on the Judgment of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1997 SC 3657 para 3 for the proposition that the first respondent workman was treated as a casual labourer who had temporary status and therefore the first respondent was not entitled for reinstatement.
In this context, he places reliance on the relevant Rule 2005 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual Volume II (`the Manual' in short) which deals with regard to entitlements and privileges admissible to Casual Labourers who are treated as temporary (i.e. given temporary status) after the completion of 120 days or 360 days of continuous employment (as the case may be).
4.
Further, Rule 2007 of the manual deals with employment of a casual labourer in skilled categories which says normally casual labourer should not be appointed in the skilled categories without a trade test.
A panel should be maintained by the open line to cater to the needs of the casual labourers in the semi-skilled and skilled categories.
Where no panel of suitable candidates is available, engagement in semi-skilled categories may be done without trade test but it should be ensured that their suitability for semi-skilled or skilled grade is adjudged well in time before they attain temporary status.
5.
Therefore, placing reliance on the Judgment of the Apex Court as stated above, he submits that the appointment of the first respondent workmen is regulated by the statutory rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and the law laid down by the Apex Court with all force applicable to the facts of this case.
Hence, the award is liable to be quashed.
6.
Further, non-consideration of the medical certificate Ex.M1 by the Labour Court and without giving proper and valid reasons rejecting that material evidence on record rendered the findings erroneous in law hence, the impugned award is liable to be quashed.
It is also further contended by the learned Counsel that, there is no refusal of employment by the petitioner he has voluntarily abandoned the services therefore, the labour Court should have considered this important aspect of the matter while passing the award.
The Labour Court has failed to take into consideration the examination-in-chief of WW1 at para 7 that nothing was given in writing to him stating that he was medically unfit.
But, he has admitted that they told him orally about it.
7.
Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of first respondent-workman Ms. Vidya Sharma sought to justify the award passed by the Labour Court contending that the labour Court on the basis of material evidence on record recorded a finding of fact holding that, the action of the Management would not fall within the exceptional category of Section 2(oo) Clause (c) of the Act as the petitioner failed to prove that as on the date of refusal of employment he was suffering from continued ill health and that it would not tantamount to retrenchment.
Further placing reliance on the DK Yadav's case she submits that, action of the Management without giving notice in refusing employment to the first respondent amounts to violation of principles of natural justice.
Therefore, the reasons given by the Labour Court that the action of the Management amounts to retrenchment and same is opposed to the principles of natural justice is perfectly valid and legal.
Hence, the impugned award passed by the Labour Court does not warrant interference by this Court.
8.
I have perused the petition averments and grounds urged, Rules 2004 to Rule 2007 and the impugned award and the record of the second respondent-Tribunal particularly Ex.M1 and considered the rival contentions urged by the learned Counsel appearing on both the sides and I have examined the submissions made by the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the parties and answer their submission as hereunder:  9.
The State Government in exercise of its powers under Section 10(1)(d) read with Section 2(A) of the Act referred the following points of dispute to the second respondent Tribunal for its adjudication:  "Whether the action of the Management of South Central Railway, Divisional Office, Hubli in terminating the services of Sri Mehaboob Sab, S/o.
Davalsab ELR/Mate is justified ?
If not, to what relief the workman is entitled to and from what date ?"
10.
As per points of dispute, the onus was on the part of the Management to justify its action.
The contentions urged in this Writ Petition were urged before the Labour Court/Tribunal to justify their case.
The petitioner has also examined its witnesses and Ex.M1 was marked as exhibit in support of its case.
The petitioner-Management was required to examine the Doctor who had examined the first respondent and has given opinion with regard to fitness of the first respondent for the purpose of Rule 2007 but, admittedly, he has not been examined.
In the counter statement this has been referred stating that, first respondent was declared unfit for said employment as per the medical certificate issued by the Assistant Divisional Medical Officer along with the endorsements made by the Doctors which are annexed to the exhibit Ex.M1 on 2891979, 26101979, 23.9.1979, 1091979 and 331979, except Ex.M1 dated 26/9/3111979, no reference is made in respect of other documents annexed to Ex.M1 in the counter statement filed by the petitioner before the Labour Court.
Further, the petitioner has examined its witness MW.1 in support of the documents, at para-4 of his statement of evidence except stating that the first respondent workman was found to be unfit as per Ex.M1 the Medical Certificate, he has not spoken to the contents of Ex.M1 and the endorsements made by the Doctors annexed to the said documents referred to above.
Therefore, the fact remains, the contents of the Exihibint M1 and other endorsements annexed to the said fact are not proved by the petitioner by examining the person who has issued Ex.M1, prescription sips and other endorsements made by the Doctors regarding the fitness of the workman on which documents strong reliance is placed by the petitioner-Management.
Therefore, the Labour Court at para-7 of the award, has stated that there was no doubt with regard to Ex.M1 and has not stated as to what was the ailment from which the first respondent was suffering.
Further, with reference to the document at Ex.M1 learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court/Tribunal has proceeded to record his findings on the basis of the reasons given by the Doctor and recorded a finding that the order of termination passed against the workman is not justified.
11.
I am of the considered view that, the contents of Ex.M1 are not proved by examining the Doctor who is said to have examined the first respondent and has opined that the workman was unfit for service.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case reported in AIR 1972 SC 330, the Ex.M1 and endorsements made by the Doctor which are annexed to it are not proved and therefore placing reliance on the said documents is not legal and valid, therefore, the Labour Court was perfectly justified in holding that the Management has not justified its action.
Therefore, the contents of Ex.M1 along with its annexures are not established.
When Ex.M1 is not established in accordance with law, the contention that the action of the Management in terminating the employment of the first respondent workman would fall within the exceptional category of Section 2(oo) Clause (c) of the Act is devoid of merit for the reason that, there is no material evidence on record to show that the workman, on account of continued ill-health could not attend to duty which fact has not been established.
The contention urged by the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner Mr. NS Prasad that finding recorded by the Labour Court does not amount to retrenchment as it would fall within exceptional category of Section 2(oo) Clause (c) of the Act is not tenable in law therefore, the reliance placed on the Judgment of the Apex Court referred to above will not be of any assistance to the petitioner.
Hence, the said contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner has to be rejected.
12.
Further, the question regarding whether DK Yadav's case applies to the case on hand or not, I am of the view that, this case does not support the contention of the petitioner, but on the other hand it supports the case of the first respondent workman with all fours.
The submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on the Judgment reported in AIR 1994 SC 1241 para-7 for the proposition that, Tribunal had no jurisdiction whatsoever to have got over the medical opinion given by the competent Doctor with regard to medical certificate and given direction for reinstatement.
This Judgment has no application to the facts of this case as the case on hand is entirely different from the facts of the said case.
Apart from this reason, the said Judgment has no application to the facts of the case for the reason that the contents of Ex.M1 & the annexed documents to it were not proved before the Labour Court.
Therefore, this Judgement also is of no assistance to the petitioner in this case.
13.
The second contention urged by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that, appointment of first respondent which is governed by the statutory rules framed under Articles 309 of the Constitution of India and therefore, he has placed reliance on the Judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi v. State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 3657 for the proposition that, the Government Department cannot be treated to be an `Industry'.
This question does not arise for consideration in view of the fact that it is an undisputed fact that the petitioner-Department is an Industry as defined under Section 2(j) of the Act.
This is not the case which was sought to be urged before this Court was urged before the Labour Court therefore, this contention must also fail.
In so far as the reliance placed on the DK Yadav's case and the case referred supra for the proposition that, the statutory rules having statutory force may also exclude application of principles of natural justice, this question has been answered by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court while examining the points of dispute referred to it has recorded a finding that, action of the Management in refusing employment to the first respondent- workman was not justified and it has categorically recorded a finding of fact having regard to the undisputed facts that, as on the date of refusal of employment, he had rendered continuous service of more than 806 days.
In the absence of establishing the case of the petitioner that the refusal of employment to the first respondent would not tantamount to retrenchment for the reasons stated supra, the contention urged by the learned Counsel for the petitioner supra must also fail.
14.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner further places reliance on the subsequent medical reports for the year 1997 and 1998, the same cannot be accepted at this stage in these proceedings for the reason that, what was sought to be established before the Labour Court was with regard to its action of refusal of employment in the year 1979 therefore, Labour Court has confined itself to adjudicate the dispute with reference to the points of dispute referred to it with regard to the refusal of employment in the order of reference.
Hence, the subsequent medical certificate cannot be looked into by this Court.
Hence, the contention in that regard is also rejected.
15.
With regard to the third contention that the workman has abandoned service therefore there was no cause of action for the first respondent for raising an industrial dispute and getting the industrial dispute referred to the Labour Court for adjudication cannot be accepted for the reason that the dispute referred to the Labour Court on the basis of the legal contentions urged and the records submitted before it and accordingly it has formulated the points of dispute and referred the same to the second respondent for adjudication.
It were to be the case of the petitioner-Management that the workman had voluntarily abandoned his services, the petitioner-Management was required to take such contention contending that the first respondent had voluntarily abandoned from his services therefore, there was no fault on the part of the Management and that it was not required to justify its alleged action as per the points of dispute referred to the Labour Court.
The plea regarding voluntary abandonment has not been pleaded in the counter statement filed by the petitioner before the second respondent except stating that he has to be paid arrears.
Further, the petitioner-Management has not taken steps to issue notice to the workman calling upon him to come and report for his duties in the establishment.
Therefore, as law declared by the Apex Court in GT Ladd's case (AIR 1979 SC 582), this contention of the petitioner cannot be accepted.
There is no material evidence placed by the petitioner-Management before this Court in this regard.
16.
Further, in view of law laid down by the Apex court in DK Yadav's case referred supra (paras 11 & 12), the action of the petitioner-Management has affected the statutory and fundamental rights guaranteed to the first respondent workman.
The rule of natural justice should have been taken into consideration in the instant case.
The action of the petitioner-Management entails serious civil consequences upon the workman and his family members' livelihood.
Even invoking the statutory rule, it should have given an opportunity to the workman.
Further, in the said Judgment, law has been laid down distinguishing the administrative enquiry and the quasi-judicial enquiry to arrive at a just decision having distinguished the same, it has held that the principals of natural justice logically apply to both the circumstances.
In this view of the matter, the contention of the petitioner-Management that the rules referred to above are applicable and therefore, its action does not amount to retrenchment is devoid of merit and the same cannot be accepted.
17.
In this view of the matter, viewing from all the angles and for the reasons stated supra, in my considered view, the award of the Labour Court does not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record on the ground that the findings recorded by the Labour Court are erroneous in law which do not warrant interference by this Court under Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India.
Accordingly, the petition must fail.
Writ Petition is rejected.
Petition dismissed.