Aftab Alam, J - The petitioner seeks a direction to the respondent Bihar State Electricity Board ('the Board', hereinafter) for payment of his salary for the period 1151987 to 541994 during which he was removed from service on the basis of an order of termination passed by the Board which was eventually quashed by this Court.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Switch Board Operator Grade II on 1011985.
He was later removed from service by an order dated 1151987 passed by the General Manager-cum-Chief Engineer, North Bihar Area Electricity Board on the ground that he had obtained appointment by producing a fake ITI certificate.
The petitioner challenged the order of his removal from service by filing CWJC No. 1033/1988.
That writ petition was disposed of by order dated 3031988 asking the petitioner to file a representation before the General Manager who is turn was directed to dispose of the same in accordance with law.
In that order an observation was made that if the authority came to the conclusion that the certificate was not forged, it would pass orders for the petitioner's re-instatement.
3.
Following this Court's direction, the petitioner made a representation which was rejected by the General Manager by order dated 1791988.
The petitioner then once again came to this Court in CWJC No. 7555/1998 challenging the order dated 1791988 along with the earlier order of his removal from service dated 1151987.
The second writ petition was allowed by order dated 2221994.
In this order this Court came to find and hold that the ITI certificate produced by the petitioner could not be said to be fake and consequently quashed in that writ petition.
The relevant extract from that order is as follows :  "In the facts of the above, it is difficult to hold that the appointment of the petitioner was made on the basis of fake certificate.
The conclusion drawn by the General Manager in the impugned order is more in the realm of conjecture than established facts.
In the result, this application is allowed.
The impugned order of cancellation of appointment dated 11587 (Annexure-2) and the order dated 17988 (Annexure-9) are quashed.
There will be no order as to costs."
4.
Following that order, the petitioner was taken back in service on 5.4.94 but he was denied the back wages and other consequential benefits for the period in question.
The petitioner then once again came to this Court in CWJC No. 1302/1996 claiming his back wages and other consequential benefits for the period in question.
That writ petition was disposed of by order dated 681997.
In that order this Court made the following observations :  "In any event since the petitioner was prevented from working as a result of the said order of termination and the same were quashed by this Court by order dated 22294 passed in CWJC No. 7555/1988, non-payment of salary and other consequential benefits to the petitioner for the aforesaid period is illegal."
5.
After making the above quoted observation this Court instead of issuing a direction to the Board to make payment of the back wages to the petitioner deemed it proper to let the Board itself rectify its error and it was presumably in that view that the petitioner was asked to make a representation before the Chairman of the Board who in turn was directed to give necessary directions on the petitioner's representation, in the light of the order passed by this Court.
It was further observed that in case the Chairman declined any part of the petitioner's claim, he should give adequate reasons in support of his decision.
The petitioner made a representation claiming his back wages and other consequential benefits before the Chairman who rejected his claim by order dated 27101997 and this writ petition has now been filed challenging that order passed by the Chairman.
6.
From a perusal of the order it appears that the Chairman has given no heed to the observation made by this Court that the non-payment of salary and other consequential benefits to the petitioner for the aforesaid period would be illegal.
The only reason assigned by the Chairman for denying the petitioner the back wages for the period of his removal from service is that during the period of seven years, the petitioner "might have been engaged in some other business affairs for which the Board cannot take any account".
The Chairman further deemed fit to presume that it was perhaps for that reason that this Court did not settle and decide the matter in the petitioner's favour.
7.
Having heard Mr. Akhileshwar Pd.
Singh, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Shivendra Kishore, learned Counsel appearing for the Board, I am of the view that both the presumption and the reason assigned by the Chairman are wholly untenable in the eye of law.
It is well settled that in case of re- instatement payment of back wages is the normal rule.
It is true that payment of back wages can be denied under some exceptional circumstances, one of them being that the concerned employee was otherwise profitably engaged during the period of his removal from service but the onus to prove that such was the position lies squarely on the employer and unless it is proved on the basis of cogent and reliable material that the concerned employee was profitably engaged otherwise during the period of his removal from service, he cannot be denied back wages on mere speculation and conjecture.
8.
In the writ petition, the petitioner has made a categorical statement that during the period of his removal from service he was not engaged anywhere else.
In these facts and circumstances, I have no hesitation in holding that the order passed by the Chairman denying the petitioner his back wages is wholly unsustainable in law.
This Court would also dispel the presumption entertained by the Chairman by now issuing a direction for payment of his entire back wages and other consequential benefits for the period 1151987 to 541994 during which he was illegally removed from service by the Board.
The payment in terms of this order must be made within three months from the date of receipt/production of a copy of this order.
9.
In the result, this writ petition is allowed but with no order as to costs.
Petition Allowed.