Satyabrata Sinha, Actg.
CJ - This appeal is directed against an order dated 521993 passed by a Ld.
Single Judge of this Court in C.O.
No. 15664(W) of 1992 whereby and whereunder the Ld.
Trial Judge allowed the writ application in terms whereof the respondents were inter alia directed to issue appointment letters in favour of the writ petitioners who are five in number, if they are otherwise eligible.
The Ld.
Trial Judge also by his order impugned observed :-  "Since the selection had already been made in 1988, if the petitioners have crossed the age limit the respondents must not take into account such age limit at the time of giving appointment on the basis of the interview already held."
2.
The writ petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 after having their names registered in the employment exchange in 1974 applied in 1984 for taking fire service and rescue training through employment exchange, Calcutta and the respondent/authorities after holding interview selected them and they obtained such training for a period of two months.
By a circular dated 30th August, 1986 some recruitments were proposed to be made for the post of Fire Operators and the writ petitioners requested the respondent No. 3 to consider their cases but the said respondent expressed his inability to consider the same and thus they were not recruited.
The writ petitioners then filed a writ petition which was disposed of on 181186 by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ajit Kumar Sengupta by the following order.
"After hearing the learned advocate for the parties, I dispose of his application by directing the respondent to call the petitioners at the interview for appointment in the West Bengal Fire Services, if they fulfil the qualification prescribed by the Director for such posts.
In the event, the respondents do not call the petitioners or any of them at the interview they shall give reasons why according to the respondents they are not qualified or eligible."
3.
Pursuant to the said order the Director, West Bengal Fire Services issued call letters to the petitioners on 27th July, 1988 and in pursuance whereof the writ petitioners appeared at the interview but they were not appointed.
Another writ application being Matter No. 5037 of 1988 was thereafter filed by the petitioners.
The respondents authorities in their affidavit-in-opposition denied that the petitioners have been selected in the interview held on 30th August, 1988.
The said writ petition was finally disposed of by Monoranjan Mallick, J on 31.3.1989 :  "All the original documents filed in connection with the appointments of Fire Operators have been called for by a writ of certiorari and the same have been produced.
From those documents it is found that in terms of the order of the Division Bench in FMAT 2463 of 1988 the Respondent No. 3, Director of West Bengal Fire Services, had been given permission to fill up 70 vacancies in the post of Fire Operators.
The files produced before me show that after this order had been passed by the Division Bench of this Court the posts for which applications were invited and the present writ petitioners along with the others were interviewed have already been filled up.
I also find the records that all the Appointment Letters have been issued and the successful candidates after undergoing training have already joined their respective posts and are now serving.
In view of the above circumstances, no order can be passed in this writ petition directing the respondents or any one of them to give any appointment to the present writ petitioners.
The writ petition has now become infructuous because in the meantime under the order of the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court all the vacancies have already been filled up.
This writ petition is, therefore, disposed of without passing any order."
4.
Against that order the petitioners preferred an appeal before the Division Bench which was disposed by an order dated 21690 in the following terms.
"We do not think that the matter calls for intervention at the appellate stage.
The proper course for the appellants, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, is to await the next opportunity for employment when fresh recruitment takes place and to apply and appear at the selection test.
There is no reason to believe that if they are eligible and found suitable, they would not be offered appointment."
5.
The Government of West Bengal, Urban Development issued a Circular dated 24490 sanctioning 36 posts for Fire Operators upto 20th February, 1991.
The petitioners made applications for being considered against those vacancies but the respondents did not consider their applications.
It is alleged that the respondents/authorities arbitrarily and mala fide did not issue letters of appointment to the petitioners in spite of several posts of Fire Operators lying vacant and they again filed a writ application being No. 15664(W) of 1992 which was disposed of by the learned trial Judge in the following term :  "Subsequently, since the aforesaid post was created as asserted in Paragraph 15 of the writ petition, the petitioners have moved this present writ petition, inter alia, praying for issuing of appointment letter in the posts of Fire Operators.
Such assertion made in paragraph 15 of the writ petition not being controverted by filing affidavits, accordingly this writ petition is disposed of by directing specifically the respondents to issue appointment letters in favour of the petitioners who are five in number.
Such appointment letter has to be issued on the basis of the availability of the vacancy, in the post of Fire Operators, within a period of two months from the date of communication of the order, if the petitioner concerned is otherwise eligible.
Since the selection had already been made in 1988, if the petitioners have crossed the age limit the respondent must not take into account such age limit at the time of giving appointment on the basis of the interview already held.
The writ petition is thus disposed of."
6.
The appellants being aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 5293 have come up with this appeal.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that the judgment passed by the learned trial Judge is per se illegal inasmuch as the same has been obtained by the writ petitioners by suppressing the fact that in an appeal from the original order (tender) No. 2463 of 1988 dated 5988, the Division Bench presided over by the Hon'ble Justice Manas Nath Roy directed that appellants would be entitled to fill up 70 vacancies for the post of Fire Operators subject, of course that in case the names of the respondents are sponsored by the Employment Exchange, their case may also be considered.
According to the Ld.
Advocate, it had been decided that mere existence of vacancy and certificate of fire fighting training will not automatically confer upon the writ petitioners any right to employment, as their names will have to be sponsored by the Employment Ereehange as per service rules.
It has further been argued that the Ld.
Trial Judge had wrongly directed to comply with the order of giving appointment within a period of two months from the date of communication of the order without taking in account the fact that the writ petitioners might have crossed the age-limit by this time but at the same time has been pleased to add, "if the petitioner concerned is otherwise eligible".
The Ld.
Trial Judge, therefore, impliedly directed that the petitioners will have to go through a process of selection for testing eligibility.
The Ld.
Counsel has, therefore, contended that the writ petition being barred by the principles of res judicat, the judgment of the learned trial Judge is liable to be set aside.
7.
In view of the specific case of the appellants to the effect that the writ petitioners did not succeed in the written examination, they had no legal right to be appointed.
All appointments, as is well known, must be made in terms of the recruitment rules.
Only because training had been imparted to the writ petitioners that by itself would not entitle them to obtain any appointment as a matter of right.
It is now a well settled principle of law that for the purpose of obtaining of writ of or in the nature of mandamus the petitioner must show the existence of legal right in themselves and corresponding legal duties in the respondents.
8.
The respondents herein filed as many as four writ petitions on misconception that after have obtained the certificate of fire fighting training they are entitled to get the job as Fire Operators as soon as such vacancies will come into existence but in none of the orders passed by the writ as also Appellate Courts, such right has been recognised.
9.
In State of West Bengal v. Monoranjan Mondal and Ors., reported in, 1996(1) CLJ 425 upon which strong reliance has been placed by the Ld.
Counsel for the respondents this Court held :  "The question of appointment is within the domain of employer.
The Court may direct the authority concerned to consider the same in accordance with the recruitment rules or relevant law, but Court cannot direct the authority concerned to give appointment in favour of any person unless a case has been made out that under the rules appointment can be given in an automatic process or appointment in a case in ministerial.
It is well settled principle that when the validity of the period of panel is fixed, after the expiry of that period the said panel lapses and on the basis of that panel no appointment can be given."
10.
The Apex Court has gone so far as to hold that even if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates do not acquire any indefeasible right to be appointed against the existing vacancies.
Unless the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies.
Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India reported in, 1991(3) SCC 47 : 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC).
11.
In Steel Authority of India Limited v. Nayan Kr.
Roy and Ors. reported in 1998(2) CLJ 125 : 1998(4) SCT 101 (Calcutta)(DB) a Division Bench of this Court presided over by one of us (SB Sinha, J) it was held :  "The appellant is a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and in order to maintain a writ application it is obligatory on the part of the petitioner to show that the appellant has violated any of the provisions contained in Part III of the Constitution of India.
The Petitioner had not succeeded in the written examination and, thus they were not called for interview.
The right to be appointed, if any, is conferred only on a person who is eligible therefor.
Even an empanelled candidate has no right to be appointed."
12.
It has been stated on affidavit by the appellants that under service rules the names of the candidates are required to be sponsored by the Employment Exchange and that has been upheld by the Division Bench in Original Order No. 2463 of 1988.
After that judgment it cannot be held otherwise that without such recommendation the writ petitioners would be entitled to get the job if they are found eligible.
It cannot be held that even without such recommendation the writ petitioners would be entitled to get the job if they are found eligible.
They cannot be found eligible unless their names are sponsored by the Employment Exchange as that is the first requisite for acquiring the eligibility of getting an interview.
The judgment passed by the Ld.
Trial Judge is at variance with that of the Judgment of the Division Bench of this Court and, thus, cannot be sustained.
13.
The Ld.
Trial Judge in our considered opinion has failed to take into consideration the earlier decision of this Court in terms whereof the cases of the petitioners were to be considered on their own merits.
The orders passed in the earlier writ application did not per se direct the respondents to appoint them as such the learned Trial Judge was not correct in issuing the impugned directions.
14.
Furthermore, a civil post can be filled up by a person eligible therefor.
Such eligibility tests having been prescribed unless and until they passed eligibility test, they cannot be appointed.
Without passing the eligibility test a direction for appointment, in our considered view, must be held to be illegal.
15.
Furthermore even in, case where the cases of the petitioner have not been considered by the respondent in the proper perspective, the direction which should be given by a writ court is to issue a writ of mandamus directing the concerned authority to perform his statutory duties.
16.
In State of West Bengal v. Nuruddin Mallik, reported in 1998(8) SCC 143 : 1998(4) SCT 349 (SC), it has been held "We have no hesitation to decline such a suggestion.
The courts can either direct the statutory authorities, where it is not exercising its discretion, by mandamus to exercise its discretion, or when exercised, to see whether it has been validly exercised.
It would be inappropriate for the Court to substitute itself for the statutory authorities to decide the matter."
17.
The learned trial Judge, in our considered opinion, also committed an error in directing the Relaxation of age bar without arriving at a finding as to whether such a power of relaxation exists or not.
18.
We, therefore, set aside the Judgment passed by the learned trial Judge and hold that the respondents herein will have to undergo a process of selection in terms of service rules obtaining in the concerned department of the appellants.
The appeal is thus allowed but considering the fact that the respondents are unemployed youths we do not make any order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.