RL Anand, J - Union of India filed this Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 25.9.1979, passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Ambala, who, affirmed the judgment and decree dated 2191978 passed by the Court of Sub-Judge 2nd Class, Ambala City, who decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent, Shri Ram Lal for declaration as prayed.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Shri Ram Lal son of Shri Mathura Dass, had filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated November 26, 1974, passed by DPO Delhi Division, North Railway, reverting the plaintiff to the post of Material Checking Clerk from the post of Material Clerk, is against the statutory rules, principles of natural justice and as such is illegal, ultra vires, void and a nullity being without jurisdiction and against the statutory instructions and regulations issued by the Railway Board and the plaintiff is entitled to continue on the post of Material Clerk and also entitled to receive all emoluments.
The plaintiff also sought a permanent injunction restraining the defendant from reverting him from the post of Material Clerk to the Post of Material Checking Clerk.
3.
The case of the plaintiff in the trial Court was that he was appointed as Boiler Maker Cooly Khallasi, in the Loco Department of Indian Railways on 13.4.1952 in the scale of Rs. 30-1/2-35.
He was confirmed as such with effect from 16.12.1955.
He was promoted as Material Checking Clerk in the scale of Rs. 55-85 (CPC) 105 (AS) with effect from 2661958.
He was further promoted as Material Clerk in the grade of Rs. 110-180 (AS)/Rs.
260-400 with effect from 2811969.
He continued to work as such till he was reverted to the post of Material Checking Clerk vide impugned order No. 752-E/35 Part I.P. dated 26111974.
The plaintiff alleged that he could not be reverted without adopting procedure prescribed in Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules.
He further alleged that the impugned orders are ultra vires, void, non-speaking and have been passed without reasons.
According to the plaintiff, as per Railway Board's Circular, he could not be reverted after putting in 18 months officiating service.
The plaintiff before filing the suit, served a notice under Section 80 CPC  4.
On the above broad allegations the plaintiff has sought the declaration and prayed for injunction.
5.
Notice of the suit was given to the defendant.
The suit was contested by the Union of India and the case set up by the defendant was that the plaintiff was promoted as Material Clerk purely on temporary ad hoc arrangement pending passing of suitability test and plaintiff was called upon to attend the suitability test of Material Clerk in the scale of Rs. 110-180(AS)/260, vide DPO DLI Letter No. 561M-186-P4 dated 1341973 but the plaintiff failed to attend.
Since the plaintiff failed to attend this suitability test and became unqualified for the said post, he was reverted to his substantive post of Material Checking Clerk.
It was, however, denied that the impugned orders are illegal.
The above pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues in the trial court :-  1.
Whether the impugned order is illegal, ultra vires etc. as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable as alleged ?
OPD 3.
Whether the notice served under Section 80 CPC is invalid as alleged ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
The parties led oral as well as documentary evidence in support of their case.
The plaintiff also placed on record the earlier circulars, Exs.
P1 to P5 which were issued prior to 2811969.
6.
The trial Court on the conclusion of the trial, decided issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff while issue Nos. 2 and 3 were decided against the defendant and the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
7.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court dated 2191978, Union of India filed the appeal before the first appellate Court and the learned Additional District Judge, Ambala, for the reasons given in para No. 6 of the judgment, dismissed the appeal.
Para No. 6 of the judgment of the first appellate Court reads as under :-  "Regarding the finding on issue No. 1, the learned counsel for the appellant has argued firstly that the earlier Rules which prohibited the reversion of a person having nugatory by the Rules framed by the Ministry of Railways in 1968.
He has read Rule 6 and its explanation, but sub-rule (iv) in runs as under :- Explanation :- The following shall not amount to a penalty within the meaning of this Rule, namely :- (i) xxxxxxxxxx (ii) xxxxxxxxx (iii) xxxxxxxx (iv) Reversion of a railway servant officiating in a higher service, grade or post to a lower service, grade or post, on the ground that he is considered to be unsuitable for such higher service, grade or post, on any administrative ground unconnected with his conduct.
According to him, the respondent was found unsuitable for the reported post and there was nothing against the respondent as regards his personal conduct was concerned.
The learned counsel for the respondent has argued that the railway rules which had been circulated on 3171958 and thereafter, on 961965, were not abrogated specifically by the rules framed in 1968.
The learned counsel for the appellant has admitted the situation that earlier the rules existed against the reversion which were contained in Ex.P1 to P5, the copies of the rules.
However, he could not say that these rules were abrogated in 1968, nor such a interpretation can be made by Sub-Rule IV quoted above.
The learned counsel for the respondent has quoted an authority namely Madhunkar Raghunath Nafday v. Union of India, 1974 All India Services Reporter 430.
According to him, if these rules of 1968 had abrogated the previous rules, the similar interpretation would have been in the cited authority but it was not so.
The cited authority was also relied upon by the learned trial Court which is in fours with the case of the respondent.
At the same time, the learned counsel for the respondent has quoted another case namely Amar Nath Gur v. General Manager Railways, AIR 1969 Assam and Nagaland 112, which laid down that an employee could not be reverted without following a procedure prescribed.
The policy of the rules framed by the railways must be followed in the concluding paragraph of this cited judgment.
It was held that a railway employee could not be reverted who had worked in the promoted post for a period of 18 months, unless his official work has been found unsatisfactory.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the appellant has cited an authority namely PC Sethi v. Union of India, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 2164, which lays down that only the length of service could not be the criteria of promotion.
He then cited another case namely MS Mehta v. Union of India, AIR 1977 Supreme Court 1673.
In the first cited authority, there was a dispute regarding the seniority between the direct recruits to the post of a Section Officer and the promotees.
The second authority cited related to a case where for the post of Assistant certain test was prescribed and certain persons by passing the test became senior.
It was held that the department taking the test in promotion and ignoring the length of service did not violate any fundamental rights.
So, both these authorities are not applicable in the case in the sense that the respondent was not concerned with any test, it was his unsuitability which was required to see the suitability of the respondents rather his unsuitability otherwise was to be for which there was no report.
The respondent did not claim his seniority on the basis of the test, rather on the basis of certain rules framed.
The learned counsel for the respondent has also quoted rule 158 from the Indian Railway Establishment Code Vol.
I, which runs as such : Rule 158.
"The General Managers of Indian Railways have full powers to make rules with regard to non-gazetted railways servants under their control provided they are not inconsistent with any rules made by the President of the Railway Board".
So, According to him the rule contained in Ex.P1 to Ex.P5 framed in 1968 cannot be deemed to be contradictory to each other.
Once the respondent had been put to serve under that rule and he served for a statutory period of 18 months, it was for the department to report his unsuitability.
The authorities cited by the learned counsel for the respondent are directly related to the matter in dispute, while the authorities cited by the learned counsel for the appellant do not apply, in view of the discussion referred to above and therefore, the finding on issue No. 1 as arrived at by the learned trial Court stands affirmed.
The findings of the learned trial Court on rest of the issues are not at all assailed or controverted in any manner.
The same are also affirmed."
Aggrieved by the judgment and the decree of the first appellate Court dated 25.9.1979, the present Regular Second Appeal has been preferred.
8.
I have heard Shri Deepak Thapar, Advocate, on behalf of the appellant and Shri AS Tewatia, Advocate, on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
9.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that plaintiff was promoted on ad hoc basis as a stop gap arrangement as Material Clerk on 2811969 subject to the passing of the suitability test.
The plaintiff was called upon to pass the suitability test vide letter dated 1341973 but he failed to attend the suitability test, therefore, he was reverted to his substantive post of Material Checking Clerk and reversion to the substantive post is not a reduction in rank and as such provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India are not applicable.
The counsel further submitted that in the year 1968 the Government of India, had framed statutory Rules and as per Rule 6, reversion of a railway servant, officiating in a higher service, grade or post to a lower service, grade or post, on the ground that he is considered to be unsuitable for such higher service, grade or post, or on any administrative ground unconnected with his conduct, shall not amount to a penalty within the meaning of this Rule.
Therefore, if the plaintiff has been reverted to his substantive post in the year 1974, it is not a reduction in rank and the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are not applicable in this case and as such, both the Courts fell in error in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
10.
On the contrary, Shri AS Tewatia, learned counsel for the respondent- plaintiff submitted that before the Rules of 1968, the conditions of service of the railway employees were used to be governed by the various circulars.
The Rules of 1968 are not in conflict with those circulars and those circulars have not been superseded, therefore, the Rules of 1968 will not come into play.
As per the circulars issued by the Department from time to time, the plaintiff kept on serving against the post of Material Checking Clerk beyond 18 months and, therefore, the plaintiff could not be called upon to pass and test of suitability and if the plaintiff has been reverted, with the passing of the impugned order, to his substantive post, it will amount to reduction in rank.
11.
After considering the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of the opinion that there is merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
The plaintiff was promoted as Material Clerk in the month of January, 1969.
At that time, the statutory Rules had come into force.
Even those Rules do not specifically overrule the circulars issued earlier by the Government of India some time in November, 1965-66, but definitely, those circulars are in conflict with the statutory Rules.
It is the case of the defendant in the written statement that plaintiff was promoted to the post of Material Clerk in the month of January, 1969.
There is no proof on the record that the plaintiff was promoted as a permanent hand and against a regular vacancy.
Rather, the plaintiff was promoted to the post of Material Clerk purely on temporary ad hoc arrangement pending passing of suitability test and that was the reason that plaintiff was called upon to pass the suitability test vide letter dated 13.4.1975.
He did not do so and in these circumstances, it cannot be said that plaintiff has acquired a right to continue against the post of Material Clerk.
He was just officiating to the promoted post by way of stop gap arrangement and vide impugned order dated 26111974, he was reverted to his substantive post of Material Checking Clerk and, therefore, such an order is not stigmatic and does not amount to penalty within the meaning of Rule 6 of the statutory Rules aforesaid concerning service conditions of the railway employee.
The suit of the plaintiff has been decreed by the Courts below mainly on the ground that the Circulars dated 3171958 and 961965, have not been repealed subsequently by the Rules of 1968 and, therefore, those circulars should be read as supplement to the Rules of 1968.
When the statutory Rules of 1968, have come into force governing the conditions of service of the railway employees including of the plaintiff, provisional promotion of the plaintiff to the post of Material Clerk by order dated 28.1.969, has to be seen in the light of those statutory Rules.
The second reason adopted by the Courts below in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff was that plaintiff continued to work on the promoted post right from 1969 to 1974 and, therefore, he has acquired a right to work as Material Clerk.
This itself is no ground to decree the suit of the plaintiff.
Both the Courts ignored the basic fact that promotion of the plaintiff to the post of Material Clerk was subject to the passing of the test of suitability.
If he has not passed the test of suitability which was mandatory in his case, any length of service on the promoted post, will not confer a right on such an employee to continue on that post.
In this regard assistance can be taken from 1989(7) SLR 161, Jetha Nand and others v. Union of India and others, wherein the following observations were made :-  "Nothing has been pointed out in the Manual or in the statutory Rules to say that a person can be appointed to a higher post on promotion without going through the process of selection."
Further, it was observed as follows :-  "The principle is well settled that an employee can acquire a right to a selection post in the higher grade only after a suitability test.
We, therefore, hold that a suitability test is mandatory before his service in class III post is regularised."
Further it was observed :  "That when the promotion of a railway employee is on ad hoc basis merely that he officiated on such post for more than 18 months and that his work has found statisfactory is not enough to entitle the employee is claim regularisation of service merely on completion of 18 months officiating service on the promotional post without qualifying the test."
Also it was observed as follows :-  "In regard to the last question as to when an ad hoc employee can be reverted, the answer is that if he has been appointed in a stop-gap arrangement, he can be reverted at any time.
If he has not qualified in the selection test, he can still be reverted.
If he has qualified in the test and had continued in ad hoc capacity for more than 18 months, he cannot be reverted except after following the Discipline and Appeal Rules.
Further, we have also held that a person who has so far not qualified in the selection test and is holding an ad hoc post in the promotional post, he should be given several chances to qualify in the selection test and if even after repeated chances given to him he fails, there would be no other alternative but to revert him.
The cardinal principle is that he must have qualified in the selection test to become suitable for the post."
Thus, the gist of the above observations is that if an employee has been appointed as stop-gap arrangement against a promoted post, he can be reverted at any time.
If he has not qualified in the selection test, he can still be reverted.
Admittedly, the plaintiff has not been declared suitable against the post of Material Clerk.
He did not appear in the suitability test in spite of the fact that he was called upon to do so.
12.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the order dated 26111974, reverting the plaintiff from the post of Material Clerk to Material Checking Clerk, was a reduction in rank, as the plaintiff did not acquire any right against the post of Material Clerk.
Resultantly, this Court is of the opinion that this appeal should succeed.
The appeal is hereby accepted, the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.