RL Anand, J. (Oral) - By this order I dispose of two SA Os.
No. 1 and 2, of 1998, both titled Parduman Singh & another v. Khalsa College Council, Mukatsar, etc., as both the appeals have arisen from the order dated 1181997 passed by the Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Faridkot, who allowed the two appeals No. RT 210 of 27.8.1994 titled Khalsa College Council, Mukatsar & others v. Munshi Singh and others and T No. 213 of 27.8.1994 titled Barinder Singh and another v. Gurdeep Singh etc., and set aside the judgment and decree of the trial court and remanded the case to the trial court for fresh decision after framing an issue.
The appellate court also gave the directions that the parties may lead evidence in support of their case and that the trial court shall decide all the issues including the additional issue framed by the appellate court.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  3.
A suit was instituted by five persons; namely, Khalsa College Council, Babu Singh, Barinder Singh, Ajit Singh and Daljit Singh against Munshi Singh and 15 others, for declaration to the effect that defendants No. 5 to 16 are not the members or office-bearers of Khalsa College Council, Mukatsar and they have no concern with the Khalsa College Council or the institutions working under its control and for a decree of permanent injunction restraining defendants No. 5 to 16 from interfering in any manner in the administration run by the plaintiff-Council.
The suit was contested by the defendants on the plea that they are the nominated members of the Council and that Gurdeep Singh, defendant No. 4, was never removed from the membership of the Council.
It was further pleaded by the contesting defendants that they are the members of the Council, after making payment of the prescribed fee, etc.  4.
The trial Court framed the following issues :-  "1.
Whether Babu Singh is a member and General Secretary of the Khalsa College Council ?
OPP 2.
If issue No. 1 is proved, whether the suit has not been filed by a proper person ?
OPD 3.
Whether defendants No. 6 to 16 are not the members or office- bearers of the Khalsa College Council ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 5.
Whether Gurdip Singh has been removed from the General Secretaryship if so, its effect ?
OPP 6.
Relief."
5.
When the case was taken up by the trial Court on 1611988, a statement was made by the contesting defendants through their counsel and also by defendant No. 4 stating that the defendants admit that plaintiff No. 2 Babu Singh is the founder member of plaintiff No. 1, i.e. Khalsa College Council.
On the basis of this admission, plaintiff No. 2 Babu Singh for himself and for plaintiff No. 1 and Shri J.S.
Brar, who represented plaintiff No. 5 Daljit Singh, made a statement that the plaintiffs withdraw the suit and that they would subsequently file a fresh suit.
On the basis of this statement made by the parties and their counsel, the suit was dismissed as withdrawn.
On 1611988, however, an application was moved on behalf of plaintiffs No. 3 and 4 Ajit Singh and Barinder Singh that qua them, the suit was not rightly dismissed as withdrawn because none of them had made any statement for the withdrawal of the suit.
Accordingly, vide order dated 1811988, the appellate court restored the suit of plaintiffs No. 3 and 4.
Thereafter, the remaining two plaintiffs, i.e. Barinder Singh and Ajit Singh and the defendants were directed to lead evidence on the issues already framed by the Court.
Finally, the suit was decided.
6.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the trial court, two appeals were instituted before the first appellate court; one by Barinder Singh and Ajit Singh (plaintiffs No. 3 and 4) and the other by Khalsa College Council, Babu Singh and Daljit Singh (plaintiffs No. 1, 2 and 5).
When the appeals came up for hearing before the appellate court for final disposal, the learned Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Faridkot, thought proper that an additional issue should be framed as plaintiff No. 1 had taken the plea that the resolution dated 20121984 had already been cancelled vide resolution dated 29111985, as a result of which an additional issue was filed by the first appellate court, to the following effect :-  "Whether plaintiffs-Council passed resolution dated 29111985 cancelling resolution dated 30.12.1984 ?
If so, its effect ?
OPP " 7.
The appellate court also came to the conclusion that before the trial Court the plaintiff No. 1, i.e. Khalsa College Council has not been given the opportunity to prosecute its case and, therefore, the case requires fresh decision on all the issues.
It was also observed by the appellate court that Babu Singh could not withdraw the suit in a valid manner on behalf of plaintiff No. 1 i.e. Khalsa College Council.
This time aggrieved by the order dated 181987 passed by the first appellate court, Parduman Singh and others have filed the present two appeals.
8.
I have heard Mr. GS Punia, counsel for the appellants and S/Shri RK Joshi and SK Arora, Advocate, for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
9.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that on 1611988, the suit was dismissed as withdrawn on behalf of plaintiffs No. 1, 2 and 5; namely, Khalsa College Council, Babu Singh and Daljit Singh, respectively, and, therefore, the appeal of these three persons was not competent before the first appellate court.
Mr. Punia submitted that Babu Singh made a categorical statement for the withdrawal of the suit on his own behalf and also on behalf of plaintiff No. 1 and, therefore, these two persons along with Daljit Singh, who also made a similar statement through his counsel, could not file the appeal before the first appellate Court.
10.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that Babu Singh had no valid authority to make any statement on behalf of plaintiff No. 1 for the withdrawal of the suit and, therefore, any statement made by Babu Singh does not bind the interests of plaintiff No. 1 and, therefore plaintiff No. 1 had the independent right to file the appeal irrespective of the fact that Babu Singh made a statement on his behalf as well as on behalf of Khalsa College Council.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, the statement of Babu Singh could only bind him and similarly the suit of Daljit Singh could have been dismissed.
11.
I partly agree with the submissions of the counsel for the appellants.
In the opinion of this court, Babu Singh and Daljit Singh whose suit had already been dismissed as withdrawn on 1611988, could not file the appeal as they had no locus standi to do so because they were no longer plaintiffs.
It is not shown on the record that Babu Singh was duly authorised by any resolution passed by Khalsa College Council to make any statement on its behalf.
In these circumstances, the statement made by Babu Singh on 1611988 will not bind the interests of plaintiff No. 1, which could always lead evidence before the trial court or could show before the appellate court that the decree as prayed for can be passed in its favour.
12.
The learned counsel for the appellants, then, submitted that there was hardly any justification on the part of the appellate court to set aside the judgment and decree of the trial court on all the issues and to remand the case.
The counsel submitted that under Order 41 Rule 25, CPC, the first appellate court could call for the report on the additional issue so framed.
13.
I find merit in this contention of the counsel for the appellants.
There was hardly any necessity on the part of the first appellate court to set aside the entire judgment and decree passed by the learned trial court.
The first appellate court could call for the report on the additional issue on which the parties were given the opportunity to lead evidence in support of their case.
The trial Court, then, could give the findings with regard to the additional issue and send the evidence along with the findings to the first appellate court, who could have examined the entire evidence on the record and, then, given findings whether the judgment and decree of the trial court could be sustained or not.
14.
Resultantly, both the appeals are hereby partly allowed, the impugned order dated 1181997 is hereby modified and directions are given to the Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Faridkot, to re-admit the appeals to their original number.
The trial court shall record the evidence on the additional issue framed by the first appellate court; giving opportunity to plaintiffs No. 1, 3 and 4 and to the defendants to lead evidence and after recording the evidence, it shall send the record along with the findings to the first appellate court, which shall hear the arguments afresh on behalf of plaintiffs No. 1, 3 and 4 and the contesting defendants.
The contesting defendants shall have the right to convince to the first appellate court that the appeal of plaintiff No. 1 was not legally maintainable in view of the order dated 1611988.
15.
The parties through their counsel, are directed to appear before the first appellate court on 2791999.
Appeals partly allowed.