Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, six in numbers, joined the Bachelor of Veterinary Sciences Course in the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Respondent No. 1 in the academic year 1990-91.
At the time of joining the course, the evaluation of marks in the examination was made on the basis of the Overall Grade Point Average Scheme (hereinafter called the OGPA).
Under this system, a grade of A to F was given with a grade of four marks on attainment of 80% and above but below 70%, 50% and above but below 60% and below 50% respectively whereas X which brought grade of zero mark was shown as fail.
The Academic Council of the University in its 214th meeting held on 29th December, 1993, decided that in view of the latest developments in the educational system, it was appropriate that the OGPA system be discarded and the system known as the overall Credit Point average (hereinafter called the OCPA) be applied to the undergraduate and post Graduate programmes of the University from the Academic Session 1993-94.
A table for evaluation was also laid down and it was directed that there would be declining grade average determined on the basis of marks obtained in the paper and the result of 100 marks in a paper would correspond to 1000 credit point which was the highest.
This information was conveyed by the Registrar of the University vide Annexure P-1 dated 17th January, 1994.
The Academic Council, thereafter, in its 233rd meeting held on 11th June, 1996 further discussed the matter in detail and decided that the students who had been admitted during the year 1992-93, could also opt for the OCPA system subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions.
This decision was also communicated to all concerned vide Annexure P-2/1 dated 25th June, 1996.
It appears that there was yet another reconsideration of the matter and it was decided on the recommendation of the Dean of the University that options for conversion to the OCPA system be given to all students of all Colleges of the 1992-93 two years' programme and to students of the 1991-92 five years programme who had not completed their degrees until the second semester of the 1996-97 academic year.
This information was also conveyed to all concerned vide Annexure P-2/2 dated 27th July, 1997.
Some of the petitioners, thereafter, moved an application Annexure P-3 dated 20th February, 1998, to the Registrar of the University, praying that this benefit should also be given to the students who had joined the University in the academic year 1990-91, but as this request had not been accepted, they have come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion issued by this Court on 16th April, 1998. a reply has been filed on behalf of the University and it has been pleaded that petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 had already completed their courses and had also received their provisional degrees between March 1996 and March 1997, whereas petitioner No. 6 Rajvinder Singh had also completed his course since then and was presently doing his internship.
It has also been pleaded that the Academic Council, the Apex Rule making body for academic matters had rightly decided to introduce the cut off point for the implementation of the OCPA programme from the academic year 1991-92 for Veterinary Science students as the cut off dates could not be taken beyond 1991-92 as these students had completed 3/4th of their courses under the old system by that time and it was, thus, not possible to amalgamate the old with the new system of evaluation.
It has also been highlighted that even in the case of those students who had been given their final degrees in accordance with the OCPA system the assessment and award of marks etc of their examination held before the year 1993-94, had been made under the old scheme.
3.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners and it has been pointed out that they had been discriminated against as they had been admitted in the academic sessions 1990-91 and had only taken six months ie one semester more of instructions vis-a-vis students who had been admitted in the year 1991-92.
On merits, it has also been pleaded that the mathematical formula given for the assessment or evaluation of merit under the two systems left the student under the old OGPA method at a serious dis-advantage vis-a-vis those students whose assessment had been under the OCPA system.
4.
Mr. GK Chatrath, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has, first and foremost, argued that there was no justification for confining the OCPA system to students who had been admitted to the various courses from the year 1991-92 onwards while declining the said benefit to the petitioners who had been granted admission in the academic year 1990-91.
He has urged that discrimination was, thus, writ large which needed to be rectified by this Court.
He has, in this connection, relied upon two judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as BS Yadav v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1981 Supreme Court 561 and SG Jaisinghani v. Union of India, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 1427.
He has also submitted that as the petitioners were placed at a dis-advantage vis-a-vis the University, they had no option but to accept the terms laid down for evaluation of their performance and as such, the respondents could not take the plea of estoppel against them.
In support of this assertion, Mr. Chatrath has placed reliance upon West Bengal State Electricity Board v. Desh Bandhu Ghosh, A.I.R. 1985 Supreme Court 722, Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, A.I.R. 1986 Supreme Court 1571 and Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, A.I.R. 1991 Supreme Court 101 : 1991(1) SCT 675 (SC).
He has finally urged that in the alternative, it would be proper if a direction was issued to the University that the petitioners should be given marks in percentage form rather than in grade form and this too, would, though reluctantly, satisfy their claim in this writ petition.
5.
Mr. Takkar, the learned counsel representing the University has, however, placed reliance on the written statement and has controverted the petitioners' claim and has, in addition, pointed out that as no vested right of the petitioners had been violated, the question of discrimination did not arises.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in this writ petition.
Admittedly at the time when the petitioners had taken admission in the course in the academic year 1990-91, the OGPA system for evaluation was in vogue and it was for the first time in the 214th meeting of the Academic Council held on 29th December, 1993 that the OCPA system had been adopted from the Academic year 1993-94 onwards.
It appears that this proposal was modified by the Academic Council and the benefit was given to even those students who had been admitted during the year 1992-93, and subsequently to students who had been admitted to the four years' programme in 1992-93 and to the five years programme in the year 1991-92.
Admittedly, the petitioners who had been granted admission in the year 1990-91 to a five years programme were not covered by any of the decisions taken by the Academic Council or the Vice Chancellor.
It has been further clarified in the written statement that the cut off date had been imposed keeping in view the status of the course as students who had completed two years of the course were given the option to switch over the OCPA scheme whereas those who had completed more than that period i.e. a substantial part of the course were to be evaluated in accordance with the existing OGPA Scheme.
Moreover, I am of the opinion that a decision taken by the Academic Council, the Apex Body on such matters, should not be lightly meddled with for the reason that it alone had the necessary expertise to go into this question.
In this view other matter, the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners are not attracted to the issues raised herein and are even otherwise glaringly distinguishable on facts.
7.
It is also significant that this writ petition had been filed in the year 1998 whereas petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 had passed out of the course between March, 1996 and March, 1997, and petitioner No. 6 had also completed the course and was undergoing internship at the time of filing of the reply on 1951998.
8.
Mr. Chatrath's alternative argument is equally to be rejected.
It is the admitted position that during the course of motion hearing of the case, the learned counsel for the respondents had been asked to find out if the result of the petitioners could be given in percentage form.
The counsel, thereafter, informed this Court that this arrangement was not feasible as the OGPA system had been followed by the University in the case of all other co- students of the petitioners who had passed out along with them and who had raised no dispute with regard to their results.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.