SB Sinha, J - The appellant feeling aggrieved by and dissatisfied with an order dated 1121998 passed by a learned Single Judge of this court whereby and whereunder the writ application was dismissed, has preferred this appeal.
2.
The appellant was appointed as an Amin on contract basis by the respondent herein.
The appointment letter dated 8.11.96 is contained in Annexure 'A' to the writ application, the relevant portion whereof reads thus :-  "Shri Tarakeswar Mahapatra, Ex-Amin, Office of the DL, SLRO, Tamluk, Government of West Bengal is hereby appointed in the interest of a public service for the post of Amin on contract basis in the office of the Special Land Acquisition Officer (for completion of Land Acquisition work pertained to Land Acquisition of Haldia Development Authority) on re- employment from the date on which he assume charges of the post."
3.
Clause 4 of the said offer of appointment is as follows :-  "The contract of this appointment may be terminated any time without assigning any reason after serving one month's notice from either side."
4.
The services of the appellant was terminated by the respondent in terms of a notice dated 5.4.98 which is to the following effect :-  "Whereas it appears to the undersigned that his performance of duties for which he was entrusted with was far below the expected norms.
Now, therefore, in terms of the proviso to Para-4 of his appointment letter, he is hereby informed that his services are no longer required and the Contract of Service is also hereby determined with one month's notice with effect from 121998 and on expiry of which his appointment shall stand terminated."
5.
The question which was raised before the learned trial Judge as also before this court is in view of the fact that performance of the appellant was found to be below the expected norms, recourse taken by the respondent to Clause-4 of the offer of appointment must be held to be arbitrary in nature.
6.
Mr. Banerjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that while passing the said order, neither any reason has been assigned nor the principles of natural justice had been complied with.
According to the learned Counsel, prior to passing of the impugned order, no allegation had been made as against him and in that view of the matter, termination of the services of the appellant must be held to be illegal particularly in view of the fact that the Governor had approved the retention of 56 posts belonging to different categories for the Office of the Special Land Acquisition, Haldia in terms of the letter dated 5th November, 1997 as contained in Annexure 'C' to the writ application.
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that by reason of the impugned order, no stigma has been cast upon the appellant and, thus, the question of suffering any civil consequences by him does not and cannot arise.
As noticed hereinbefore, the appellant was appointed as an Amin on contract basis.
The appointment was temporary in nature.
The said contract of service was offered in view of creation of the said post which was valid upto 28.10.97 by reason of the aforementioned letter dated 5th November, 1997 the said posts were directed to continue for a period of one year only with effect from 29.10.97, thus, admittedly the said posts no longer exist.
The appellant was had not been appointed in terms of the recruitment rules.
His appointment absolutely temporary in nature.
The appellant's appointment, therefore, was not substantive and, thus, he had no right to continue to hold the said post.
8.
In Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1958 SC 36, it has been held :-  "If the servant has no right to the post, as where he is appointed to a post, permanent or temporary, either on probation or on an officiating basis and whose temporary service has not ripened into a quasi-permanent service as defined in the Temporary Service Rules, the termination of his employment does not deprive him of any right and cannot, therefore, by itself by a punishment."
9.
This aspect of the matter has again been considered in Khem Chand v. Union of India and others, reported in AIR 1958 SC 300.
10.
In GB Pant Agricultural and Technology University v. Kesho Ram reported in AIR 1995 SC 718 : 1994(3) SCT 806 (SC), it has been held that a termination of service in terms of contract of service cannot be held to be per se illegal.
11.
Furthermore, the validity of order of termination has to be judged upon taking into consideration the entire facts and circumstances of the case.
12.
The question as to whether the order of termination of service would be a punitive one or not has been considered in State of UP and others v. Krishna Kumar Sharma reported in 1997(11) SCC 437.
In that case the Apex Court relied upon its earlier decision in State of UP v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla reported in 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) : 1991(1) SCC 691 and held that an averment had been made in the counter affidavit to the effect that the services of the appellant was not free from blemish, held that such adverse report, if any, cannot be said to be the basis for termination and the termination of service being termination simplicitor, no infirmity thereto was to be found.
13.
In Kunwar Arun Kumar v. UP Hill Electronics Corporation Ltd. & others, reported in 1997(2) SCC 191 SC, the Apex Court found that in case a person who was to undergo probation, termination of service on the expiry of the probationary period on the ground of unsatisfactory work does not contain any stigma nor the probationer is entitled to an opportunity of being heard prior to passing of the said order.
The learned Judges held :-  "The reasons mentioned in the order may be a motive and not a foundation as a ground for dismissal.
During the period of probation, the authorities are entitled to assess the suitability of candidate and if it is found that the candidate is not suitable to remain in service they are entitled to record a finding of unsatisfactory performance of the work and duties during the period of probation.
Under these circumstances, necessarily the appointing authority has to look into the performance of the work and duties during the period of probation and if they record a finding that during that probation period, the work and performance of the duties were unsatisfactory, they are entitled to terminate the service in terms of the letter of appointment without conducting any enquiry.
That does not amount to any stigma."
14.
Although it was found that the termination was not punitive but in the facts and circumstances of this case grant of compensation was held to be in consonance with the principles of justice.
15.
In Union of India and another v. Bihari Lal Sidhana reported in 1997(4) SCC 385 : 1997(3) SCT 318 (SC), the Apex Court despite acquittal of the concerned officer by a criminal court held :-  "The termination order indicated the factum that he, by then, was under suspension.
It is only a way of describing him as being under suspension when the order came to be passed but that does not constitute any stigma.
Mere acquittal of government employee does not automatically entitle the government servant to reinstatement.
As stated earlier, it would be open to the appropriate competent authority to take a decision whether the enquiry into the conduct is required to be done before directing reinstatement or appropriate action should be taken as per law, if otherwise available.
Since the respondent is only a temporary government servant, the power being available under Rule 5(1) of the Rules, it is always open to the competent authority to invoke the said power and terminate the services of the employee instead of conducting the enquiry or to continue in service a government servant accused of defalcation of public money."
16.
In Champaklal Chamanlal Shah v. Union of India reported in 1996(4) Supreme Court Service Law Judgment 51, the Apex Court again followed Parshotam Lal Dhingra (supra).
17.
This aspect of the matter has also recently been considered by one of us in Shri Shibranjan Ghosh v. West Bengal Surface Transport Corporation Ltd, and others, C.O.
No. 2945(W) of 1993, decided on 211298 wherein this Court upon taking into consideration the decisions of the Apex Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore reported in 1991(1) SCC 691, Hukam Chand Khundia v. Chandigarh Administration and another, reported in 1995(6) SCC 534 : 1996(1) SCT 478 (SC), Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, reported in AIR 1974 SC 2192, The Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd, and others v. Lt. Col. Dipankar Bhattacharya and others reported in 1990(6) S.L.R.
743 and other decisions had held that the termination of a temporary service only on the ground of unsatisfactory work cannot be said to have cast stigma and for that purpose, the principles of natural justice are not required to be complied with.
18.
Referring to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Uptron India Ltd v. Shammi Bhan reported in 1998(6) SCC 538 : 1998(2) SCT 169 (SC), it was held:-  "The said decision, therefore, makes it absolutely clear that only a 'permanent status' confers a right for invoking the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act.
A person who has not been appointed upon compliance with the provisions under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and upon observance of the Recruitment Rules does not derive any legal right to continue in service.
Termination of services of such employee without casting any stigma whatsoever does not attract the wrath of Article 14 of the Constitution of India."
19.
Even in a case where a permanent employee was put on probation, the employer has a right to consider rendition of satisfactory service by the concerned employee before passing an order of confirmation.
In State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, reported in 1991(1) SCC page 691, the Apex Court held that :  "As already observed, the respondent being a temporary government servant had no right to hold the post as the competent authority terminated his services by an innocuous order of termination without casting any stigma on him."
20.
In Hukum Chand Khundia v. Chandigarh Administration and another reported in 1995(6) SCC page 534, the Apex Court distinguished its earlier decision in Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, reported in 1986(3) SCC page 277, holding :  It, however, appears to us that no discriminatory treatment has been meted out to the petitioner as was done to the employee concerned in the said decision.
It appears that the service of the petitioner was found unsatisfactory for the reasons indicated hereinbefore.
Since the petitioner was holding a temporary service and was on probation, an order of termination simpliciter against him.
As the service records were found unsatisfactory, the termination order cannot be held arbitrary and capricious.
In the aforesaid facts, we do not think that in reality an order of punishment has been passed against the petitioner simplicter without holding any departmental proceeding thereby violating Article 311 of the Constitution."
21.
For the reasons aforementioned, there is no merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be not order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.