TS Doabia, J - In this petition challenge is being made to an order passed by Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Srinagar.
Respondent-Kamini Tickoo was working as Typing with the respondent-organisation.
She came to be employed in the year 1979.
She worked up to 27th of February, 1982.
Her services were brought to an end by passing verbal order.
As there was non- compliance of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 inasmuch as retrenchment compensation was not paid in terms of Section 25-F of the Act and as she had rendered more than 240 days of service order of termination was held to be bad.
She was held entitled to the payment of back wages.
For this reliance was placed on a decision given by the Supreme Court of India in case reported as Hindustan Tin Works v. Its employees, AIR 1979 SC 75 : 1978 Lab IC 1667.
2.
In my opinion view expressed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Srinagar cannot be faulted.
3.
The Supreme Court of India in the case of Des Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1182 : 1988 Lab IC 1713 has held that Public Works Department is an Industry.
Telecommunication Department was held to be an industry in the case reported as GM Telecom v. A Srinivasa Rao, 1997(8) SCC 767.
The respondent is thus a workman for the purposes of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
4.
What happens when a workman completes 240 days of service in one calendar year.
This aspect of the matter be examined.
5.
Under the Industrial Law, it is well settled that if services of a workman who has completed more than 240 days of services in one calendar year are terminated he is entitled to reinstatement if his services are brought to an end without complying with Section 25-F of the Act.
As to how this period is completed is totally irrelevant.
As a matter of fact, where by arithmetical count, a workman is able to demonstrate that he had completed this period the relief of reinstatement has to be granted.
It would be apt to notice the decisions given by the Supreme Court of India.
In the case reported as Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1980 SC 1219 : 1980 Lab IC 687 wherein the earlier view expressed in the State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111 : 1976 Lab IC 769 and Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa, 1976(4) SCC 222 : 1976 Lab IC 1766. was approved.
The relevant observations are as under :-  "In State Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, 1976(3) SCR 160 : AIR 1976 SC 1111 Bench of three-Judges of this Court consisting of Chandrachud, J (as then was), Krishna Iyer, J and Gupta, J considered the question whether Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act was attracted to a case where the order of appointment carried an automatic cessation of service, the period of employment working itself out by efflux of time and not by an act of employer.
Krishna Iyer, J who spoke for the Court observed: "Termination......for any reason whatsoever are the key words.
Whatever the reason, every termination spells retrenchment.
So the sole question is has the employee's service been terminated.
Verbal apparel apart, the substance is decisive.
A termination takes place where a term expires either by the active step of the master or the running out of the stipulated term.
To protect the weak against the strong this policy of comprehensive definition has been effectuated.
Termination embraces not merely the act of termination by the employer, but the fact of termination howsoever produced......True, the section speaks of retrenchment by the employer and it is urged that some act of violation by the employer to bring about the termination is essential to attract section 25-F and automatic extinguishment of service by effluxion of time cannot be sufficient......Words of multiple import have to be winnowed judicially to suit the social philosophy of the statute.
So screened we hold that the transitive and intransitive senses are covered in the current context.
Moreover, an employer terminates employment not merely by passing an order as the service runs.
He can do so by writing a composite order, one giving employment and the other ending or limiting.
A separate, subsequent determination is not the sole magnetic pull of the provision.
A pre-emptive provision to terminate is struck by the same vice as the post-appointment termination.
Dexterity of diction cannot defeat the articulated conscience of the provision."
6.
In Hindustan Steel Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa, 1977(1) SCR 586 : AIR 1977 SC 31, the question again arose whether termination of service by efflux of time was termination of service within the definition of retrenchment in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Both the earlier decisions of the Court in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. AK Divikar, AIR 1957 SC 121 and State of Bank of India v. N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111 : 1976 Lab IC 769 were considered.
There was also a request that N Sundara Money's case conflicted with the decision in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. A.D. Divikar and, therefore, required reconsideration.
Bench of three-Judges of this Court consisting of Chandrachud, J (as he then was), Goswami, J and Gupta, J held that there was nothing in Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v. A.D. Divikar which was inconsistent with the decision in N Sundara Money's case.
They held that the decision in Hariprasad Shivshankar's case was that the words for any reason whatsoever used in the definition of retrenchment would not include a bona fide closure of the whole business because it would be against the entire scheme of the Act.
The learned Judges then observed that on the facts before them to give full effect to the words for any reason whatsoever would be consistent with the scope and purpose of Section 25 of the Industrial Disputes Act and not contrary to the scheme of the Act.
In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhu Nath Mukerjee, 1978(1) SCR 591 : AIR 1978 SC 8, S Goswami, J, Shinghal, J and Jaswant Singh, J held that the striking off the name of a workman from the rolls by the management was termination of the services which was retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
"The above view stands reiterated in later decisions in Karnataka SRTC v. M Baraiah, 1984(1) SCC 225; Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Chandigarh, 1990(3) SCC 682.
Thus once an employee completes more than 240 days of services and there is failure to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act then he is entitled to reinstatement and this relief can be granted even in a writ petition."
7.
If above be the situation then respondent who had completed more than 240 days of service in one calendar year had some rights under the Industrial Disputes Act also.
8.
In this regard, it would again be pertinent to refer to another decision of the Supreme Court of India reported as Workman of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 458, wherein it has been observed that the paid holidays and Sundays are also to be counted for determining as to whether a person has completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.
9.
In the face of the above situation it can again be said that a right did accrue in favour of the respondent No. 2.
As her service were terminated without compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, therefore, her termination would be bad.
10.
With regard to the back wages Tribunal has rightly placed reliance on the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt, Ltd, AIR 1979 SC 75.
Grant of back wages is normal it is for the employer to prove that the workman was not gainfully employed.
Relevant observations are as under :-  "Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal Rule.
Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer.
If the employer terminates the service illegally and the termination is motivated as in this case, viz. to resist the workman's demand for revision of wages the termination may well amount to unfair labour practice."
11.
In view of the above, this petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.