GS Singhvi, J - The points to be decided in this petition are whether the Labour Court can, even in the absence of employer's plea that the workman was gainfully employed after the termination of his service, deny full back wages to him and whether after his retirement on superannuation, the petitioner- workman can be denied retiral benefits calculated on the basis of last drawn pay.
2.
Shortly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was boarded out of service w.e.f.
3041987 under Rule 518 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume-II (as applicable to the State of Haryana) after he had worked as Driver in the Haryana Roadways for almost 20 years.
The cause of his retirement was disclosed as medical unfitness.
This action of the employer was challenged by the petitioner by means of an industrial dispute, which was referred to the Labour Court, Ambala vide Haryana Government notification dated 881989.
After considering the pleadings and evidence produced by the parties, the Labour Court directed the employer to give some other suitable job to the petitioner (workman) carrying the same emoluments.
The Labour Court also declared that the workman will be entitled to 50% back wages from the date of demand notice.
Notwithstanding the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner could not actually join the duty because soon after the pronouncement of the award dated 821995, he attained the age of superannuation.
It is also not disputed that on the basis of his deemed retirement from service on attaining the age of superannuation w.e.f.
3041995, the petitioner's case for calculation of pension etc. was forwarded to the office of the Accountant General vide memo No. 5852/ECP dated 281996 but the Accountant General did not agree to pay pension and other retiral benefits to him on the last drawn salary.
Instead, it approved payment of pension etc. calculated on the basis of 50% wages payable to him in accordance with the award of the Labour Court.
3.
Shri Rajan Gupta argued that the award of only 50% back wages implied denial of the relief of full back wages and to this extent the impugned award should be declared legally erroneous and quashed because the employer had neither pleaded nor proved that the workman-petitioner was gainfully employed after the termination of service by way of retirement and in the absence of such plea, the Labour Court could not have denied full back wages to the petitioner.
In support of this argument, Shri Gupta relied on the following decisions :  1.
M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. AIR 1979 SC 75;  2.
Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak, 1980 Lab.
IC 123;  3.
Prem Singh v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Ambala, 1990(2) RSJ 109;  4.
Mam Raj v. State of Haryana, 1990(2) SLR 332; and  5.
The Patiala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Patiala v. Mehar Chand, 1998(1) RSJ 297 : 1998(2) SCT 356 (P&H).
4.
Learned counsel also assailed the decision of the Accountant General, Haryana to calculate retiral benefits payable to the petitioner on the basis of award of the Labour Court.
He submitted that the pension etc. should have been calculated on the basis of pay and allowances which the petitioner would have drawn on the date of his superannuation i.e. 3041995 and the award of 50% back wages in respect of the period between the date of termination of his service and the date of decision of the dispute is wholly irrelevant for the purpose of determination of retirement benefits payable to the petitioner.
5.
Shri Jaswant Singh urged the Court not to interfere with the discretion exercised by the Labour Court to award only 50% back wages to the petitioner.
He submitted that the petitioner's case is not one of retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') and as the Labour Court has not declared the employer's action of retiring him on the ground of medical unfitness to be contrary to the provisions of the Act or otherwise arbitrary or violative of the principles of natural justice, the principles laid down by the Courts while dealing with the cases of unlawful termination of service cannot be applied to the facts of this case.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari v. Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 1003, and the circular letter No. 4392-4410 dated 2081992 issued by the Transport Commissioner and argued that the direction given by the Labour Court for re-employment of the petitioner on a post carrying the same emoluments was unwarranted.
On the second issue, Shri Jaswant Singh frankly conceded that he is not in a position to support the action of the office of the Accountant General to calculate the post - retiral benefits payable to the petitioner on the basis of award of 50% back wages.
6.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and are inclined to agree with the learned Deputy Advocate General that the award passed by the Labour Court directing payment of 50% back wages only to the petitioner neither suffer from an error of law nor it has occasioned failure of justice warranting exercise of certiorari jurisdiction by this Court to upset the same.
Admittedly, the petitioner was retired from service because he was declared unfit to drive heavy vehicles.
It was not a case of retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Rather, the action of the employer fell within the ambit of Section 2(oo)(c) of the Act which is in the nature an exception to the substantive definition of retrenchment contained in Section 2(oo) of the Act.
In Anand Bihari's case (supra), the Apex Court has held that the termination of the service of a Driver of Roadways on medical grounds does not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act and that such case is covered by Section 2(oo)(c) of the Act.
7.
A look at the award dated 821995 passed by the Labour Court, Ambala shows that the learned Presiding Officer, without adverting to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case and without making reference to the instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner vide circular dated 2081992, straightaway applied the decision of this Court in Mam Raj's case (supra) under a mistaken belief that the termination of the service of the petitioner is vitiated due to violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the award was not challenged by the respondents No. 3 and 4, we deem it necessary to take cognizance of this patent error in the approach of the Labour Court for the purpose of deciding whether the direction given by it for payment of 50% back wages is inequitable, arbitrary and unjust so as to require interference by this Court.
8.
We are also of the opinion that the Labour Court was not justified in giving a direction to the respondents No. 3 and 4 to re-employ the petitioner on a post carrying the same emoluments.
Instead of doing that, it should have left the employer free to provide suitable job to the petitioner, keeping in view the guidelines given by the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case (supra) and the circular letter issued by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana.
This is also the law laid down in State of Haryana v. Hawa Singh, JT 1997(10) SC 460.
However, as the award of the Labour Court is not under challenge in this petition, we refrain from interfering with this direction of the Labour Court.
9.
The principles of law laid down by the Apex Court on the question of relief to which a workman is entitled in the case of unlawful termination of service are unexceptionable and it must be treated as an established proposition of law that the Labour Court etc. should, in the case of illegal termination of services ordinarily pass an award of reinstatement with the benefit of continuity of service and full back wages.
However, neither it is desirable nor proper to lay down a strait jacket formula or prescribe water- tight compartment for exercise of discretion by the Labour Courts and Tribunals in varied types of cases involving termination of services of workmen.
Even in the cases in which the action of the employer is held to be contrary to the provisions of Section 25-F and 25-G of the Act or other statutory provisions or violative of the basics of natural justice, the adjudicating Court/Tribunal may in the peculiar facts of the particular case(s) decline relief of reinstatement and/or of back wages.
Some illustrations of such eventualities have been given in Surendra Kumar v. The Central Government, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, AIR (sic) SC 422.
10.
The propositions laid down in M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. (supra) and other decisions relied upon by Shri Gupta do not in any manner help the cause of the petitioner because the Labour Court has not recorded a finding that the action of the employer is contrary to the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act or the principles of natural justice or that the termination of petitioner's service is vitiated by mala fide or arbitrariness.
In fact, the Labour Court directed re-employment of the petitioner on an alternative post by simply placing reliance on the decision in Mam Raj's case, which, in our humble opinion, cannot be regarded as good law in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case (supra).
11.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the discretion exercised by the Labour Court to award only 50% back wages to the petitioner is not vitiated by an error of law.
12.
However, we find merit in the submission of Shri Gupta that the respondent No. 2 has gravely erred in calculating the post - retiral benefit payable to the petitioner on the premise that in terms of the impugned award he will get only 50% back wages.
This action of the Accountant General must be treated as wholly illegal because :-  (1) the award of 50% back wages between the date of petitioner's retirement and the date of award cannot have any bearing on the calculation of retiral benefits payable to the petitioner.
The same ought to have been calculated on the basis of the salary which he would have drawn on the date of superannuation in the normal circumstances; (2) The petitioner will be deemed to have retired w.e.f.
3041995.
Therefore, even though he may have not actually re-employed after 821995, the respondents are bound to pay him the retiral benefits calculated on the basis of deemed wages (salary and emoluments) drawn on the date of retirement.
13.
In the result, we partly allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to re-calculate the pension, gratuity etc. payable to the petitioner on the basis of salary and emoluments which the petitioner would have drawn on 3041995.
This shall be done within a period of 2 months of the submission of certified copy of this order before the respondents No. 2 and 3.
The petitioner shall also get interest at the rate of 18% on the amount of arrears which may be found payable to him as a result of re- calculation of his post - retiral benefits.
The petitioner shall get costs of Rs. 2,000/- from the respondent No. 2.
However, his plea for quashing the award of the Labour Court and issuance of direction for payment of full back wages between the date of retirement i.e. 3041987 and the date of award is rejected.
Petition partly allowed.