Bashir-ud-Din, J. - Mr. MH Attar, AAG enters appearance and takes notice on behalf of respondents.
On submission of counsel for the parties, matter heard.
Considered.
2.
In the year 1990, the Government of J&K banned all educational Institutions/Schools managed and run by the Fallahi Aam Trust.
The teaching Staff of the trust was absorbed and adjusted in Institutions/Schools of education department of State Government.
Orders and circulars were issued on subject.
Block Education Officer Sirgufwara allowed the petitioner to join in his office on 11690 and posted him as teacher in Pry.
School Charrigam (Annexure-P1).
However, petitioner with many other similarly circumstanced and situated persons filed civil suit in the Court of Sub Judge Bijbehara on 19.3.1992, after they were refused salary by the concerned Officers of Education Department.
The court passed certain interim directions and petitioner and his other co-plaintiffs have been working and are being paid salary on the basis of directions of trial court of Sub Judge Bijbehara.
The suit is pending till date.
3.
The Director School Education issued show cause notice to the petitioner on 7.9.1998 requiring him to show cause within specified period why his services as such teacher shall not be discontinued on the ground that he had been absorbed and allowed to join in the Education Department as teacher borne on the staff of FAT, beyond 6/90, the cut off date for the purpose (Annexure- P4).
This was followed by another order dated:18.9.1998 of the Director School Education disengaging the services of the petitioner as FAT teacher in the Education Department forthwith (Annexure-P7).
This order of disengaging petitioner (Annexure-P7) is impugned in this writ petition.
4.
The petitioner alongwith other candidates has filed the Civil suit and suit is pending in the Court of Sub Judge Bijbehara.
He and other co- plaintiffs in the suit have been working and drawing emoluments on the basis of interim directions/orders of the trial court of Sub Judge Bijbehara.
Copy of the plaint (Annexure-P2) reveals that the plaintiffs in the suit have sought a decleratory decree of being duly appointed and absorbed as teachers in the Education Department from the teaching staff of FAT Educational Institutions/Schools and for permanent injunction restraining the respondents from interfering with or obstructing plaintiffs (Petitioner and Co-plaintiffs) from discharging their duties as such teachers of the State Education Department.
It is manifest that the matter of engagement/appointment of petitioner and his right of continuance in the department is subject matter of this suit.
Any subsequent change in the facts and circumstances is a matter to be taken care of by the trial Court, after such pending lit development is brought to its notice on proper motion.
Instead of approaching the trial Court, coming to the writ court directly with the frame of the petition as it is/not proper.
Merely because, Presiding Officer is not available in the Sub Judge Court Bijbehara, the petitioner cannot bye-pass to persue the matter in the trial court.
Though the petitioner had his remedies available before other forums due to absence of Presiding Officer, if at all so, vis-a-vis speedy trial and expeditious hearing of the suit matter, he has not opted for the course.
Rushing to approach the writ court, in the totality of circumstances of this case in the face of pendency of parallel proceedings is abuse of due process of law.
The petitioner has effective and efficacious remedy available to persue the matter before trial Court, therefore, this Court in its discretion does not find it just and proper to intervene in the matter.
5.
Additionally the petitioner has in terms of the averments in the petition averred that his holding of post as a teacher from 1990 till date with all its manifestations, is being disputed and that a full dressed inquiry merits to be conducted with which the petitioner has to be associated.
He has to be given an opportunity to substantiate his case.
Petitioner cannot be condemned unheard.
Obviously, this aspect of matter lies within the realm of disputed facts and cannot be gone in the writ Court.
To determine and adjudicate this aspect of matter, the Court of Sub Judge Bijbehara seized of the matter in above suit, is the appropriate forum.
6.
In the result, no case much less good case is made out for admission and the petition alongwith CMP is dismissed at threshold.
Petition dismissed.