RS Mongia, J - This judgment of ours will dispose of LPA No. 133 of 1998 as well as LPA No. 263 of 1998 as also CWP No. 10098 of 1998.
The LPAs are against the judgment of learned Single Judge in CWP No. 16488 of 1995, which was disposed of on December 24, 1997, by passing the following order :-  "It is conceded by the learned counsel for the parties that the matter is covered in favour of the petitioner in terms of the judgment of this Court reported in Malook Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) RSJ 193 : 1992(2) SCT 133 (P&H); Disposed of in the same terms."
2.
The appellants in LPA No. 133 of 1998 were the respondents in CWP No. 16488 of 1995.
However, the appellants in the other LPA (LPA No. 263 of 1998) were not impleaded as parties in CWP No. 16488 of 1995.
3.
Pursuant to the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Additional Secretary to Government of Punjab had issued separate show cause notices dated April 20, 1998, to the appellants in LPA No. 263 of 1998 and invited objections regarding change of their seniority proposed to be made on the basis of the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The appellants filed objections to the proposed change in the seniority list.
Since the show cause notice was issued on the basis of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellants in LPA No. 263 of 1998 sought permission to be impleaded as parties and permission to file LPA.
In view of the facts mentioned in the application, the appellants are impleaded as parties and granted permission to file LPA.
4.
CWP No. 10098 of 1998 has been filed by Swaran Singh, who is one of the appellants in LPA No. 263 of 1998.
The challenge in this writ petition is again to the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
Since the petitioner is one of the appellants in LPA No. 263 of 1998, in which again the judgment of the learned Single Judge has been challenged, the learned counsel stated that this writ petition may be dismissed as withdrawn.
We order accordingly.
5.
Now coming back to the LPAs, the brief facts may be noticed.
Respondents No. 3 to 17, who were the writ petitioners in CWP No. 10098 of 1998, were appointed as Clerks on purely ad hoc basis as stop-gap arrangement between the period June 24, 1970, to December 17, 1971.
Under the instructions of the State Government dated January 27, 1973, the aforesaid respondents (writ petitioners) were regularised w.e.f.
January 1, 1973.
These instructions specifically laid down that for the purpose of seniority, their services would be counted w.e.f.
the date of regularisation, i.e. January 1, 1973.
In other words, no benefit of ad hoc service would be given towards seniority.
Malook Singh and others, who were appointed as Clerks on ad hoc basis in the Civil Secretariat in 1975-76, were regularised pursuant to Punjab Government instructions dated May 3, 1977, w.e.f.
April 1, 1977.
Malook Singh and 98 others filed CWP No. 2780 of 1980 in this Court claiming that they were entitled to count their ad hoc service for determining their seniority.
A learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition on December 6, 1991, and the judgment is now reported as 1992(2) RSJ 193.
The State of Punjab had preferred LPA No. 555 of 1992 against the aforesaid judgment.
It may be observed here that the writ petitioners in Malook Singh's case were all regularised w.e.f.
April 1, 1977, whereas the private respondents in the writ petition were all directly recruited on April 14, 1977.
The Letters Patent Bench only went to the extent of holding that the writ petitioners in Malook Singh's writ petition would be senior to be private respondents under the Punjab Civil Secretariat State Service (Class III) Rules, 1976, because the seniority of the members of the service under the Rules was to be determined by the length of service on a post in the cadre and since the writ petitioners were regularised w.e.f.
April 1, 1977, and the private respondents had been directly recruited on April 14, 1977, the writ petitioners would rank senior to the private respondents under the statutory rules.
To this extent that the writ petitioners would be senior to the private respondents, the Letters Patent Bench upheld the finding of the learned Single Judge.
However, the Letters Patent Bench did not express any opinion as to whether ad hoc service rendered by the writ petitioners prior to their regularisation was to be counted for purpose of seniority or not.
The Bench had observed as under :-  "We, however, express no opinion on the other aspect adverted to by the learned Single Judge, that upon regularisation, the services of the petitioners for purpose of seniority would relate back to the date of their initial appointment.
In the circumstances, we prefer to leave this question open to be dealt with in an appropriate case and, therefore, the view of the learned Single Judge in this issue be not treated as a binding precedent."
6.
Counsel for the appellants in LPA No. 133 of 1998 submitted that the learned Single Judge while deciding CMA No. 28873 of 1997 in CWP No. 16488 of 1995 decided the main writ petition itself vide the impugned judgment and no notice of the miscellaneous application had been given to the appellants, otherwise they would have pointed out that the judgment in Malook Singh's case already stood overruled on July 21, 1994, by a Division Bench judgment dated July 21, 1994, in CWP No. 9200 of 1993 (Gurmail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others).
The Division Bench in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) observed as under :-  "It is, thus, clear that the judgment in Malook Singh's case (supra) is based mainly on the Government's stand that regularisation of service of the ad hoc appointees shall be with retrospective effect and their seniority be determined vis-a-vis regularly appointed persons on that post.
In addition, the learned Judge relied on the Supreme Court decision in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association's case (supra).
In our considered opinion, after the subsequent decisions in Masood Akhtar Khan's case (supra), Dr. MA Haque's case (supra), Keshav Chandra Joshi's case (supra) and Aghore Nath's case (supra) the principle that the ad hoc appointees are entitled to seniority on the basis of total length of service cannot be treated as correct and to this extent the judgment in Malook Singh's case (supra) cannot be regarded as correct law.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that a person appointed on ad hoc basis or a person appointed without following the procedure prescribed in the Rules is not entitled to the benefit of total length of service for the purpose of seniority even though he is subsequently regularised in service on the basis of a policy decision taken by the Government or on the basis of the amendment made in the rules.
We further hold that even where an appointment on ad hoc basis is made after calling names from the employment exchange such ad hoc appointee will not be entitled to seniority over an employee recruited in accordance with the rules even if the service of ad hoc appointee is subsequently regularised."
7.
Learned counsel for the appellants argued that it was not correct on the part of the State counsel to concede that the case of the writ petitioners was covered by the judgment in Malook Singh's case (supra).
8.
Learned counsel for the appellants also cited another Division Bench judgment reported as Jagjit Kapoor v. State of Punjab, 1994(4) SCT 807.
In the said judgment relying on the various judgments of the Apex Court and the judgment in CWP No. 9200 of 1993, Gurmail Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, decided on July 21, 1994, the Court held as under :-  "In our considered opinion, the claim of the petitioners for assignment of seniority on the basis of total length of service does not merit acceptance.
Judgment in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) is fully applicable to the facts of this case.
Consequently, the writ petition fails and it is hereby dismissed."
9.
Harnek Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 15061 of 1996, decided on September 26, 1996, it was observed by a Division Bench as under :-  "In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, prayer made is for direction to respondent No. 1 to determine the seniority of petitioners vis-a-vis the private respondents as per length of service i.e. from the date of joining, in terms of decision rendered by this Court in Malook Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(7) SLR 367.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, we are of the view that there is no merit in the petition.
The judgment on the basis of which relief is being claimed by the petitioner in this petition has specifically been overruled by a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 9200 of 1993 (Gurmail Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others) decided on 2171994."
10.
Learned counsel for the appellants further argued that under the instructions by which the writ petitioners were regularised specifically laid down that for purpose of seniority, their services will be reckoned w.e.f.
the date of regularisation and not from any earlier date.
Consequently, the petitioners could not be given any benefit of ad hoc service towards seniority.
In support of this submission, learned counsel for the appellants relied upon the Division Bench judgment in CWP No. 14338 of 1997 Jacob and another v. State of Punjab and others, rendered on May 12, 1998, as also the Division Bench judgment in Gurmail Singh's case (supra).
In Jacob's case (supra), it had been observed as under :-  "Since he had continued on the temporary basis for a period of more than two years as on December 21, 1990, he was entitled to be regularised in accordance with the instructions of the State Government dated June 5, 1991 (copy Annexure P-5).
Those very instructions lay down that seniority of such regularised persons shall be determined w.e.f.
December 31, 1990, the date w.e.f.
which regularisation was to take effect.
The instructions under which respondent No. 3 got the benefit of regularisation have to be read as a whole and when the instructions provide the date w.e.f.
which the seniority is to be determined that clause of the instructions has also to be given full effect.
The judgments referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioners support this view.
The learned trial Court was not correct in decreeing the suit of respondent No. 3 by holding that he would be entitled to get his seniority reckoned as a Labour Inspector Grade I w.e.f.
the date he was appointed temporarily vide Annexure P-2.
The judgment of the trial Court dated June 5, 1997, is liable to be set aside."
11.
In Gurmail Singh's case, the Division Bench had observed as under :-  "There is an additional reason for rejecting the claim made by the petitioners.
In para 2 of the circular dated 29.1.1973 issued by the Government for regularisation of the service of the petitioners and othersimilarly situated persons clear guidelines have been laid down for determination of seniority.
Para 2 of the aforesaid letter reads as under :- "The seniority of ad hoc employees whose appointments are regularised in terms of the above policy shall be determined in the following manner :- (a) After approval by the Departmental Committee, the regularisation of their appointments shall date back to Ist January, 1973 from which date their seniority shall be determined vis-a-vis candidates appointed on regular basis after selection through the prescribed agencies.
(b) The service rendered on the ad hoc basis shall not be taken into account for purposes of seniority except to determine inter se seniority among the ad hoc employees themselves whose services are regularised with effect from Ist January, 1973.
The above abstracted portion of the letter dated 29.1.1973 clearly shows that the Government had unequivocally made it clear that seniority benefit shall not be given to the employees on the basis of their ad hoc service except to the limit extent of determination of seniority inter se amongst ad hoc employees.
The petitioners have been regularised on the basis of the policy decision of the Government and therefore they cannot claim that even though regularisation of their service has been brought about in accordance with the policy decision of the Government, a part of that very policy decision denying benefit of seniority based on ad hoc service should be ignored and the Court should give a direction for the determination of seniority based on total length of service."
12.
Learned counsel for the private respondents, however, argued that the appointment of the private respondents (writ petitioners) though on ad hoc basis was done after being sponsored by the Employment Exchange and thereafter selection by a Selection Committee of the Chief Secretary Organisation in the Punjab Civil Secretariat.
The Chief Secretary is the appointing authority of the Clerks in the Punjab Civil Secretariat as per the statutory rules.
Further, it was submitted that Didar Singh and Sulakshna Kapoor, who were the private respondents in the writ petition, had also been granted the benefit of the ad hoc service though they were also regularised under the instructions dated May 3, 1977, which were similar to the 1973 instructions.
According to 1977 instructions, the regularisation was to take place w.e.f.
April 1, 1977 and under the 1973 instructions w.e.f.
January 1, 1973, which were the cut off dates for the seniority under the respective instructions.
If those two persons could be given the benefit of ad hoc service for seniority under similar set of instructions, there is no reason why the same should have been denied to the private respondents (writ petitioners).
13.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants.
The learned Single Judge on some concession of the State counsel allowed the writ petition in terms of Malook Singh's case (supra), which in fact stood ever ruled by a Division Bench of this Court in Gurmail Singh's case (supra).
The judgment in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) which was prior to the judgment of the learned Single Judge was never brought to the notice of the learned Single Judge.
Apart from this, as has been noticed above in the various authorities of this Court, which take into account the judgments in the Apex Court that ad hoc service per se is not reckonable for purpose of seniority, if an employee gets benefit of the instructions for purpose of regularisation in service, then as has been held by the two Division Benches of this Court in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) and Jacob's case (supra), the entire instructions have to be applied to such an individual and if the instructions lay down as to w.e.f.
which date the service will be counted for purpose of seniority, then that part of the instructions would be equally applicable to such a regular employee.
Both the Division Bench judgments took notice of the Apex Court's judgments as well.
If for any reason, two persons as directed by the private respondents, i.e., Didar Singh and Sulakshna Kapoor were given the benefit of ad hoc service for purpose of seniority, which, according to the law, could not have been given to them, the writ petitioners (now respondents) could not lay a claim on the basis of a wrong precedent.
The Letters Patent Bench in Malook's case (supra) had specifically left this point open as to whether the ad hoc service is countable for purpose of seniority.
It was specifically mentioned in the Letters Patent judgment in Malook Singh's case (supra) (relevant extract already quoted above) that that case (Malook Singh's case) would not be cited as precedent as to whether ad hoc service is countable for purpose of seniority.
In view of the various judgments referred to above, especially the judgment in Gurmail Singh's case, where the Malook Singh's case was overruled and further fact that in the Letters Patent judgment in Malook Singh's case, it was specifically observed that the same would not be cited as a precedent for the purpose as to whether ad hoc service is reckonable for purpose of seniority or not, we are of the view that the concession given by the State counsel on the basis of which the impugned judgment was given by the learned Single Judge was not correct in law.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow these appeals and set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge and also the show cause notice dated 20th April, 1998, issued to the appellants.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.