THB Chalapathi, J - Petitioner is seeking interference of this Court in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner filed this writ petition seeking a writ of certiorari quashing the award of the Labour Court dated 2851985.
2.
The 2nd respondent was employed with the Guru Cooperative Milk Producers Union Ltd., Bhatinda as Milk Procurement Assistant.
He was removed from service on the ground of misconduct by the Management vide order dated 18th September, 1981.
Second respondent raised `Industrial Dispute' which has been referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
Before the Labour Court, 2nd respondent pleaded that his termination was illegal and, therefore, he is entitled to reinstatement in service with back wages.
The Management pleaded that the removal of 2nd respondent from service was based on enquiry conducted against him for misconduct on his part.
3.
On consideration of the material produced before the Labour Court, it came to the conclusion that 2nd respondent is a workman and enquiry was not fair and proper and, therefore, the order of termination was not justified.
Accordingly the learned Labour Court reinstated the 2nd respondent with continuity of service and full back wages.
4.
Challenging the said order of Labour Court, this petition has been filed.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that Labour Court has erred in holding that 2nd respondent is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and has erred in holding that the enquiry against 2nd respondent was not fair and proper.
He further submits that even if it is held by the Labour Court that the enquiry was not fair and proper, then the proper course was to remand the enquiry back without directing the reinstatement of the workman.
6.
It is no doubt true that under clause (iv) of Section 2(s), the person who has been employed in supervisory capacity and draws wages exceeding Rs. 500/- per month is not a workman.
It is not disputed that 2nd respondent was drawing more than Rs. 500/-.
No material has been placed before the Labour Court that the 2nd respondent was working in supervisory capacity.
Simply, 2nd respondent was asked to supervise the collection of milk and take the milk, it cannot be said that he is working in supervisory capacity.
He comes within the definition of `workman'.
The Labour Court rightly held that 2nd respondent is a `workman'.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the Labour Court has erred in coming to the conclusion that enquiry held against the 2nd respondent is not fair and proper.
This is purely a finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court on the basis of material placed before it.
There cannot be any dispute that ordinarily in exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India this Court will not interfere with the finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court.
After going through the award of the Labour Court, I am of the opinion that the said findings have been passed on the appreciation of the material placed before it.
The file which is perused by the Labour Court clearly shows that the Enquiry Officer has recorded the statements of the witnesses without giving an opportunity to the workman and to examine the material collected against him.
7.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Labour Court should have remitted to fresh enquiry.
The Labour Court has passed the Award in 1985 and the workman has been reinstated in service and he has been working in the petitioner-society for the last 14 years.
No useful purpose will be served by remanding the matter for further enquiry at this point of time.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the 2nd respondent is not entitled to back wages.
The fact remains that the workman raised `Industrial Dispute' immediately after his removal from service w.e.f.
18th September, 1981.
Therefore, there is no negligence or default or laches on the part of the workman.
I do not find any ground for denying the payment of back wages to the workman.
9.
On a consideration of the record, I do not find any ground to interfere in the Award passed by the Labour Court.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and is dismissed, but there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.