Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was employed with Maruti Udyog.
He was charge-sheeted.
It was alleged that on July 30, 1990 he along with certain other persons had followed Mr. Parveen Kumar Gupta, Deputy Manager, on a motorcycle.
He was stopped near the boundary wall of the company.
The workman had pulled out Mr. Gupta from his car, physically assaulted him and caused injuries.
Inquiry was held.
Ultimately vide order dated August 31, 1991 the petitioner was dismissed from service.
He raised an industrial dispute.
On March 5, 1992 it was referred to the Labour Court.
On July 15, 1996 the Labour Court answered the reference against the petitioner.
It found that a proper inquiry was held.
The petitioner had been afforded due and reasonable opportunity.
The principles of natural justice had been duly complied with.
The punishment awarded to the petitioner was commensurate with the proved misconduct.
The petitioner has now approached this Court in March 1999 to challenge the award delivered by the Court on July 15, 1996.
2.
We have heard Mr. MM Kumar, learned Counsel for the petitioner.
It has been contended that C.W.P.
No. 8472 of 1997, challenging the same award is already pending in this Court.
On this basis it has been contended that delay cannot stand in the petitioner's way.
On merits it has been submitted that the order of dismissal is vitiated as the complainant was himself the disciplinary authority.
He had also appeared as a witness.
Thus the order is vitiated by his bias.
It has also been submitted that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice.
Learned counsel has then submitted that in view of the provisions contained in item No. 2022 of Standing Order No. 20, the respondent-Company could not have taken any action against the petitioner, as the alleged assault had been committed outside the factory premises.
3.
It deserves notice at the threshold that the petitioner is challenging the award of the Labour Court after a lapse of more than 2 years and 8 months.
There is no explanation for this inordinately long delay.
Still further, the mere fact that another workman had approached this Court in the year 1997 and that his writ petition has been admitted, cannot mean that even the petitioner is entitled to claim that his petition be admitted.
Law protects the vigilant.
The petitioner, admittedly, was not vigilant.
Thus, he cannot take any advantage of the fact that the petition filed by another workman is pending in this Court.
There is delay in approaching the Court.
There is no explanation, whatsoever, muchless than a satisfactory explanation.
Resultantly, no ground for condoning the delay is made out.
On this ground alone the petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
Even on merits we find that the petitioner is not entitled to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The proved misconduct of assaulting a senior Officer of the Company, without any cause or provocation, is reprehensible.
The cause of discipline would suffer if the persons like the petitioner were allowed entry into industrial units.
The authority had followed the prescribed procedure before passing the order of punishment.
It has been found as a fact by the Labour Court that the principles of natural justice had been duly followed.
5.
Mr. Kumar contends that there was violation of principles of natural justice as the disciplinary authority had itself appeared as a witness in the proceedings.
We find that no such contention was raised by the petitioner before the Labour Court.
There is not even a suggestion that the interests of the petitioner were in any way prejudiced.
Still further, we do not understand as to how Mr. TA Rajan was the complainant.
The admitted case is that the petitioner had assaulted Mr. Parveen Kumar Gupta, Deputy Manager.
Apparently, Mr. Gupta was the complainant.
He was not the disciplinary authority.
The petitioner has not been punished for assaulting Mr. TA Rajan.
In this situation, we feel that if the petitioner felt that his interests had been prejudiced, he should have raised the contention before the Labour Court, so that relevant evidence could have been adduced by the parties.
We cannot now permit the petitioner to raise this plea for the first time before this Court in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that the question had to be decided on the basis of evidence.
As at present, there is nothing before us to indicate that the complainant Mr. Gupta was disciplinary authority at any stage.
In this situation, the contention that the proceedings were not in conformity with the principles of natural justice, cannot be sustained.
6.
Still further, what deserves mention is that the Labour Court had recorded the entire evidence.
It was open to the petitioner to show that his interests had been prejudiced.
The proceedings were not in conformity with the law.
7.
Learned counsel has pointed out that Mr. TA Rajan had supplied a copy of the inquiry report to the petitioner vide his letter dated July 6, 1991.
He had appeared as a witness during the inquiry proceedings and that even the final order of punishment had been passed by Mr. TA Rajan.
Thus, there was violation of the principles of natural justice.
8.
Normally, a witness does not adjudge.
Such a course of action is avoided.
However, in the circumstances of the present case we find no infirmity so as to call for any interference.
Firstly, so far as the letter dated July 6, 1991 is concerned, it only shows that a copy of the inquiry report had been forwarded by Mr. TA Rajan to the petitioner.
So far as the final order of penalty is concerned, it was not passed by Mr. TA Rajan alone.
It was proposed by three officers, viz. M/s. TA Rajan, KK Aggarwal and Ghanshyam Dass.
Still further, it appears that Mr. TA Rajan was not the disciplinary authority because the final order was actually passed by DVM (Personnel).
It is thus clear that the order of penalty had not been passed by Mr. Rajan.
9.
In any event, bias is a question of fact which has to be proved by adducing evidence on the file.
If it was the petitioner's case that any prejudice had been caused to him because of the participation of Mr. Rajan, he should have raised the plea, led evidence and proved the fact.
He had not done so.
He sat on the fence.
After the order has gone against him, he has chosen to challenge it before this Court.
In the exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, we are not inclined to entertain this plea at this belated stage.
10.
Mr. Kumar has referred to the judgment of their Lordships of the Supreme Court reported as Rattan Lal Sharma v Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-Education) Higher Secondary School, 1993(3) SCT 525 (SC) : 1993(4) SCC 10.
We have perused the judgment.
It is no doubt true that their Lordships have not approved of the procedure of the disciplinary authority taking action after having appeared as a witness.
However, in the peculiar facts of this case we are satisfied that any interference at this belated stage would lead to a total injustice.
Still further, on facts, as pointed out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner, it is clear that the disciplinary authority had not appeared as a witness.
Mr. TA Rajan had not taken the final decision.
The decision had been actually taken by the DVM (Personnel).
He was, admittedly, a person other than Mr. TA Rajan.
Thus, on facts present case is totally different from that in Rattan Lal Sharma's case.
11.
Lastly, it was contended that the respondent-Company is not the custodian of law and order.
If an offense is committed by the petitioner outside the factory premises, in view of the provisions of Order 2022, the Company had no jurisdiction to proceed to take action against the petitioner.
12.
We are unable to accept this contention.
An employer is entitled to expect good conduct of the employee at all places.
This expectation is not confined to the factory premises.
A person who commits theft outside the premises cannot take the plea that as the offence had been committed outside factory premises, he can only be tried by a Criminal Court and that he is not liable to face any disciplinary action.
Still further, the Labour Court has considered this matter.
It has referred to the provisions of Item Nos. 2022 and 2023.
The view taken by the Court is fair and reasonable.
It calls for no interference.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed in limine on the ground of delay as well as on merits.
Petition dismissed.