VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Brij Mohan was appointed as Mali in April, 1987.
He worked in the employment of Forest Department, Haryana.
His services were terminated w.e.f.
20.12.1992.
He claimed that it had been done in violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court and contested by the management.
The Labour Court held as under :-  "It is true that the claimant cannot be provided employment for all the 12 months around the year but he would be provided work in preference to other workmen, who are junior to him and he would not be retrenched or ousted from service so long his juniors are retrenched or ousted while keeping in view the length of service as envisaged under section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In the circumstances, there could be no finding regarding back wages and the reference is answered accordingly."
2.
Aggrieved by the same, petitioner filed the present writ petition.
3.
While the writ petition was admitted, an application was filed by the petitioner stating therein that one Samay Singh (Pal ?)
was also working with the forest department and had challenged the award of the Labour Court on same terms.
The award had been quashed and the matter has been remitted to the Labour Court.
According to the petitioner, since on identical facts a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 9029 of 1997 titled Samay Pal v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad and others, has remitted the matter for fresh consideration, similar order may be passed in this case.
Notice has been sent to the State who does not dispute the said fact.
A copy of the judgment pronounced in the case of Samay Pal (supra) has been placed on the record.
Therein the controversy was as to if the workman was entitled to back wages.
A Division Bench of this Court on 11121997 had passed the following order :-  "An order for payment of back wages is the necessary and logical concomitant of a declaration that the service of a workman has been terminated in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F or Section 25-G of the Act of 1947.
Such direction is necessary with a view to compensate the workman against the unlawful termination of service and consequential denial of basics of livelihood.
The other reason why such a direction should be given is that the workman is prevented from discharging his duty by the employer even though he is ready and willing to perform his duty in accordance with the contract of employment and the relevant rules.
The employer can avoid an order of back wages if he pleads and proves that the workman was gainfully employed and was receiving identical or almost the same emoluments.
The Labour Court and other adjudicating authorities may decline an order of full back wages if the workman is found responsible for delay in raising the dispute or on similar grounds.
A look at the impugned award shows that the Labour Court had declined the relief of back wages on a totally irrelevant ground, namely, that the work of Forest Department is seasonal in nature and that the workman was engaged in the service with intermittent breaks.
The finding about the nature of work undertaken by the department has to be treated as erroneous in view of the judgment of the Division Bench and the factum of breaks in the service of the petitioner losses significance in view of the finding on the issue in violation of Section 25-F of the Act of 1947.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that the impugned award passed by the Labour Court-II, Faridabad suffers from an error of law in so far as relief of back wages has been denied to the petitioner and to this extent, it deserves to be set aside.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and quash the award Annexure P-3 in so far as the relief of back wages has been denied to the petitioner.
We direct the Labour Court to decide the issue of back wages afresh after giving opportunity to the parties to produce evidence on the issue of gainful employment of the petitioner.
This shall be done by the Labour Court-II, Faridabad within six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The registry is directed to forward a copy of this order to the Labour Court- II, Faridabad."
Keeping in view the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in an identical case, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order is quashed in so far as relief of back wages is concerned.
The Labour Court is directed to decide the issue afresh after giving opportunity to the parties to produce evidence on the gainful employment of the petitioner.
This shall be done by the said Labour Court within six months from the date of receipts of a copy of this order.
The registry is directed to forward a copy of this order to the Labour Court, Faridabad.
Petition allowed.