VK Bali, J - Pursuant to his selection and recommendation made by the Service Selection Board, in the category of Reserved Caste for the post of Junior Engineer (Civil), petitioner joined on March 14, 1995 along with other three Schedule Caste candidates.
After more than three years ie on April 24, 1998, the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana, Chandigarh, gave a marching out order, Annexure P-7, to the petitioner by terminating his services.
It is this order to which the petitioner takes a strong exception.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, advertised seven posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) on April 7, 1993.
Pursuant to the said advertisement, petitioner applied to the post against the reserved category of Scheduled Caste.
Against three posts of Scheduled Casee reserved category, petitioner was placed at Sr.No.
4 and recommended as such to the Department by the respondent Board on January 31, 1995.
He was appointed on March 14, 1993 (1995 ?)
alongwith other three Scheduled Caste category candidates and he joined his duties on March 24, 1995.
By way of Civil Writ Petition No 14492 of 1995 (Navdeep Singh Cheema v. State of Haryana & Ors.), selection and appointment of the 13 candidates was challenged.
In the writ aforesaid it was decided that appointments to the extent of advertised seven posts should be made and selection of four candidates was quashed.
It is the case of petitioner that the respondent Board, pursuant to the orders rendered by this Court in the writ aforesaid, re-determined inter se merit, as a result of which respondent No. 4 was placed at Sr. No. 1 and petitioner's name was not even included in the waiting list as per the revised recommendations dated December 19, 1997.
Petitioner was, thus, served a show case cause notice proposing termination of his services as his name was excluded from the revised selection list.
In reply to the notice given to the petitioner, it was stated that respondent No. 4 was below the petitioner in the merit list originally sent and the Board had virtually redetermined the inter se merit under the garb of revision of selection list as also that respondent No. 4 has been serving as Assistant Engineer (Class II), i.e., a higher post and he being not willing to accept appointment as Junior Engineer, a lower post, the merit of the petitioner stands upgraded at Sr.No.
4 and as such his appointment is saved being within the permissible limit/strength in terms of the judgment of this Court in Navdeep Singh Cheema's case (supra).
Despite the objections raised by the petitioner to the show cause notice, as referred to above, his services were terminated due to exclusion of his name from the revised selection list.
As mentioned above, it is this order dated April 24, 1998 that has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
The court, while issuing notice of motion, noted the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner which reins as follows :-  "Inter alia contends that initially when recommendations were made by the SSS Board, Haryana, so far as the petitioner is concerned, he was shown higher in merit than Vinod Kumar-respondent No. 4.
Petitioner was in fact given appointment and ever since he is working on the post Junior Engineer (Civil).
After the judgment was rendered by this Court after three and half years the SSS Board has redetermined the merit and shown Vinod Kumar respondent No. 4 higher in merit to that of petitioner.
Learned counsel further contends that seniority cannot be changed/redetermined after three and half years and that too without any basis.
Learned counsel further contends that although Vinod Kumar, respondent No. 4 has already joined on the post which is higher post than that of the Junior Engineer, and he is not willing to accept the appointment as Junior Engineer on which post the petitioner is already working, yet he has been asked to quit.
Notice of motion for 471998.
Operation of the impugned order, Annexure P-7 is stayed."
4.
While opposing the cause of petitioner, two separate written statements, on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and the other on behalf of respondent No. 3 have been filed.
Respondent No. 4 has chosen not to appear and oppose the matter.
It has, inter alia, been pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 that in compliance with the order dated August 1, 1997 passed in CWP No. 14492 of 1995 passed by this Court, the Secretary, Subordinate Service Selection Board now Haryana Staff Selection Commission, was requested on November 26, 1997 to send waiting list of candidates.
The Secretary, Haryana Staff Selection Commission sent a merit list and waiting list including the name of the withdrawn candidates as a consequence of the revised list on December 19, 1997.
As regards the adversely affected candidates belonging to the reserved category, opinion of the Legal Remembrancer, Haryana, was sought on the following points :-  "1.
Whether revised list dated 19121997 sent by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission is to be followed or not ?
2.
Whether the candidates who were not given appointment as per the old list dated 3111995 can be given appointment now after the expiry of three years which situation will accure if the revised list is considered valid" ?
The Legal Remembrancer vide his advice dated January 21, 1998, gave the opinion which runs as under :-  "In the opinion of this department, in the given facts and circumstances, it is only the list dated 19121997 revised by the Subordinate Service Selection Board so as to conform to the given reservation and advertised number of posts, etc., which is deemed valid and relevant for purposes of appointment.
However, any adversely affected candidate/appointee shall have to be afforded an opportunity of hearing and the show cause notice must indicate the circumstances which have occasioned the termination etc." In view of the opinion of the Legal Remembrancer, the petitioner was given show cause notice for termination of his services and after considering his reply to the said show cause notice and hearing him personally, his services were terminated.
5.
The case of the respondents, thus, is that the impugned order has been passed pursuant to the directions issued by this Court in the writ petition, referred to above.
Not only services of petitioner have been terminated, the other three were also treated alike as they were out of the permissible merit and waiting list.
Inasmuch as the petitioner has now been placed beyond the merit list and waiting list, by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, there is no question of considering his name or retaining him in service.
6.
The relevant part of the judgment date August 1, 1997, Annexure P-2/A reads as follows :-  "In the present case only seven vacancies had been advertised by the Board.
Therefore, only 7 candidates could have been selected for being included in the main list.
The Board could have selected two more candidates to be included in the waiting list in terms of the instructions dated 2011998.
Therefore, the selection and appointment of 13 candidates cannot be upheld and the appointments of four candidates are liable to be quashed.
The other illegality committed by the Board is to recommend general category candidates far in excess of the advertised posts.
According to the reply submitted by the Board, only one post of general category was available.
Therefore, the selection of more than one candidate belonging to general category was clearly unwarranted and a direction deserves to be given to the Board and the other official respondents to revise the list keeping in view the advertisement issued by the Board.
xx xx xx In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The select list prepared by the Board is declared illegal to the extent it contains the names of more than nine candidates.
The appointment of the candidates in excess of the advertised posts and the waiting list of two candidates are declared illegal and quashed.
The official respondents are directed to issue appropriate order within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order.
While doing so, they shall keep in view the reservation made in favour of the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste and Ex-Servicemen.
We also direct the official respondents to make fresh selection against the 4 posts which will become available as a result of quashing of the appointment of four candidates."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that it is clear from the operative part of the order, reproduced above, that this Court did not uphold the action of the Selection Board in recommending candidates far in excess of the advertised posts.
This Court, therefore, issued a positive direction to the respondent Board and other official respondents to revise the list keeping in view the advertisement issued by the Board.
This Court further held that the select list contains the names of more than nine candidates.
It was further declared that the appointment of candidates in excess of the advertised posts and waiting list of two candidates was illegal.
This Court, the learned counsel further contends, did not issue any direction to redetermine the inter se merit of the candidates and thereafter to send the revised selection list.
In the original recommendation made by the Board on January 31, 1995, Annexure P-1, petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 4 among the Schedule Caste Candidates whereas respondent No. 4 had been shown immediately below him.
It is then argued by the learned counsel that in view of the fact that this Court has upheld the appointment of nine candidates only, it is abundantly clear that four candidates of Schedule Caste category were entitled to be retained in service, i.e., three out of main list and one out of waiting list.
Inasmuch as petitioner was placed at Sr.No.
4 in the select list, Annexure P-1, his selection and appointment had to be protected in terms of the judgment of this Court.
It is further the contention of learned counsel that true compliance of the directions issued by this Court would have been to revise the original select list dated January 31, 1995 to the extent that respondent No. 3 ought to have prepared a separate list comprising of the candidates at Sr. No. 1 (general category) 7, 8 and 9 (ex-serviceman category) and 10, 11 and 12 (Scheduled Caste category).
Similarly, a waiting list of two candidates out of the same selection list, Annexure P-1 comprising of candidate at Sr.No.
2 (general category) and 13 (scheduled caste category) i.e., the petitioner, should have been prepared and sent to the Department and rest of the names mentioned in Annexure P-1 were liable to be deleted from the main list as well as waiting list.
Instead of following the aforesaid method for revision of the selection list, respondent No. 3 has adopted a strange method whereby it has virtually redetermined the inter se merit and as a consequence thereto, respondent No. 4 has now been placed at Sr.No.
1 among the Schedule Caste category candidates in the waiting list and the name of petitioner has not even been included in the said list.
Even as per these revised recommendations, petitioner is at Sr. No. 5 amongst the scheduled caste candidates.
It is then argued that respondent No. 4 in any case has neither joined the services nor is prepared to do so having been appointed on a higher post and that being the position, no occasion had arisen at all to the respondents to terminate the services of the petitioner.
8.
The arguments of learned counsel, noted above, could not be repelled on any meaningful grounds whatsoever.
In the first place, we fail to understand as to how and pursuant to what directions, inter se merit between the scheduled caste candidates was re-determined.
Concededly, insofar as petitioner is concerned, he was higher in merit than respondent No. 4 in the original merit list and was recommended at St. No. 4 in the scheduled caste category and it may be reiterated that in the advertisement, three posts were actually reserved for the scheduled caste category candidates.
His merit was such that if one seat in the waiting list was to be filled, his name ought to have been recommended for appointment.
His appointment was not in excess of posts that were advertised plus one reserved post of scheduled caste category candidate from the waiting list.
Further, it is not known as to under what rule, while making selection and appointment of nine candidates, a candidate in general category was added from amongst the waiting list and not from the reserved category of either ex-serviceman or scheduled caste.
It is not the case of the respondents that even if initially nine candidates were appointed, there would have been two posts available in the general category.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the impugned order Annexure P-7 has come to be passed only on account of directions issued by this Court in CWP No. 14992 of 1995.
The operative part of the judgment has already been reproduced above and we do not find any direction contained in the orders passed by this Court that may entitle the respondent Board to re-determine the merit inter-se the candidates, who came to be appointed against the reserved posts.
In addition to what has been said above, the respondents should have considered the fact that insofar as respondent No. 4 is concerned, he had since already joined a higher post and was not interested to join the post of Junior Engineer (Civil).
Looked from any angle, order, Annexure P-7 cannot be sustained and the same is thus quashed.
Petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service and shall also be entitled to consequential benefits.
No orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.