GC Garg, J - Plaintiff-petitioner filed a suit for permanent injunction.
It was averred that he could not be transferred out of Chandigarh and his transfer from Chandigarh to Delhi ordered on 15121992 w.e.f.
111993 was illegal and beyond the statutory rules.
Plaintiff also moved an application along with the suit under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 CPC seeking ad-interim injunction.
The trial Court vide order dated 611993 allowed the application and stayed the transfer of the plaintiff and he was allowed to continue in the establishment of the defendants at Chandigarh.
2.
The defendants aggrieved by the ad-interim order of the trial Court preferred an appeal which was assigned to the Court of Additional District Judge, Chandigarh.
Learned Additional District Judge on a consideration of the matter and after hearing the parties, allowed the appeal and vacated the order passed by the trial Court.
The learned Additional District Judge further came to the conclusion that the suit as such was not maintainable.
He consequently ordered the return of the plaint as well as to the plaintiff for presentation to the Court of competent jurisdiction.
It is this order dated 10.9.1993, which is under challenge in this revision.
3.
During the course of hearing of this revision petition, the plaintiff obviously remained out of service as he did not join at Delhi and was not allowed to join at Chandigarh.
When the matter was being argued, at the suggestion of the Court, the matter was settled by a compromise.
4.
The plaintiff-petitioner has offered to seek premature retirement as he has already crossed the age of 50 years and has put in more than 20 years of service provided he is paid the wages, gratuity and an amount on account of ex gratia payment minus the provident fund.
Representative of the defendant-Firm after working out the details offered a lump sum amount of Rs. 1,80,000/- on account of back wages upto the date of retirement (65% of the back wages), gratuity, and ex gratia payment minus an amount of Rs. 22,560/- on account of provident fund contributions.
The representative further states that the amount of provident fund contributions would be deposited with the Provident Fund Commissioner on or before 721999 or along with the monthly return, whichever is earlier.
The representative has also brought two cheque Nos. 1264226 dated 1411999 for Rs. 28,043/- and 1264265 dated 20.1.1999 for Rs. 1,29,401/- (total Rs. 1,57,444/-) for payment to the plaintiff-petitioner on account of arrears of salary in lump sum from January 1993 till January 31, 1999.
The cheques have been handed over to the plaintiff-petitioner present in Court and the calculations arrived at by the defendants have been accepted by him.
5.
In view of the compromise arrived at and the petitioner having sought voluntary retirement, the controversy in this revision petition and in the suit has come to an end and the suit has become infructuous and so the present revision petition.
In that view of the matter, the matter stands completely settled.
The plaintiff-petitioner shall stand retired w.e.f.
31.1.1999.
The plaintiff would obviously be entitled to withdraw the entire amount standing to his credit on account of provident fund contributions (employee and employer's share) minus any amount that may be required to be deducted by the Provident Fund Commissioner under the Employees Pension Scheme.
The representative of the respondents present in Court has undertaken to issue the necessary certificate, if need be, in favour of the plaintiff for the withdrawal of the provident fund and for the grant of pension under the Employees Pension Scheme including the certificate of voluntary retirement.
Thus all claims of the employee stand settled and nothing remains due to the petitioner from the defendant.
6.
Petitioner is admittedly a member of Provident Fund scheme and I am told that a substantial amount is standing to his credit in his provident fund account besides an amount of Rs. 22,560/- which amount would be deposited with the Provident Fund Commissioner as already ordered on or before 721999 or with the monthly return.
I hope and expect that the Provident Fund Commissioner shall release the amount of Provident Fund in favour of the petitioner as and when approached preferably within three weeks of the making of the application including Rs. 22,560/- to be deposited by the defendants under this order.
The Provident Fund Commissioner or the authority under the Employees Pension Scheme shall also take immediate steps for the grant of pension to the petitioner in accordance with law preferably within two months.
If any amount is required to be deducted from the Provident Fund of the petitioner for making him the member of the Employees Pension Scheme, the same shall be debited to his account and remaining amount disbursed to him in accordance with law.
7.
The matter having been settled, this petition has been rendered infructuous and is disposed of as such.
No costs.