VK Bali, J - Baldev Singh and Parminder Singh, who are Sub Inspector and Constable respectively in the Punjab Police Force along with one Balbir Singh, have filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India primarily for setting aside the order vide which they have been placed under suspension.
They further seek issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to take immediate steps to protect petitioner No. 1 from being victimised by the respondent of the reason that he could not oblige District Police Authority by withdrawing case against one Gurjant Singh son of Geja Singh, resident of village Bhagwanpura, against whom a criminal case vide FIR No. 188 dated May 31, 1998 under Sections 324, 323, 506, 148, 149 read with Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code as also under Section 25 of the Arms Act was registered on the complaint filed by Balbir Singh, who had received gun shot injuries.
2.
Brief facts of the case, as have been projected in the writ, reveal that petitioners 1 and 3 filed civil suit dated June 1, 1994 against Farzand, Pritam Kaur, Sarwan Singh and Talok Singh claiming themselves to be owners in possession of land in dispute whereas Sarwan Singh and Pritam Kaur filed Civil Suit dated May 21, 1994 with regard to the same very land.
Both the suits were decided together vide judgment and decree dated May 5, 1998.
Whereas, civil suit filed by petitioners 1 and 3 was decreed and they were held to be owners in possession, civil suit filed by Sarwan Singh and Pritam Kaur was dismissed.
A copy of judgment and decree dated May 5, 1998 has been placed on record as Annexure P-1.
On May 31, 1998 petitioners 2 and 3 went to the land subject matter of civil suits, referred to above, with two tractors.
Near the farm house of Pritam Kaur and Sarwan Singh, Pritam Kaur, Mehal Singh, Tarlok Singh, Kulwant Singh and a number of women folk appeared there and the women lay prostrate before the tractors, due to which the tractors were stopped by petitioner No. 2.
Mehar Singh and his son, Sarwan Singh, who were armed with Single Barrel gun and Double Barrel gun respectively, opened fire towards the tractors, as a result of which petitioner No. 3 was hurt.
The other side also suffered injuries.
It is the case of the petitioners that the gun used by Sarwan Singh for attacking Balbir Singh was given to him by Gurjant Singh son of Gaija Singh, who was present at the spot but the name of Gurjant Singh was not brought in the case by the local police.
Rather, the local police, under the political pressure, registered a case FIR dated May 31, 1998 against the petitioners and others, even though petitioner No. 1 was not present at the spot.
After registration of the FIR aforesaid, petitioner No. 1 applied for anticipatory bail.
Learned Additional Sessions Judge, Ferozepur, vide his order dated June 4, 1998, stayed the arrest of petitioner No. 1.
On May 21, 1998 Sarwan Singh and Pritam Kaur respondents filed appeal against the judgment and decree dated 551998.
Learned District Judge, Ferozepur, vide orders dated May 21, 1998 admitted the appeal and issued notice of appeal as well as of the stay an application for September 14, 1998 and the parties were directed to maintain status-quo regarding possession in the meanwhile.
It is the case of petitioners that respondent No. 3 obtained a false report from respondent No. 4 who reported that petitioners 1 and 3 had got the land registered in their favour, although the land had been purchased by Mehal Singh etc. from Farzand son of Saraj.
On the basis of the said false report of respondent No. 4, respondent No. 3, vide order dated June 10, 1998, placed petitioner No. 1 and his son, Parminder Singh, petitioner No. 2, who is a constable, under suspension.
As mentioned above, it is primarily the order of suspension that has been called in question in the present writ.
3.
Impugned order, Annexure P-4, dated June 10, 1998, suspending petitioners 1 and 2, reads as follows:-  "The Deputy Superintendent of Police Sub Division Ferozepur has informed vide his letter No. 511-R dated 361998 that Mehal Singh son of Ajit Singh.
Jat, resident of Palla had purchased land measuring five acres in village Dulchike from Farjand son of Saraj, Balmeek.
The Registry of the said land measuring five acres was got done in their favour by SI Baldev Singh No. 791/Ferozepur and his brother-in-law Balbir Singh.
Later on Mehal Singh obtained a stay order from the court of Sessions and had sown paddy and fodder in the said land.
SI Baldev Singh, his son Parminder Singh along with 10/12 more persons destroyed the said crop of Mehal Singh and also caused injuries to the complainant and his brother.
As a result, case FIR No. 188 dated 3151998 under Sections 324, 312/336/427/506/148/149/120/-B IPC, Police Station Sadar Ferozepur, was registered against them.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police Sub Division, Ferozepur has recommended that SI Baldev Singh No. 791/Ferozepur be placed under suspension for which approval is hereby granted and Constable Parminder Singh No. 1800/Ferozepur who is also involved as accused in the said case is also placed under suspension w.e.f.
361998 (AN).
These officials after being released on bail will remain present at police line and will attend all roll call and parades under PPR 1621 and they will be entitled to 50% of the emoluments under rule 72(2)(a) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part I" 4.
A perusal of the order, that has been reproduced above in ex-tenso, would manifest that the same has been passed and petitioners 1 and 2 were placed under suspension for the reason that even though stay had been granted to the other side by District Judge (mentioned as Court of Sessions), petitioners had gone to the land where crop of other side was standing and they destroyed the same.
The injuries were also caused to the other side resulting into registration of case under Section 324/323 etc. of the Indian Penal Code.
5.
When the matter came up for motion hearing before this Court on July 13, 1998, on the contentions raised by learned counsel for the petitioner, following order was passed :-  "Inter-alia contends that the trial Judge determined the suit in favour of the petitioners vide judgment and decree dated 451998.
It was specifically held that the petitioners were in possession of the land in dispute.
The adversaries of the petitioners carried an appeal wherein the District Judge granted only status-quo.
No clear order restraining the petitioners from interfering in the land in dispute has been passed by the District Judge.
Till such time the findings recorded by the learned Subordinate Judge are reversed, the petitioners are to be held in possession of the land in dispute and, therefore, there cannot be any question of interfering with the order passed by the District Judge.
Further contends that petitioners 1 and 2 have been placed under suspension on the only allegation that they are interfering with the order of the District Judge, referred to above.
Notice of motion for 2591998.
Operation of order, Annexure P-4 is stayed meanwhile.
Mr. AG Masih, AAG, Punjab, who is present in the court, accepts notice on behalf of the official respondents."
6.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, respondents have entered defence and filed written statements.
Whereas respondents 1 to 4 have filed separate written statement, another written statement has been filed by respondents 5 and 6.
It has been pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 4 that after the decree of civil court dated May 5, 1998 and order of the District Judge dated May 21, 1998 for maintaining status-quo, it was well known to the petitioners that at present respondents 5 and 6 were in cultivating possession of the disputed land.
On May, 31, 1998 petitioners 2 and 3 along with 10/12 others with criminal conspiracy of petitioner No. 1, went to the disputed land to establish their possession forcibly.
Thus, a case FIR No. 188 dated May 31, 1998 under Sections 324, 312/336/427/506/148/149/120/-B IPC, and S. 25 of the Arms Act.
PS Sadar Ferozepur, was registered against the petitioners being the aggressive party and a cross-case under Sections 307/148/149 IPC and 25 Arms Act was made out against respondents 5 and 6 and others.
During investigation, there being no evidence on the file regarding the fire arm injuries suffered by Balbir Singh, petitioner No. 3, at the place of occurrence, the case made out on his statement was being recommended for cancellation.
It has then been pleaded that before the petitioners and others reached the disputed land, ladies/children and brothers of respondent No. 6 prevented the petitioners and requested them not to take forcible possession till the decision of the District Judge but they refused.
When they tried to move their tractors to the disputed land to take forcible possession, both the parties scuffled.
Respondent No. 6 Mehal Singh, who at present is in cultivating possession of the disputed land, fired three/four shots in the air with his gun to protect his landed property but the petitioners drove their tractors in paddy crops and destroyed the same as also broke the tubewell and engine of respondents 5 and 6 with a view to show that they are owners in possession of the disputed land.
Thereafter, both the parties admitted their men in the hospital with the injuries on brothers of respondent No. 6 and petitioner No. 3.
It has been admitted that petitioner No. 1 was not present at the place of occurrence but it is further pleaded that he had played a major role of criminal conspiracy in this case.
7.
Reply filed by respondents 5 and 6 is on the same lines as is written statement filed by respondents 1 to 4.
It has further been pleaded by them that since the civil court decree passed in favour of the petitioners has been challenged in the court of District Judge, who has ordered status quo regarding possession of the suit land and the appeal filed by them has been admitted wherein next date has been fixed as January 18, 1999, petitioners cannot claim themselves to be owners in possession of the suit land on the basis of the decree of the civil court which is likely to be set aside being based on wrong facts and is not according to law.
The other averments made in the written statement filed by respondents 5 and 6 for the purpose of deciding the present writ, in which, as mentioned above, relief claimed is primarily for setting aside order of suspension, are not necessary to be detailed.
8.
Mr. Chatrath, learned counsel who appears in support of the petition, vehemently contends that the petitioners belong to Kamboj community and a number of persons belonging to the said community, who were in the police department, were actively involved in combating terrorism in Ferozepur District.
Petitioner No. 1 joined service as Constable on October 6, 1970 and was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1987.
He was further promoted as ASI in 1991 and then as Sub Inspector in 1994.
From 1983 to 1986 he was posted as Gunman with Sardar Harcharan Singh Hero, a Congress Leader and the then Chairman of MARKFED.
Petitioner No. 1 also used to be deputed for security duty of Sardar Beant Singh, the then Chief Minister of Punjab whenever the visited Ferozepur as PCC Chief and Chief Minister.
Similarly, petitioner No. 1 used to be deputed for security duty with Shri Jagmeet Singh Brar, Congress Leader.
During the days of militancy, petitioner No. 1 and a number of his relatives including his brother ASI Satnam Singh, Cousin brother HC Mohinder Singh and HC Subeg Singh and CID Inspector Gurpal Singh were actively involved in combating terrorism in the State of Punjab.
On March 21, 1991 nine members of the family of petitioner No. 1 were killed by terrorists at village Haddanwali, Police Station Zira including his one brother, who was Sarpanch, and his wife.
On March 23, 1991 Shri OP Malhotra, the then Governor of Punjab along with then Director General of Police, visited the house of petitioner No. 1 to offer condolence.
Similarly.
HC Mohinder Singh, cousin of petitioner No. 1 also incurred wrath of terrorists and his entire family was killed by terrorists and later on HC Mohinder Singh was also killed and his house was set on fire.
HC Subeg Singh, brother of the husband of sister of petitioner No. 1 was also killed by militants.
When none was left in the family of petitioner No. 1 to look after the land, he engaged two servants for the said purpose but those two servants were also killed by the militants and thereafter no body was prepared to work on his land.
Counsel contends that the petitioners, who had borne major brunt of their participation in combating terrorism and petitioner No. 1 lost as many as 29 members of his family including certain police officials who were killed by the militants, without caring for the meritorious services rendered by petitioners 1 and 2, order Annexure P-4 suspending them has been passed without even looking into the records of the civil suit and by making one-sided investigation which has gone beyond even the civil court decree.
The respondents could not ignore the civil court decree passed by the learned trial Judge and assume interference by the petitioners on the land in question only on account of order of status-quo granted by the District Judge in an appeal preferred by the other side, further contends the counsel.
In any case, till such time, the District Judge, before whom the appeal is stated to be pending, had reversed the judgment of the learned trial Court and as such held the other side to be in possession, an order, as has been impugned in the present writ, could not be passed, alternatively contends the learned counsel.
9.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, who represents the respondents, on the other hand, contends that the findings recorded by the learned trial court were not binding upon the investigating agency and if, after the occurrence that has been admitted, even though case of the petitioners is that they are in peaceful possession and the other party was wanting to take forcible possession, a conclusion could be arrived at that the petitioners are not in possession, order placing petitioners 1 and 2 under suspension on account of their interfering with the order passed by the District Judge and then taking law into their own hands, could well be passed.
10.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
As would be clear from the order, Annexure P-4, reproduced above, petitioners 1 and 2 have been placed under suspension only by observing that Mehal Singh had obtained a stay from the court of District Judge (mentioned as Court of Sessions).
It is then mentioned that Mehal Singh had sown paddy and fodder in the said land and that SI Baldev Singh and his son Parminder Singh along with 10/12 persons had destroyed the said crop and had caused injuries to the complainant, as a result of which, FIR, under various sections of the IPC, was registered against them.
It has then been mentioned that the DSP has recommended that petitioners 1 and 2 be placed under suspension.
In our view, the impugned order proceeds on entirely wrong premises.
Order of status-quo cannot be equated with an order of stay.
It could not be disputed during the course of arguments that status- quo only means that possession was to remain with whomsoever it was.
At this stage, it shall be appropriate to notice the findings recorded by the learned trial Court against which an appeal has been filed by respondents 5 and 6, resulting into an order of status-quo.
As mentioned above, two civil suits, one filed by the petitioners 1 and 3 and the other by respondents 5 and 6, were consolidated and disputed (disposed ?)
of by a common order.
Whereas, Sarwan Singh son of Mehal Singh and Pritam Kaur had filed Civil Suit No. 766 against Baldev Singh and one Avtar Singh, petitioners Baldev Singh and Balbir Singh had filed civil suit No. 697 with regard to the same land.
The case, as pleaded by Sarwan Singh and Pritam Kaur was that initially land measuring 40 Kanlas was owned by the Central Government.
It was allotted to Farjand son of Saraj who, vide two sale deeds dated June 20, 1993, sold the said land to the plaintiffs for a valuable consideration.
Possession was delivered to the plaintiffs there and then and since then they were in cultivating possession of the suit land as owners.
Defendants got executed a sale deed dated 451994 from the said Farjand just to defeat the right of the plaintiffs.
The second sale deed executed by Farjand is illegal, inoperative on the rights of the plaintiffs as Farjand was not competent to execute any further sale deed.
Under the garb of the illegal sale deed aforesaid, defendants claim themselves to be the owners of the suit land and threatened to take forcible possession.
Petitioners 1 and 3 in their civil suit No. 697, had, on the other hand, pleaded that Farijand was owners of the suit land.
Vide sale deed dated 451994 he sold the suit land to the plaintiffs, who are owners of the same.
One Mulakh Raj son of Munshi Ram was in cultivating possession of the suit land and he delivered the possession to the plaintiffs on 451994 and executed an affidavit duly attested by Executive Magistrate, Ferozepur.
The plaintiffs are in cultivating possession of the suit land as owners and the defendant had no right, title or interest over the same.
In the two suits, referred to above, following issues were framed :-  Civil Suit No. 766/1994  "1.
Whether the plaintiffs are owners in possession of the suit land ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to declaration prayed for?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to injunction prayed for ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPP 5.
Relief.
Civil.
Suit No. 697 of 1994  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for declaration as prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiffs are owners in possession of the suit land ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is liable to be stayed in view of the preliminarily objection No. 3 ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPP 5.
Relief."
11.
There is no need to mention the evidence led by the parties in the civil suits.
Suffice it to say that while disposing of the two civil suits, which, as referred to above, were consolidated, it was held that "In view of the above discussion, Sarwan Singh and Pritam Kaur plaintiffs are not owners in possession of the suit land and as such they are not entitled for any relief of declaration regarding their title.
Baldev Singh and Balbir Singh are proved to be owners in possession of the suit land.
In view of the reasons recorded above Issue No. 1 and civil suit No. 766/94 are decided against the plaintiffs and issues No. 1 and 2 of civil suit No. 697/94 are decided in favour of the plaintiffs Baldev Singh and Balbir Singh".
12.
It can, thus, be demonstrated that the Civil Court had recorded a finding of fact that petitioners 1 and 3 are owners in possession of the disputed land.
This judgment and decree, no doubt, has been appealed against and the learned District Judge, Ferozepur, on May 21, 1998, passed following order :-  "Heard.
Appeal is admitted.
Issue notice of the appeal as well as of the stay application to the respondents for 1491998.
In the meantime, the parties are directed to maintain status-quo regarding possession."
13.
We are of the clear view that by virtue of order dated May 21, 1998 findings recorded by the civil court can not be said to have been reversed.
The order, at the most can be stated to mean that if the appellants, i.e., the plaintiffs in civil suit No. 766, are in possession, they shall continue in possession.
It also necessarily follows that if petitioners 1 and 3 are in possession, they too, likewise, would continue to be in possession.
It has been clearly mentioned in the said order that the parties shall maintain status-quo regarding possession.
In our considered view, it was too premature at this stage to hold that petitioners had interfered with the order dated May 21, 1998.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, may be right to contend that despite findings recorded by the civil court, which could be reversed by the appellate court, inasmuch as the matter had not assumed finality inter-se parties, the police in investigation, could well come to the conclusion that it was the other side, i.e., plaintiffs of civil suit No. 766, who were in possession.
That being so, for involvement of the petitions in a criminal case they could well be placed under suspension.
Even though we might agree to what has been argued by the learned DAG, the question that still needs to be answered is as to whether at this stage it was at all appropriate to place petitioners 1 and 2 under suspension ?
The more we have thought over the issue, more convinced we are that it was too premature a stage to place petitioners 1 and 2 under suspension.
As on today, the findings with regard to ownership and possession are in favour of the petitioners.
As mentioned above, the said findings have not been reversed nor can be interpreted to have been reversed by an interim order of the District Judge dated May 21, 1998.
Petitioners thus, could not said to have interfered with the order of stay (emphasis supplied), as has been mentioned in the impugned order.
There was no stay at all commanding the petitioners so as not to interfere in the possession of the other side.
If supposing, being prima facie convinced that the findings recorded by the learned trial court were incorrect, the learned District Judge would have restrained the petitioners from interfering with the possession of the other side, things might have been different.
Insofar as registration of criminal case is concerned, it is the positive case of the petitioners that they are victims of aggression and not those who might have taken law into their hands.
The investigating agency, in these circumstances, could only register cross-cases and put both the parties for trial leaving it open for the court to determine as to who are the aggressors.
In face of the findings recorded by the civil court, mention whereof has been made above, and which findings, as on today, have not been set aside, it cannot be said that the petitioners are aggressors and, therefore, have been involved in a criminal case which can entail their suspension.
We are of the firm view that respondents have not applied their mind to the facts of this case at all.
We would not like to go into the allegations of bias and mala-fide made by the petitioners at this stage and we feel it is sufficient to observe that the impugned order Annexure P-4 has been passed without at all seeing the attending circumstances and as mentioned above, without application of mind.
Respondent No. 4-Deputy Superintendent of Police, Ferozepur, gave a report and respondent No. 3-SSP, Ferozepur accepted the same, it appears, without even looking into the order passed by the District Judge and passed the impugned order.
As mentioned above, it is an order of status-quo that has been granted whereas it is mentioned in the impugned order that there was a stay in favour of the other side.
14.
We are further of the clear view that the petitioners herein have been dragged into un-necessary litigation.
If respondents 3 and 4 had given a correct report after looking into the records, i.e. the civil court decree and interim order pased by the District Judge, such an order could not have been passed.
In these circumstances, were allow this petition and quash the impugned order, Annexure P-4.
Inasmuch as it is a case where petitioners 1 and 2, who served the cause of Nation at a crucial time, have been dragged into an avoidable litigation and that too for the reason that respondents 3 and 4, before passing the impugned order, did not even look into the records of the case, we are of the view that this petition deserves to be allowed with costs which we quantify at Rs. 10,000/-.
We are further of the view that costs should be equally shared by respondents 3 and 4.
So ordered.
Petition allowed.