RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioners herein, Pawan Kumar and Amarjit Singh, were working as Lecturers in Government Engineering College, Bathinda.
The said College with the existing staff was handed over to a Society which is an autonomous body as a result of Government decision dated February 26, 1992.
The petitioners and some others who were then working in the Government Engineering College, Bathinda challenged the handing over of the Institution along with the staff to an autonomous body by way of different writ petitions in this court.
Apart from other things, they alleged they were losing the status of a civil servant and protection of the Civil Service Rules and Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
Those writ petitions were allowed on February 2, 1993.
The State of Punjab and others filed S.L.P.
against the judgment in the writ petitions.
The appeal filed by the State Government was disposed of by the Apex Court on December 6, 1996, A copy of the judgment has been appended as annexure P/1.
While disposing of the appeal filed by the State, it was observed by the Apex Court qua the petitioners and three others as under :  "As regards the 5 Lecturers, namely (1) Shri Prabhjot Singh (2) Sh. Manwinder Singh (3) Sh. Pawan Kapoor (4) Sh. Amarjit Singh and (5) Dr. Sarita Chopra, it is stated in the affidavit that they were working at the time when the said college was taken over by the Society in the year 1992, as Lecturers.
As a result they were carrying the scale of pay of Rs. 2200-4000 as on the date.
It is stated that the Government is prepared to absorb them as Lecturers in any of the Polytechnics of the State under the Directorate of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab with a special pay of Rs. 200/- per mensum.
Shri PH Parekh, learned counsel for the respondents, states that even as early as 1992-93 advertisement was made for recruitment of lecturers either the same scale of pay or lower scale of pay and such recruitment was regularly going on thereafter and a recently as on October 4, 1996 further advertisement came to be made inviting applications for recruitment.
Therefore, there is no impediment for the Government to absorb them in any of the colleges, instead of Polytechnics, where they can improve their qualification and channel of service tenure.
Even if no vacancies are existing at present, they are prepared to wait till the vacancies arise.
We are of the view that the suggestion made by Shri PH Parekh appears to be reasonable.
Undoubtedly, they have been working as Lecturers in the colleges which are Government Colleges with status as Government servants.
Under these circumstances, it would be appropriate to absorb them in any of the colleges instead of Polytechnical Institutions.
Therefore, the appellants are directed to absorb them in any of the colleges as Lecturers in the same scale of pay.
If there are no vacancies as at present, they are directed to be absorbed as and when vacancies arise.
Until then, the respondents are directed to work in the polytechnical institutions as Lecturers, as suggested in the counter affidavit."
2.
So far as the present petitioners are concerned, it was specifically observed qua them by the Apex Court as under :  "Mr. Pawan Kapoor and Amarjit Singh are presently working as a Lecturers in the subject of Mechanical Engineering in the College of Engineering taken over by the Society.
Though in his affidavit Shri Ranjit Singh, Additional Director has not dealt with their claims for absorption in the Government service, in the affidavit filed by Dr Sekhon in para 15, it is stated as under : "That the respondents No. 13 to 18 are teaching as lecturers in the subject of Mechanical Engineering in the College of Engineering and Technology, Bhatinda.
They can be absorbed against the posts of SDE Irrigation Department; Assistant Divisional Manager (Store/Purchase) State Transport Department; Assistant Director of Factories Labour Department; S.D.E.
Public Health Department and S.D.E.
(B&R) Department of Punjab Government, to the best of knowledge two posts of S.D.E., Irrigation Department are lying vacant with the Government of Punjab."
In view of the above statement, we think that if there is no post available in any of the Engineering Colleges for absorption as lecturer, it will be open to the Government to absorb them as Sub-Divisional Engineers in Irrigation Department, Assistant Divisional Manager (Store/Purchase) State Transport Department; Assistant Director of Factories Labour Department; S.D.E.
(B&R) Department of Punjab Government.
Therefore, it is open in the Governments to absorb the two persons in any of those posts mentioned or any equivalent post in which the Rules of recruitment would permit.
The appeals are accordingly disposed of.
No costs."
3.
The respondents have passed an order dated 2.12.97 (annexure P/2) absorbing the petitioners as Lecturers in Mechanical Engineering in the Government Polytechnic, Guru Teg Bahadurgarh and Government Polytechnic for Women, Amritsar against the vacant posts.
It is this order that has been made the subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners on the basis of the observations of the Supreme Court which have been reproduced above, submitted that the petitioners were not to be absorbed in any Polytechnical Institution.
They had to be either absorbed in any Government College or against the post mentioned by them in the affidavit filed by Dr Sekhon before the Apex Court (which has already been reproduced above, while quoting the judgment of the Apex Court).
However, in case the petitioners could not be absorbed in any one of those posts mentioned in the said affidavit, then the other alternative with the Government was to offer them one of the equivalent post in which the rules of recruitments permit.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that the petitioners could not be appointed in any Government Engineering College as Lecturer as there is no Engineering College run by the Government and, therefore, they have been offered the lecturership in Government Polytechnical Institutions which posts are equivalent to the posts mentioned in the affidavit of Dr Sekhon, already reproduced above.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that as per the directions of the Apex Court (supra), the petitioners could be offered a post in the Government Engineering college or any of the posts mentioned in the affidavit of Dr Sekhon, failing which any equivalent posts to the posts mentioned in the affidavit of Dr Sekhon but these equivalent posts were not to be in the Polytechnical Institutions as mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment of the Apex Court reproduced above that none of the petitioners including the three persons were to be offered posts in Polytechnical Institutions.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, by way of Civil Miscellaneous application, brought on record an advertisement dated May 2, 1998 published in "The Tribune", on behalf of the Punjab Public Service Commission, inviting applications for the four posts of Temporary Engineers (Mechanical) in the Irrigation and Power Department, out of which two posts belong to the General Category and remaining two reserved for Scheduled Castes.
It may be observed here that petitioner Pawan Kapoor belongs to General Category whereas the other petitioner Amarjit Singh belongs to Scheduled Caste category.
On the basis of this advertisement, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in fact two posts of Temporary Engineers are vacant where the petitioners can be absorbed as per the directions of the Apex Court as they fulfil the requisite qualifications for the said posts.
From the advertisement, it is evident that four posts of Temporary Engineers in the Irrigation and Power Department are lying vacant.
We are told by learned counsel for the petitioners that so far as no interview has taken place for filling up the above posts by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
8.
In view of what has been observed above, we allow the writ petition, quash the order annexure P/2 dated December 2, 1997 and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for absorption against the aforesaid posts of Temporary Engineers in accordance with law and in case there is any requirement under the law to have approval of Public Service Commission, the same may be obtained.
We have no doubt that the respondents will consider the petitioners' case expeditiously.
9.
As a matter of abundant caution, we may observe that in case the petitioners are absorbed as aforesaid, then for the purpose of pay/seniority and other service benefits, they would be treated in the same manner as to other three persons namely (1) Shri Prabhjot Singh (2) Shri Manwinder Singh and (3) Dr. Sarita Chopra have been treated on their absorption by the respondents in compliance with the directions of the Apex Court.
A copy of this order, attested by the Special Secretary of this court, be given to Mr. Ahluwalia for onward transmission to the concerned quarters.
Petition allowed.