SB Sinha, J - Both these writ applications being inter-related were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
The case has a chequered career and involves an intricate question.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Teacher in English in Konnagar Higher Secondary School for nearly 14 years.
He, thereafter was appointed as Headmaster in Maniramur Swami Mahadevananda Vidyayatan, Barrackpore for about one year.
While he was discharging the aforementioned function, he was suspended, whereagainst he filed a writ application marked as CO No. 17731(W) of 1985.
His services had been terminated.
He preferred an appeal thereagainst before the Appeal Committee, against the said order of termination dated 451986, being appeal No. 23 of 1986.
However, in the meantime on the basis of an advertisement for the post of Headmaster in Barasat Satyabharati Vidyapith, he applied therefor and was selected.
He was appointed as Headmaster on 12121985 and his appointment was approved by the District Inspector with effect from 311986 whereafter he joined the school.
The petitioner had filed a writ application questioning his order of suspension and by an order dated 16111989, the said order of suspension was set aside with a concession of the learned Advocate that he would have no claim whatsoever in future against the school authorities and shall not enter into the aforementioned school premises at any time in future.
This court, however, directed that the quashing of the order of suspension shall not disturb the continuity of service of the writ petitioner and it will be treated as continued service throughout without any break.
In the meantime, a disciplinary proceeding was initiated against the petitioner.
He filed a suit questioning the said disciplinary action in the Court of the learned Munsif, 1st Court, Barat (Barasat ?
), which was registered as Title Suit No. 229 of 1986.
Interim injunction was granted therein, whereagainst an appeal was preferred.
The petitioner filed an application for opening his provident fund, which according to the new Managing Committee could not be considered.
Again, the Managing Committee issued a notice to the petitioner for taking some steps against him and he filed another suit, being Title Suit No. 319 of 1988 and obtained an interim injunction against the defendants from holding meeting on 15101988 or on any subsequent date or for taking steps against him.
The aforesaid Managing Committee was superseded and an Administrator was appointed.
Upon an application filed by the said Administrator, the interim injunction was vacated, whereagainst the petitioner preferred an appeal, being Misc. Appeal No. 45 of 1989, but eventually the interim stay granted was vacated.
According to the petitioner, he was prevented from entering into the Headmaster's room and he was handed over a communication dated 1251990 containing some allegations against him and one senior-most teacher was appointed as teacher-in-charge of the said school.
The petitioner again filed a suit, being Title Suit No. 232 of 1990 in the Court of the learned Munsif, 1st Court, Barasat.
On 661990 the petitioner replied to the charges brought against him denying the said allegation.
However, the petitioner's order of suspension in the meantime received approval from the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education on 1571991.
The petitioner was directed to show cause why he should not be removed from service.
The Board also granted approval for initiation of disciplinary proceedings.
The petitioner replied to the show cause notice.
The Administrator filed an application before the learned Munsif for declaration that the said Title Suit No. 232 of 1991 be dismissed as being not maintainable and upon dismissal of such application, a revision application was filed and all further proceedings of the suit was stayed.
On 2391991, the petitioner applied for exercising his option for new scale.
He filed another writ application, being CO No. 12981(W) of 1991 against the show cause notice dated 1571991 and an of order of status quo was passed by this court for 2 weeks only so that he can move the civil court.
It is not stated as to whether the Civil court thereafter passed any order of injunction, or not.
Thus, the said stay application did not remain operative upon expiry of 2 weeks.
The petitioner was thereafter removed from service by the Administrator by an order dated 4121991 as contained in annexure `J' to the writ application, being CO No. 12981(W) of 1991.
The said writ application was disposed of with a direction to the writ petitioner to have his remedies before the trial court.
The petitioner has questioned the order of removal in CO No. 18800(W) of 1992, inter alia, on the ground that prior thereto the procedure prescribed under Rule 28(8) of the Rules for Management of Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969, had not been followed.
In the meantime, the petitioner had been selected for the post of Headmaster of Dumdum Sree Arabinda Vidyamandir.
It appears that by an order dated 1861992, a learned single Judge of this Court permitted the petitioner to join the said school, inter alia, on the ground that after dismissal the petitioner has to seek some employment for survival of himself and his family.
The learned Judge, therefore, granted leave to the petitioner to join the said Dumdum Sree Arbinda Vidyamandir without prejudice to his rights and contentions in that matter.
It was, however, made clear that Barasat Satyabharati Vidyamandir shall also be not adversely affected in any way by his joining Dumdum Sree Arabinda Vidyamandir on the strength of the said order.
Pursuant thereto, the petitioner joined the latter school on 26.6.1992.
The petitioner was drawing a scale of pay of Rs. 3,600/- as basic pay and other allowances as per revised scale of pay.
The petitioner claimed his additional increment, but the Secretary of the school informed the District Inspector of Schools that he is entitled to the revised scale of pay.
Moreover, by an order dated 31101994, the scale of pay of the petitioner was reduced.
4.
The pay scale of the petitioner was again revised.
However, in the meantime, the petitioner attained his age of superannuation on 30111996.
Curiously enough, the Managing Committee informed the petitioner that they had taken a resolution terminating his service with effect from 23111996 and allegedly the Board had approved the proposal by its letter dated 5.5.1997.
Questioning the aforementioned order reducing his scale of pay, the petitioner filed CO No. 7-83(W) of 1995.
Despite direction, no affidavit in opposition has been filed in any of these matters.
The petitioner has also filed an application for bringing on record subsequent events, namely, the order of dismissal passed against him by the Managing Committee dated 1951997.
In his aforementioned application bringing on record subsequent events the petitioner raised various contentions that the matter being sub judice, neither any order of suspension or dismissal could have been passed.
The said order dated 1951997 as contained in Annexure `Y' to the application for bringing on record subsequent events reads thus :  "This is to inform you that the Managing Committee of the School by resolution dated 1751997 resolved to terminate your services with effect from 23111996 on various grounds as intimated to you in the charge sheet and show cause served.
Subsequently the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education by a letter No. 24/22721/G dated 5.5.1997 informed us of the approval of the Managing Committee's proposal taken in the meeting No. 12/96 dated 23111996 to terminate your services from school A xerox copy of such letter is enclosed herewith.
In view of the above you are hereby informed that your service in the post of Headmaster stands terminated from 23111996."
5.
A bare perusal of the said order would show that the same is ex facie illegal, as the Managing Committee could not have passed a resolution on 1751997 for terminating the service with effect from 23111996.
Assuming that the petitioner has committed misconduct and, therefore, a disciplinary proceeding had been initiated against him, from the said letter dated 1951997 it appears that the services of the petitioner had been terminated with retrospective effect from 23111996.
An order of termination of service, as is well known, takes effect from the date of communication of the said order.
Reference in this connection may be made to a decision reported in AIR 1966 SC 1313 in the view of the matter, service of the petitioner could not have been terminated even by Dumdum Sree Arabinda Vidyamandir with retrospective effect from 23111996.
Even, nothing has been shown that requirement of Rule 28(8) of 1969 Rules as has been explained by a Division Bench of this court in Sujit Das v. West Bengal Board of Secondary Education reported in 1997(2) CLJ 497, had been followed.
Although, this appears to be a peculiar case, as the petitioner despite an order of removal was allowed to join another school by leave of this court, and no attempt had been made by the authorities of the school or the State to clarify the position, this court has no other option but to hold in view of the decision of this court, in Sujit Das (supra) that the order of removal dated 4121991 as contained in annexure `G' to the writ application, being CO No. 18800(W) of 1992 is illegal.
For the self-same reason also on the ground that the petitioner's services could not have been terminated after he had superannuated from his service, the order of termination dated 1951997 cannot also be sustained.
The question, therefore, which remains is what relief should be granted to the petitioner.
The petitioner had filed several applications.
This court, without any material on record, is not in a position to arrive at a conclusion, as has been submitted by Ms. Nandini Mitra, learned counsel appearing for Dumdum Sree Arabinda Vidyamandir, that the petitioner obtained his service by suppression of fact.
It is really a matter of regret that if the petitioner was appointed by committing fraud, the same should have been brought to the notice of this court, as the petitioner had joined the school with the leave of this court in terms of this court's order dated 1861992.
However, there cannot be any doubt that on the principle of no work no pay, the petitioner would not be entitled to salary for the period he had not worked.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, it is directed that the petitioner shall not be paid his full salary during the period for which he was under suspension, but there cannot be any doubt that for the period he has actually worked he will be entitled to salary in terms of the scale of pay to which he is entitled to.
From the impugned order as contained in annexure `B' to the writ application, it does not appear that any reason has been assigned for non-payment of the petitioner's remuneration on any justifiable ground.
The said order has been passed only because he has failed to produce his last pay certificate.
From annexure `P' itself, it appears that as far back on 31101991, the District Inspector of Schools was aware that the petitioner had been removed from service, and the matter is pending in this court and thus, it was obligatory on his part in the aforementioned situation, to take steps to move this court for variation and/or vacation of the order and/or bring to the notice of this court the circumstances under which the order of approval had been wrongly given in favour of the petitioner.
The said authority having granted approval of the appointment cannot be heard to say that the petitioner would be entitled to a salary of Rs. 2440/- only and not the salary to which he is entitled to under law.
The petitioner may be paid his arrears to which he would have been entitled to had he continued in his former school, namely Satyabharati Vidyapith upon deduction of the salary which he had received from Dumdum Sree Aarbinda Vidyamandir.
No order of dismissal could have been passed after the petitioner reached his age of superannuation without extending his service or in the absence of any rule to the contrary.
No order for extending his service for continuing the departmental proceeding has been produced before this court, nor any extant rule has been shown.
In the opinion of this court, the aforementioned order shall meet ends of justice as the petitioner had worked in the latter school with knowledge of his order of removal passed against him.
Furthermore, as the order of removal passed by the former school as contained in annexure `J' in CO No. 18800(W) of 1992 is set aside, he will be deemed to be continuing in service in that school, but as the petitioner cannot get double benefit, all the salary he has drawn from Dumdum Sree Arabinda Vidyamandir be deducted from his arrear salary.
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to initiate any appropriate proceedings against him if permissible under the law.
The Director of School Education shall be entitled to take such action against the erring officer as he may deem fit and proper.
6.
These two writ applications are disposed of with the aforementioned directions.
7.
Xerox certified copy be supplied on priority basis.
Petition allowed.