Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were selected as Patwaris by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter called `the Board') in District Jalandhar in pursuance of an advertisement issued by the Board.
One such letter of appointment dated 11.1.1982 has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition.
On 681982, respondent No. 2 i.e. the Commissioner Jalandhar Division, took a decision transferring the petitioners and other patwaris to other Districts and consequent thereto, the petitioners were transferred to District Hoshiarpur and they joined their duties on transfer on 19/20.8.1982.
Respondents No. 5 to 139 were appointed as Patwaris in District Hoshiarpur on ad hoc basis on 23121981 on the basis of letters of appointments of even date and in paragraph 1 of the letter of appointment, it was specifically noted that the appointment was purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till candidates recommended for regular appointment whichever was earlier, were made available and it was further stipulated that their services were liable to be terminated at any time without notice.
It is the petitioners' case that the services of each of these respondents were regularised w.e.f.
141985 as per Govt. notification dated 2931985 subject to various conditions; condition No. 3 stipulating that he must have been recruited through an Employment Exchange or by an open advertisement and condition No. 8 providing that amongst such persons, the inter se seniority would be maintained and that they would rank junior to all those working on a regular basis.
Pursuant to the aforesaid conditions, respondent No. 3 i.e. the Collector Hoshiarpur vide order dated 7.3.1986 Annexure P.4 to the petition regularised the services of the respondents, w.e.f.
141985.
A tentative seniority list dated 2111987 was, thereafter, issued and objections were invited from such persons who were likely to be affected thereby.
Petitioner No. 1 aforesaid took objection to the list vide Annexure P-5.
It is the petitioners, case that while the objections were still pending, respondent No. 3 issued a final seniority list Annexure P-6, determining the seniority w.e.f.
31.3.1988 in which the petitioners were shown junior to the private respondents.
It is further the petitioners' case that the list Annexure P-6 was never circulated within the service and it was only in August 1993 that the petitioners became aware of the same and, accordingly, on 1491993 filed set of fresh objections; a copy thereof being Annexure P-7 to the petition.
It appears that no action was taken on this representation as well, which led to the filing of reminders Annexures P-8, P-9 and P-10.
Finding that there was still no action being taken on the part of the State Government, the petitioners filed C.W.P.
No. 15215 of 1994 in this Court and vide order dated 18101995, a Division Bench directed that the representation filed by the petitioners be disposed of within three months from that date after affording a hearing to all those likely to be affected.
As a direction had also been given to the petitioners by the aforesaid order to make a fresh representation, Annexure P-11, another detailed representation was, thereafter, filed.
The Collector, Hoshiarpur, considered the representation and vide order dated 1711996 Annexure P-12 to the petition, rejected the same, observing that the private respondents were entitled to count their period of ad hoc service for the determination of their seniority, and as they had been appointed on ad hoc basis on 23121981 whereas the petitioners had been appointed on a temporary basis thereafter, the respondents were deemed to be senior to the petitioners.
The order Annexure P-12 has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
The petitioners' primary grievance is that as the private respondents had not been selected for appointment as Patwaris under the Punjab Revenue Patwaris Clause (3), Rules, 1966 (hereinafter called `the Rules'), they were not entitled to count the period of their ad hoc service for the purpose of the determination of their seniority.
Contrarily, it has been pleaded that as the petitioners had been appointed under the provisions of the aforesaid Rules, though initially on a temporary basis, they were deemed to have entered service on the date of their initial appointments, as they too had been confirmed in service in the meanwhile.
3.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed by the respondents.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4 i.e. the State Government, it has been admitted, that the private respondents had not been appointed through the SSS Board, but had, in fact, been appointed under the procedure set out in the instructions dated 14101981 Annexure R-1 to the reply, issued by the State Government in order to fill in the vacant posts which was an immediate and dire need.
It has further been pleaded that the appointments in question had been made in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
It has further been highlighted that the seniority list referred to above, had been circulated through the Patwari unions as also through the respective Tehsildars and as such, the plea of ignorance taken by the petitioners was an effort to cover up the delay in coming to the Court or even approaching the Collector concerned.
It has also been pleaded that representations dated 2821994, 11.5.1994 and 26.6.1994 had not been received in the department and the averments to that effect were an attempt at covering up the delay in seeking the redressal of their grievance.
4.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners to this written statement and the contents of the writ petition have been reiterated.
5.
A second written statement has been filed on behalf of private respondents No. 10, 13, 14, 17 and while reiterating the plea of the State-respondent, it has been pointed out that the petitioners had been appointed as Officiating Patwaris vide order dated 11.1.1982, Annexure P-2 to the petition and as such, the period of their temporary appointment could not count towards the determination of their seniority.
Reference has also been made to Annexure R-10/1, the appointment order dated 23121981 to plead that they were entitled to claim their seniority from that date.
6. a replication has also been filed to this written statement as well and the petitioners have reiterated the facts given in the writ petition.
7.
Yet, another written statement has been filed on behalf of private respondents No. 57, 68, 71, 96, 116 and 120 and it has been pleaded that they had been recruited after their names had been requisitioned from the Employment Exchange, Hoshiarpur as also by issuing newspaper advertisements, and that, they had continued to work without break till their services had been regularised on 141985.
It has also been claimed that the word "ad hoc" in the letters of appointment of the answering respondents was wholly arbitrary and unwarranted as the said respondents had been recruited under the Rules by a duly constituted Departmental Selection Committee.
It has also been highlighted that they had been appointed initially in District Jalandhar but had chosen to forego those appointments and had joined service in District Hoshiarpur which happened to be nearer home.
8.
This writ petition had initially been put up before me for regular hearing on 22121997 and was allowed as covered by the Full Bench decision of this Court in Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) RSJ 382 : 1994(4) SCT 800 (P&H)(FB) on the explicit statement made by Mr. HS Gill, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the State-respondent.
The private respondents, through their counsel, thereafter, moved CM No. 242 of 1998 under Order 9 Rule 13 of the CPC and CM No. 1169 of 1998 in this Court seeking a review of the order, on the ground that they had not been heard.
The learned Counsel pointed out that though they had filed their powers of attorney/memorandum of appearance in the writ petition, their names had not figured in the cause list and as such, they had remained unaware of the proceedings of 22121997.
Notices of these applications were issued and an interim order in favour of the respondents was also made during the course of the proceedings.
The learned counsel for the parties have now been heard at great length on the merits of the controversy raised in the writ petition, in hearings spilling over into several days and the writ petition as also the miscellaneous applications are being disposed of by this judgment.
9.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, the learned Counsel for the petitioners has, first and foremost, argued that the services of the private respondents had been regularised w.e.f.
141985 subject to two primary conditions, firstly that they should have been recruited through an Employment Exchange or an open advertisement and secondly that on regularisation, they would be placed junior to those working on a regular basis.
He has also pointed out that from this order itself which formed the core of the respondents' case, it was apparent that the petitioners were to be held senior to them.
He has, in addition, pointed out that the appointments of the private respondents had not been made in accordance with the Rules and as they had been appointed on a purely temporary basis under Annexures R-2 and R-5 with the reply filed by respondent Nos. 57 etc. to fill in an urgent need, the period of ad hoc services could not be counted for the determination of the seniority.
In this connection, Mr. Atma Ram has placed primary reliance on Chembel Singh case (supra) as also PK Singh v. Bool Chand Chablani and others, 1998(6) JT 407 : 1999(1) SCT.
128(SC) and CK Antony v. B Muraleedharan and others, 1998(6) JT SC 11 : 1998(4) SCT.
151.
Two other arguments pertaining to Rule 15 which dealt with the seniority of the Patwaris in service and another argument with regard to the PCS (General Conditions of Service Rules) 1994, were also raised by the learned Counsel.
10.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate, appearing for some of the private respondents has however pointed out that the petitioners had made serious misrepresentation of facts in the writ petition when they had stated that the seniority list of 1988 had never been published or circulated and in the light of this position, a challenge made in the present writ petition in the year 1994 was unacceptable and as they had chosen to sit back and had accepted what had come their way, they could not now turn around and challenge the seniority list after six long years Reliance in this connection has been placed on Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, 1989(4) S.L.R.
437.
11.
On merits, Mr. Patwalia has urged that the private respondents had been selected for appointment as Patwaris in accordance with the Rules and if there was some procedural defect in the manner in which the selections had been made, the same needed to be overlooked and as such, the petitioners' services were deemed to have been regularised w.e.f.
14101981.
He has also urged that even accepting for a moment that the services of the petitioners had been regularised w.e.f.
141985, yet, on regularisation, the date of appointment would relate back to the date of initial appointment and in that eventuality, the respondents were entitled to count their entire period of service from that date onwards for the purpose of the determination of their seniority.
He has, in this connection, relied upon GP Doval and others v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
555.
12.
Mr. MS Kang, the learned Counsel representing respondents No. 10, 14 and 17 while adopting Mr. Patwalia's arguments had, in addition, argued that the petitioners too had been appointed only on an officiating basis and as such, were not entitled to count that period for the purpose of the fixation of their seniority as the seniority was to be fixed under Rule 15 on the basis of continuous length of service on a post in the cadre.
13.
Mr. Amar Vivek, the learned Counsel representing respondents No. 57 etc. has urged that some amongst his clients had foregone their selection in District Jalandhar and had accepted the same in District Hoshiarpur to be nearer home and in any case, the word "ad hoc" in the letters of appointments issued to them was wholly arbitrary and subject to challenge even at this stage.
14.
Mr. Patwalia's objection as to the writ petition being belated must first be examined.
It is true that there is a divergence on facts as to when the petitioners had initially represented against the seniority list of 1988.
This factor would, however, be of little consequence, as the order now impugned is Annexure P-12 dated 1711996.
The reliance on Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case (supra) is, therefore, to no avail.
15.
The arguments raised by the learned Counsel would have to be considered in the light of the Rules read along with their conditions and terms of appointment and of the regularisation of their services.
It is the admitted position that the service is to be governed by the Rules and the appointments also to be made thereunder.
Section 2 of the Rules defines the `Board' to meant the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
Section 10 provides that the appointments to the service in the case of Patwaris shall be from various sources including direct appointment from amongst accepted patwari candidates and that the Collector of the district in which the appointment has to be made, (the cadre being district-wise) shall determine the source for recruitment.
Rule 4 talks about the mode of acceptance of patwaris.
This Rule is reproduced hereunder :-  "4.
MODE OF ACCEPTANCE OF PATWARI CANDIDATE->  </UL (1) As and when a requisition is received by the Board from the Collector, the Board shall recommend to the Collector such number of candidates for acceptance as Patwari candidates as the Collector may specify in the requisition.
(2) For the purpose of direct appointment to the service, a register of Patwari candidates shall be maintained by the Collector in each District in which the names of Patwari candidates shall be entered in the order in which they are recommended by the Board.
(3) The number of Patwari candidates that may be enrolled on the register of a district shall be such as may be determined by the Government from time to time."
16.
Rule 4 (ibid) stipulates that whenever the Collector of the District feels the necessity of making direct recruitment of Patwaris, he would make a requisition to the Board and the Board shall recommend such number of candidates for acceptance as may be specified in the requisition and for that purpose, a Register of Patwari candidates shall be maintained by the Collector in which the names of the Patwari candidates would be entered in the order in which they had been recommended by the Board.
It is, therefore, evident that the appointment to the post of patwaris is to be made from the Register of accepted Patwari candidates to be maintained by the Collector and the names to be put on the register are to be determined by the Board.
In other words, the Agency for making selection of Patwari Candidates is the Board and no other agency or individual.
It is clear from Annexure R-5 dated 14101981 filed with the reply of the State Government that the procedure envisaged under the Rules was being ignored for the time being on account of a paucity of trained Patwaris to man a large number of vacant posts in the cadre and it was specifically noted that as the process of making selection under the Rules at the instance of the Board was time consuming, the Collectors of the District were authorised to make ad hoc appointments of candidates selected by the Departmental Selection Committee only till such time as the Board made recommendations for regular appointments.
It was in pursuance of the authority conferred by Annexure R-5 that the Collector, Hoshiarpur, vide order dated 28121981 Annexure R-8, with the reply filed by respondents No. 57 etc. issued appointment orders to the respondents and condition No. 1 specifically provided that the appointment was purely on an ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the Subordinate Service Selection Board made recommendations for regular appointments, whichever was earlier.
It is, therefore, clear that the appointments offered to the respondents pursuant to the policy decision dated 14101981, Annexure R-5, was purely a stop gap arrangement made in deviation of the Rules.
The legal position has now to be examined in this factual background.
In CK Antony's case (supra), it was observed as under :-  "A person who has been appointed to a service or post temporarily or provisionally as a stop gap arrangement can never be considered as one who has been appointed to that post or service.
If there is no substantive vacancy in the permanent cadre, no direct recruitment can be resorted to.
The direct recruits should get substantive vacancies in the permanent cadre while recruits by transfer can be adjusted against a permanent vacancy or a temporary vacancy depending upon the vacancy position.
A person who gets temporary appointment or promotion, as the case may be, shall not be regarded as a probationer in that category and on account of that temporary appointment or promotion, he cannot have any preferential claim to that post.
Any commencement of probation for the purpose of counting seniority must precede by an appointment in accordance with the rules."
17.
In PK Singh's case (supra), the following observations were made :-  "It is well settled that when ad hoc appointment is made de hors the Rules, the said appointment would not ensure benefit to the appointee for the purpose of determining the seniority in the cadre."
18.
Primary reliance has, however, been placed by the petitioners' counsel on Chambel Singh's case (supra), wherein a Full Bench of this Court on a consideration of the relevant law held :-  "(i) that the period as an ad hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of an incumbent; (ii) it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered will be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre; (iii) In the absence of Rules, it would have to be kept in view as to whether the appointment so made is against an existing vacancy and not for a limited period and in that case, the period so spent by an incumbent can be considered to determine his seniority in the cadre; (iv) if the appointment is otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural defects such defect/defects stand cured with the subsequent regularisation; (v) mere long stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of delinquent officer or on account of interim direction of the Court will not clothe the appointee with any right to tag such a period to determine his seniority in the cadre.
Period of service as a stop gap arrangement shall be ignored while determining his seniority in the cadre."
19.
It will be seen from the passage quoted above that the period of ad hoc appointment is not to be excluded under all circumstances, and if an appointment is as per Rules and is not by way of stop gap arrangement and there has been only a procedural defect or departure the period of ad hoc appointment cannot be ignored.
Mr. Patwalia has laid emphasis on point (iv) quoted above in this connection and has highlighted that there was only a procedural defect in the ad hoc appointments of the private respondents and as their service had been regularised w.e.f.
141985, the defect, if any, stood cured.
The argument of the learned Counsel is, however, not acceptable.
It bears repetition that under Rule 4, the Agency for making selection of Patwari candidates to be put on the Register maintained by the Collector is the Board and none else.
To my mind the power to make the selection which vests in the Board cannot be said to be procedural matter as it goes to the very root of the selection process leading to appointment.
The selection made by the Departmental Selection Committee under the provision of Annexure R-5 dated 14101981 on condition given in Annexure R-8 dated 28121981 and was, therefore, not in accordance with the Rules.
To my mind, Mr. HS Gill, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, was, therefore, perfectly justified in making a statement on 22121997 that the matter was covered by the decision in Chambel Singh's case (supra).
20.
Mr. Patwalia has nevertheless placed reliance on CWP No. 3163 of 1990 (Dr. RK Mittal etc. v. State of Punjab etc.) decided on 2441996 to contend that this Court has given a direction to the State Government that it should issue instruction to all the departments to give benefits of ad hoc service for the purpose of seniority etc. to deserving employees and in the light of this order, the private respondents too were entitled to claim benefit of their ad hoc services.
To my mind, the observations made in the order of the Division Bench cannot be universally applied to the case of the petitioners as neither they nor the private respondents were parties to that litigation.
The general observations, therefore, too, are of no avail.
21.
Mr. Atma Ram's second argument though really a limb of the first one must now be examined.
He has urged that the services of the respondents had been regularized with effect from 141985 under the Government notification dated 2931985 and two of the conditions therein postulated that the official ought to have been recruited through the Employment Exchange or by an open advertisement and that the persons whose services were being regularized would be placed junior to all those working on a regular basis.
The stand, therefore, is that as the respondent were governed by this order, they could not claim the benefit of ad hoc services prior to 141985 and in any case, seniority over those who had been appointed on regular basis prior to that date.
Mr. Atma Ram has, in this connection, placed reliance on Union of India and others v. M Dharani and others, 1998(1) All India Services Law Journal 183 : 1997(3) SCT 596 (SC), wherein construing similar instructions, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that if the services of an employee had been regularised in accordance with a particular policy of regularisation and on terms which were set out in that policy, no deviation therefrom was permissible and such an employee was bound by the same.
22.
Faced with this situation, Mr Amar Vivek and Mr. MS Kang Advocates appearing on behalf of some of the private respondents have urged that the petitioners too had been appointed under Annexure P-2 dated 11.1.1982 on an officiating basis and as no order of confirmation had been made in their favour as of today, they also continued to hold appointments in a temporary capacity.
It will be seen from clause 1 (ii) of Annexure P-2 that the appointments had been made on a temporary basis.
Under Rule 14, a person appointed by direct appointment was ordinarily to be put on probation for a period of two years which could be extended by one year but could not be allowed to exceed three years in all.
Even assuming for a moment that no order confirming the petitioners in their appointments had been made, yet by virtue of Rule 14, they would be deemed to have completed the maximum period of three years of probation and were deemed to have been confirmed in service on that date.
23.
Mr. Patwalia has, nevertheless, argued that in the light of the judgment of this Court in Surinder Singh Sekhon v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) S.L.R.
129 : 1993(1) SCT 412 (P&H) that once the services of the petitioners had been regularised, their appointments should relate back to the date of their initial appointments and as such, the respondents being senior to the petitioners were entitled to have their seniority fixed on that basis.
Reliance has also been placed on the following words in paragraph 7 of the report :-  "In my opinion, if a person is appointed temporarily or on ad hoc basis by way of stop gap arrangement and his appointment is not in accordance with rules and subsequently, the competent authority or the Commission approves or regularises or confirms the initial appointment, then the date of regular appointment would relate back to the date of his initial appointment.
Similarly, if a person is promoted temporarily, provisionally or on ad hoc basis pending approval of confirmation by the Commission or any other competent authority, and if such approval or confirmation is granted subsequently, it would also relate back to the date of initial promotion even though that was not in accordance with the rules.
If, on the other hand, a person is appointed on temporary or ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement pending final selection by the Commission or any other competent authority and such competent authority later chooses to make a fresh selection by advertising the post and selects the ad hoc appointee after considering the claims of others as well, the date of regular selection would not relate back to the date of initial appointment.
In such a case, the competent authority is not formally approving or regularising the initial appointment but making a fresh selection where others are also considered."
24.
Read in isolation, some of the observations of the learned Single Judge certainly do support Mr. Patwalia's contention but on a closer analysis, they in fact, do not do so.
First and foremost, it has to be borne in mind that the services of the private respondents had been regularised w.e.f.
141985 by a general order issued by the government on certain conditions which bound them in view of the decision in U.O.I.
v. M Dharani and others (supra).
Moreover, if the aforesaid observations are read in the manner suggested by Mr. Patwalia, they would also appear to be contrary to the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in DN Aggarwal and another v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, JT 1990(2) SC 9.
In para 10 of the report, it was observed as under :-  "Their appointments were made specifically under the power given to the Government to make ad hoc appointments for administrative exigency.
The appointment orders made it clear that the appointments were in the said special circumstances and that they will not be deemed to determine seniority for any purpose whatsoever."
25.
GP Doval's case (supra) also does not come to the respondent's aid.
In this case, it was held that though an appointment was made outside the Rules, but in the absence of a `Rule to the Contrary', the said appointment must relate back to the initial appointment on confirmation.
However, in the case in hand, it is apparent that the respondent's services had been regularised under a specific order which provided inter alia that they would rank junior to all those Patwaris who had been appointed on regular basis under the Rule.
26.
As already held above, the appointment of the private respondents herein was not defective in a formal sense but as the very power of selection had been taken away from the Board and given to the Departmental Selection Committee, there was a short-circuiting of the procedure for selection.
To my mind, therefore, it would not be possible to hold that the respondents appointment must relate back to the date of their initial appointment.
27.
Mr. Amar Vivek, the learned Counsel has also pointed out that the respondents had been selected in Jalandhar District as patwaris but they had forgone these appointments in favour of district Hoshiarpur which happened to be their home district and as such, they should not be allowed to suffer prejudice now.
This argument is to no avail as well.
The said respondents had chosen to accept appointment on ad hoc basis in Hoshiarpur District on certain terms and conditions and they cannot get away from them.
28.
This petition is, accordingly allowed, the order Annexure P-12 is quashed and a direction is issued to respondent No. 3, the Collector, Hoshiarpur to redetermine the seniority vis-a-vis the petitioners and other similarly situated Patwaris and the private respondents.
It is also directed that the entire exercise will be completed within a period of three months from the date that a certified copy of the order is supplied to him and pending finalisation of the seniority, no appointments from Patwaris to the posts of Kanungos will be made.
Petition allowed.