OP Sharma, J - The petitioner was a constable in Border Security Force.
By order dated 12595 impugned in the writ petition he was dismissed from service on being found guilty of an act which was prejudicial to good order and discipline of the force punishable under section 40 of the BSF Act.
2.
He challenges his conviction under section 40 and the order of dismissal inter-alia on the grounds that he was neither informed of the nature of charge levelled against him nor made to understand the same before being tried on the said charge.
It is also averred that he however pleaded guilty to the charge and the same has been wrongly attributed to him.
3.
Mr. Dutta, appearing for the petitioner argued that the provisions of Rule 142 of the BSF Rules 1969 have not been followed which have vitiated the trial and consequently the order of dismissal is liable to be quashed.
He also argued that the charge-sheet dated 28.9.1884 indicates that the petitioner was charged under section 20-B of the BSF Act whereas he has been punished under section 40 of the Act, without framing the charge under the said section.
This according to him vitiates the trial.
The plea of guilt attributed to the petitioner according to Mr. Dutta is a concoction because he was never explained the charge nor the consequence of the plea of guilty, before the same was recorded.
4.
Mr. Salathia appearing for the respondents on the other hand, submitted that the charge-sheet dated 2891994 is in fact the offence report because it contains the nature of allegations against the petitioner.
A regular charge- sheet was however, framed on 18.4.1995, whereafter he was tried for the same.
Moreover, it is the act attributed to the petitioner which constitutes the offence.
In case the ingredients of section 40 are made out from the act alleged to have been committed by the petitioner, reference to section 20, according to Mr. Salathia, will be inconsequential.
5.
The petitioner at the time of commission offence was posted at Kupwara.
The offence report dated 2781994 reads as under :-  "BSF Act 1968 Sec. 20(b) USING THREATENING LANGUAGE TO HIS SUPERIOR OFFICER.
In that he, at 2330 hrs on 2781994 was found with his rifle cocked going towards ORs line in drunken state saying that, "MAIN BHM KO GOLI MARUNGA" and words to that effect."
This is re-produced in the charge sheet dated 2891994 which also mentions the offence punishable under section 20(b) of the BSF Act.
Subsequently, he was however, tried by the Summary Security Force Court under section 40 of the B.S.F.
Act.
The charge and the allegations against him remaining the same.
In the counter, it is specifically pleaded that the petitioner pleaded guilty to the charge after its consequence was explained to him.
His plea of guilt was recorded only after the court was satisfied that he understood the charge and the effect of the plea of guilt.
6.
The first contention of Mr. Dutta is that the nature of allegations remaining the same the petitioner could not have been convicted under Section 40 when the act attributed to him is specifically covered by Section 20 of the Act.
7.
The first question is whether the allegations made in the offence report constitute offence punishable under Section 20 or Section 40 of the Act.
Section 20 of the Act reads :  "20.
Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offence, that is to say - (a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or (b) uses threatening language to such officer; (c) uses insubordinate language to such officer, shall, on conviction by a security Force Court."
8.
But use of force and use of threatening or insubordinate language under this Section is possible only in presence of the officer who is threatened and not in his absence.
Admittedly the occurrence did not take place in presence of BHM Draya Singh though petitioner was found rushing towards his location.
9.
The next question is whether the act is covered under Section 40 of the Act which reads :  "Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the force shall, on conviction by a security force court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
10.
It is an omnibus provision under which a person subject to the Act who is guilty of any act or omission which though not specified in the Act is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the force has been made punishable.
The act of the petitioner could fall under section 20 only, if it was accompanied by use of criminal force or assault which is not the case.
Similarly use of threatening language or use of insubordinate language to attract application of sub-sections (b) and (c) of section 20 must be in the presence of the superior officer.
Since he was only found going towards officers line armed with rifle cocked and using threatening language against his superior officer in his absence, it does not fall under section 20 of the Act but is specifically covered by section 40 of the Act because it is an act prejudicial to good order and discipline of the force.
He was thus rightly charged under section 40 before the trial commenced.
Moreover, under R. 140 of the BSF Rules charge could be amended at any stage of the so charge-sheet dt 28996 was based on offence report dated 2781994.
Subsequent alteration of the charge from section 20(b) to section 40 of the Act is perfectly legal and in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
In the counter, it is specifically pleaded that the petitioner was charged, "under section 40 of the BSF Act for the act prejudicial to the good order and discipline of the Force and not for the intoxication which falls under section 26 of the BSF Act".
So the charge of intoxication has been dropped but it cannot be said that the act attributed to the petitioner is not covered by section 40 of the Act.
Therefore, this contention of Mr. Dutta does not hold good and as such, is rejected.
11.
The second limb of his argument that the plea of guilt was not properly recorded.
For this he placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of this court in Union of India & Others v. Ex-Havildar Clerk Pritpal Singh and others, 1991 KLJ 513.
This superior officers line armed with rifle cocked and using threatening he Division Bench had, however, reiterated the earlier decision by observing as under:-  "The Divison Bench of this Court in case Bhagwan Singh v. Union of India, 1984 SLJ 90 while dealing with rule 52(2) of the Army Rules in similar circumstances has held as under :-  "The document does not show as to whether or not the charges were explained to the petitioner, who is not at all conversant with English, the language in which they were framed.
It also does not show as to whether or not the Judge Advocate had satisfied himself that the petitioner had understood the charges before pleading guilty to them.
It does not show that he had informed the petitioner that he could be convicted on the basis of his plea of guilty without recording any other evidence.
Nor does it transpire from the said document that he had gone through the summary of evidence to arrive at a conclusion as to whether or not the petitioner required to be advised to withdraw his confession.
On the other hand, the certificate appended to the aforesaid confession reveals that the Judge Advocate assumed automatic compliance of Rule 52(2), on the petitioner's pleading guilty to the charges.
He, in our opinion, clearly slipped into an error.
Rule 52 enjoys upon him a compliance with its mandatory provisions, not only in letter, but also in spirit and this compliance ought to have been reflected in the document itself, or elsewhere in the recorded proceedings of the G.C.M.
Incidently, it is reflected nowhere, except to some extent in the reply affidavit of the respondents, which admittedly has neither been sworn by the concerned Judge- Advocate nor by the Presiding Officer of the concerned G.C.M.
and nor for that matter, by any of its members.
The conclusion is, therefore, inevitable that since there has been no compliance with Rule 52, the trial of the petitioner stands vitiated.
Rule 52 applies to cases being held by Court Martial whereas Rule 115 pertains to summary court martial.
Rule 52(2) is parametric to rule 115(2).
The aforesaid view taken earlier by the Division Bench is the same as being taken by us in this case."
12.
Rule 142 of the BSF Rules being almost in pari-materia with Rule 115 of the Army Rules, the ratio will apply provided the procedure has not been followed.
However, on facts it is clear that both the aforesaid decisions rest on particular facts of the case where the Court Martial did not follow the mandate of the Rules as is evident from the following conclusion of the judgment in Pritpal Singh's case (supra) which reads :  "The other point which has been made basis for quashing the sentence awarded to respondent-accused relates to clause (2) of Rule 115.
Under this mandatory provision the court is required to ascertain before it records plea of guilt of the accused, as to whether the accused understands the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty and shall inform him of the general effect of that plea and in particular of the meaning of charge to which he has pleaded guilty.
The court is further required under this provision of law to advise the accused to withdraw that plea if it appears from summary of evidence or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty.
How to follow this procedure is the main crux of the question involved in this case.
Rule 125 provides that the court shall date and sign the sentence and such signatures shall authenticate whole of the proceedings.
It comes out from this rule that the signing of the proceedings by the court will amount to authentication of the same.
We may take it that the signatures of the accused are not required even after recording plea of guilt but as a matter of caution same should be taken.
But in order to come to a finding as to whether compliance of sub-rule (2) of rule 125 has been made there should have been some certificate of the court to that effect or at least some minutes pointing out the fulfilment of the procedure.
Nothing is coming out from record to this effect.
It is certainly a violation of the aforesaid rule."
13.
However, the facts of this case are entirely different as is evident from the following record of the proceedings:  "The charge sheet is read (translated) and explained to the accused, marked B-2 signed by the court and attached to the proceedings.
Now say you No. 01004763, Constable, Name Dharintar Singh are you guilty or not guilty of the first charge/charges.
GUILTY  The accused having pleaded guilty to the charge, the court explains to the accused the meaning of charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertain that the accused understands the nature of the charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty.
The court also informs the accused the general effect of that plea and the difference in procedure which will be followed consequent to the said plea.
The court having satisfied itself that the accused understands the charge(s) and the effect of his plea of guilty, accents and records the same.
The provisions of Rule 142(2) are complied with."
14.
Such record was missing both in Bhagwan Singh's case as well as in Prithpal Singh's case.
Moreover in Bhagwan Singh's case only evidence relied by the summary Court Martial was his plea of guilty, whereas in the present case it is admitted by the petitioner that summary Force Court examined Path Ram, Hira Lal, Shiv Charan and Satveer Singh as witnesses.
Their evidence he has not challenged.
His only grievance is that the court should have also examined BHM Draya Singh who was allegedly threatened by him and also the Doctor with regard to his state of drunkenness.
However BHM Draya Singh was not a material witness as he was not present on-spot while the charge of drunkenness having been dropped, doctor was not a necessary witness.
Moreover petitioner having pleaded guilty to the charge which has been supported by other evidence, the decision not to examine other evidence can neither be said to be arbitrary nor in violation of any rules of procedure.
So the respondents having acted strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Act and Rules, the order impugned does not suffer from any illegality whatsoever.
The petition is therefore dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.