GC Garg, J - Petitioner was appointed as Driver on 141984 by the State Transport Department, Haryana.
Petitioner claims that he had proceeded on rest for five days on 1481987 for which he had obtained prior permission from the Inspector concerned, but thereafter he fell ill and consequently was got admitted in the Government Hospital.
The doctor advised him complete rest from 1581987 to 1491987.
Petitioner was served with a charge-sheet with the allegations that he remained absent from duty for 22 days ie from 2481997 to 1491887.
Petitioner submitted reply to the charge sheet.
A departmental inquiry was conducted and the Enquiry Officer submitted his report, copy Annexure P-4.
As per the report of the Enquiry Officer the petitioner absented himself wilfully from duty w.e.f.
2481997 without getting his leave sanctioned.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The question for consideration before the Labour Court was "whether the termination of the petitioner is in order ?
If not, to what relief is the entitled ?"
Labour Court on a consideration of the matter, came to the conclusion that the order of termination of services of the petitioner was proper.
The Labour Court, however, declined to dilute the punishment of termination of services awarded to the petitioner on the ground that no such plea was raised either in the claim statement or in the rejoinder.
The petitioner was thus held not entitled to any relief by the Labour Court.
A copy of the award dated 2021997 is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
The petitioner has impugned this award of the Labour Court by filing the present writ petition.
2.
In response to notice of motion, respondents have put in appearance and have filed reply.
3.
At the time of issuing notice of motion on 2021998, learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner is willing to forego his back wages.
During the course of hearing before us, learned counsel for the petitioner only submitted that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is harsh and the Labour Court was not right in refusing to consider this aspect on the ground that this was not pleaded before it.
Learned counsel submitted that once the entire matter was before the Labour Court, there was hardly any requirement to plead specifically that the penalty imposed was excessive.
Learned counsel further submitted that it was open to the Labour Court to mould the relief and grant lesser punishment by reducing the punishment imposed by the management, after affording an opportunity to the petitioner and observing the principles of natural justice.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the contention has merit.
A perusal of the impugned award goes to show that the Labour Court did not go into the question, whether the penalty imposed by the management is excessive.
It refused to interfere on this aspect only on the ground that no such plea was raised in the pleadings before it.
Undisputedly the petitioner was on sanctioned leave from 1581987 to 2381987 and he has been held to be absent by the Enquiry Officer w.e.f.
2481997 only for 22 days, as he did not join his duties after the expiry of his leave period.
The petitioner has today produced before us a certificate issued by the hospital authorities indicating that he remained admitted in the hospital from 1581987 to 1491987 and another certificate showing that he was fit to resume his duties w.e.f.
15.9.1987.
The certificate indicating the period of admission of the petitioner in the hospital which has been produced before us, was also produced before the Labour Court but the same was not accepted on the short ground that it is dated 1091987 whereas in the body of the certificate it is recorded that the petitioner remained admitted in the hospital from 1581987 to 1491987.
On a careful examination of the certificate, we find that it was initially issued only for the period 1581987 to 1091987.
However, the figure "10" was changed to "14" under the initials of the hospital authorities but it seems that the date of the certificate could not be changed to 1491987 due to inadvertence.
We are satisfied after going through the certificate produced by the petitioner before us that the petitioner remained admitted in the hospital during the period and it was on this ground that he could not join his duties, but at the same time it cannot be said that the petitioner is not liable for any punishment.
Even if the petitioner was admitted in the hospital, he was expected to submit a leave application and inform his employer in that behalf.
The order terminating his services was passed only having regard to his unauthorised absence for 22 days.
5.
On a consideration of the matter, we are of the opinion that the penalty imposed on the petitioner is excessive.
It is not a case where services could be terminated on that ground.
It the facts and circumstances of the case, a lenient view was required to be taken by the management.
It was in this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted before us that the interest of justice would be better served, if two annual increments of the petitioner are ordered to be stopped with cumulative effect and the period of his absence i.e. from 7.5.1988 till the date he joins duties is treated as dies non.
6.
For the fair stand taken by learned counsel for the petitioner, we allow this petition and modify the order, Annexure P-5 of the Labour Court only to the extent that the petitioner shall be entitled to reinstatement into service and instead of punishment of termination of services of the petitioner, his two annual increments shall be stopped with cumulative effect.
It is further ordered that the petitioner shall not be entitled to any benefit of service for the period from 7.5.1988 till the date he joins his duties and this interregnum period shall be treated as dies non.
The petitioner is now directed to report for duty immediately before the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon within a period of one month of the receipt of a copy of this order and in case he reports for duty, he shall be taken back into service and issued posting orders and also paid salary as admissible to him in accordance with the rules.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.