Vijender Jain, J. (Oral) - The petitioner had filed the present writ petition for issuance of appropriate writ to quash the order dated 1641991 and the order dated 591991.
Petitioner, who was working as Junior Engineer with the respondent-Department, was transferred to the Housing Division No. IV in January 1983.
In August 1983 the petitioner was directed to take charge of construction of 237 MIG Dwelling Unites in Pocket KG-1, Vikaspuri, New Delhi from one AK Chopra, Junior Engineer, who was at the relevant time in-charge of construction work.
2.
It is the case of petitioner that the order transferring Mr. AK Chopra was issued by the Superintending Engineer in August' 1983 and forwarded to one Radhakrishan, Asstt Engineer directing the petitioner to take over charge from AK Chopra.
Said Radhakrishan endorsed the said order only on 2681983.
It is contended before me by Mr. Ambrish Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, that the petitioner was on sanctioned leave on 2681983 and he did not attend the office on 2781983 as well as on 2881983, two days i.e. 2781983 & 2881983, being Saturday and Sunday were holidays in the respondent-Department.
The order of handing/taking over the charge was communicated to the petitioner only on 2981983.
The case of the petitioner is that he took over charge on 2981983 subject to verification.
The charge against petitioner was as follows :-  "That the said Shri RC Jain, Junior Engineer while functioning as JE Housing Division No. IV during the year 1983 failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty inasmuch as pilferage/misappropriation of brass fitting comprising of brass valve, brass bib cock, brass stop cock, face of stop cock etc. (valued at approximately Rs. 32,000/-) stored in two locked trunks inside a room of a vacant FF Flat No. 146 at the work site of 237 MIG Houses at Bodella, took place as a result of gross negligence of Shri Jain.
Shri RC Jain by his above said acts of commission and omission exhibited lack of integrity and devotion to duty thereby violating Rule 3 of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964 as made applicable to D.D.A."
On the basis of aforesaid charge framed against the petitioner, the impugned order dated 1641991 was passed imposing a penalty of compulsory retirement from the service as well as recovery of Rs. 32,000/- from the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently challenged the mode and method of conducting the enquiry as well as assailed the finding of the enquiry report, which was the basis on which order of compulsory retirement was passed by the respondent.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Exhibit `P-4', the handing/taking over report, was not produced in original before the Enquiry Officer.
He has also contended that the petitioner had signed both the pages of the said handing/taking over report but the photocopy which was produced before the Enquiry Officer, the signatures of the petitioner appeared only on the second page of the handing/taking over report, and the Enquiry Officer took that Exhibit `P-4' into consideration in spite of the protest of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that the first page of the said handing/taking over report was material for determining the controversy between the parties as the items, which were stolen, appeared at page-1 of the said report.
Mr. Kumar took great pain in arguing that the whole approach of the Enquiry Officer was based on surmises and conjectures.
The fact that the handing/taking over report was not produced in original nor any attested copy thereof was produced in evidence before the Enquiry Officer, finds mention at page-91 of the paper book in the enquiry report itself.
4.
Learned counsel has further assailed the enquiry report on the ground that the Enquiry Officer held that it was for the petitioner to produce the copy of the first page before the Enquiry Officer, although the evidence was on record that the petitioner did not have any copy of the handing/taking over report.
As a matter of fact, AK Chopra in his cross-examination had admitted that the signatures of the petitioner did not appear on the first page of Exhibit `P-4' and three copies of the said report was prepared.
The original copy was retained by the petitioner, second carbon copy was signed by the petitioner and was kept by AK Chopra, and the third carbon copy which was not clear petitioner had refused to sign and that copy also remained with AK Chopra.
It does not stand to reason that original of the handing/taking over report would be with petitioner as deposed by PW-1.
Carban copies thereof was admittedly retained by AK Chopra, PW-1.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further assailed the finding of the enquiry report on the ground that admittedly in the testimony of PW-1, it was stated that the keys of these two boxes used to remain with Radhakrishan, Assistant Engineer, PW-3 when AK Chopra was working as Junior Engineer with him.
The testimony of AK Chopra to the fact that process of handing/taking over was started on 2581983, does not inspire any confidence when Radhakrishan had endorsed on the order of transfer of the petitioner only on 2681983, it does not stand to reason as to how the process of handing/taking over had started on 2581983.
It is also disputed by the respondents that the petitioner was not present in office on 2681983 to 2881983.
The testimony of PW-2, Shri N R Gupta, Executive Engineer, does not support the case of the respondent-Department.
In his cross-examination PW-2 had deposed that there was no mention in the report that process of handing/taking over had started on 2581983 or subsequent date.
PW-2 further stated that he was told by Radhakrishan that the petitioner had not physically verified the items in the store till 22121983.
He had further emphatically denied that he was never told that the keys were handed over to the petitioner on 2981983.
Petitioner in his deposition has stated that time and again he had been requesting Radhakrishan to hand over the keys of the tin boxes so as to enable him to verify the contents of the boxes.
Mr. Kumar has contended that as a matter of fact, Radhakrishan, Assistant Engineer, was also inflicted penalty of reduction of pay by Rs. 100/- per month but to the reasons best known to the respondents, he has not paid the penalty.
6.
As a matter of fact, said Radhakrishan had admitted that order of reduction of Rs. 100/- per month was received.
During the course of hearing, I directed the respondents to produce the transfer orders which was endorsed by Radhakrishan on 2681983.
Mr. Apurb Lal, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, showed his inability to produce the file containing the letter, which was endorsed by said Radhakrishan on 2681983, on the instructions that same was not traceable.
The reliance by the Enquiry Officer on the statement of testimony of Radhakrishan does not inspire any confidence.
According to Radhakrishan the keys of the tin boxes, which contained the valuable articles, were handed over to the petitioner on 2581983.
In support of his contentions the petitioner also produced DW-2, Ranbir Singh who had refuted the allegation that keys were handed over to the petitioner on 2581983.
In view of the fact that AK Chopra in his testimony has also stated that keys of the tin boxes remained with Radhakrishan, how the Enquiry Officer believed the testimony of Radhakrishan that the keys were handed over on 2581983.
There was overwhelming evidence before the Enquiry Officer in the shape of testimony of PW-2, the Executive Engineer of the respondents, which has not been considered by the Enquiry Officer.
It seems that extraneous factors were taken into consideration by the Enquiry Officer, which was not supported from the material placed before him to arrive at a finding that the petitioner was negligent and his finding that the pilferage was possible only on account of connivance and negligence of the petitioner.
7.
I find considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it is a case of mis-carriage of justice and appointing authority as well as the Appellate Authority of the respondent had not taken into consideration the grave discrepancies in the testimony of witnesses before the Enquiry Officer and the report of the Enquiry Officer which was based on surmises and conjectures.
8.
Yet another argument was raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, Mr. Lal, that the writ petition is highly belated as the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner was passed in the year 1991 whereas the present writ petition has been filed in the year 1997 and Mr. Lal has contended that on the basis of the delay in filing the writ petition, the petition deserves to be dismissed.
Mr. Kumar has contended that under a bona fide legal advice of a counsel a civil suit was filed in the District Court for declaration, however, no written statement was filed for almost five years by the respondent and when the petitioner did not have any relief from the civil court, was advised to file writ petition.
The petitioner has mentioned in the writ petition that he undertakes to withdraw the civil suit.
Mr. Kumar has further contended that the petitioner, who is a lay man, should not be punished on account of mistake in advice by a counsel as some relief, which has been sought in the writ petition regarding violation of Article 14 of the Constitution, could not have been availed of by the petitioner before the civil court.
In support of his contentions he has cited the case of The State of East Bengal v. The Administrator, Howrah Municipality and others, AIR 1972 SC 749 in which it is held :-  "........But, as pointed out by the Judicial Committee in Kunwar Rajendra Singh v. Rai Rajeshwar Bali, AIR 1937 PC 276 if a party had acted in a particular manner on a wrong advice given by his Legal Advisor, he cannot be held guilty of negligence so as to disentitle the party to plead sufficient cause under Section 5 of Limitation Act.
In fact, the Judicial Committee observes as follows : The advice given by the lawyer to file applications under Article 227, in our opinion, is also a circumstance to be taken into account in considering whether the appellant has shown sufficient cause."
He has also cited the case of Balbir Singh v. Bogh Singh, (1974) 1 SCC 854 and Rameshwarlal v. Municipal Council, Tonk & others, 1996(6) SCC 100 ; 1997(1) S.C.T.
485 to support his arguments.
All these authorities cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner deal with cases where there was inherent lack of jurisdiction in the court before whom the party instituted the proceedings.
Therefore, in the strict sense, the ratio of these authorities, I am afraid, is not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
But the question is what is to be done ?
In a case where the petitioner at the first instance approached a civil court after spending six years when on account of delay in filing the written statement by the respondent his case could not proceed so as to have justice from the court of law, should this Court again ask the petitioner to go back to civil court after having come to the conclusion that the whole enquiry, decision and the orders passed thereon are vitiated and based on surmises and conjectures, irrelevant material and exclusion of relevant material from the realm of consideration ?
The answer is in the negative.
That will not be in the interest of substantial justice.
9.
Another redeeming feature in the case before me is that petitioner has bona fidely mentioned in the writ petition that he had instituted a civil suit but, as a matter of fact, on account of long delay in getting that suit proceeded, he has chosen to file writ petition in order to get speedy justice and the undertaking of petitioner that he will withdraw the suit, also gives credence to his cause.
For the first time matter came up for hearing on 1121997 on which date the matter was simply renotified for 431997.
The petitioner withdrew the suit on 2721997.
Should the Court having entertained the petition, issued show cause notice, having admitted the matter, again throw the petitioner out only on the ground of delay and laches, in my opinion the Court while issuing notice and admitting the petition for hearing, has condoned the delay in filing the writ petition.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, I hold that the impugned orders dated 1641991 and 591991 are mala fide, arbitrary and illegal and cannot stand the scrutiny of law as discussed by me earlier and same are, therefore, quashed.
Petition is allowed.
Rule is made absolute.
10.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has suffered the agony, torture of being unemployed with a stigma of compulsory retirement and of pilferage which on the basis of the records does not seem to be plausible, should not suffer the loss of salary and emoluments.
This Court would not have granted the salary for the period for which the petitioner has not worked with the respondent, but in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, it seems that respondents were bent upon to punish the petitioner without any sufficient material, smacks arbitrariness on the part of the respondents, therefore, I direct the petitioner be reinstated in services forthwith with all consequential benefits.
Petitioner shall also be entitled to cost which I quantify as Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition allowed.