NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner working as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, Rewari was placed under suspension on 31121997 by the departmental authorities.
He challenged the order of his suspension in a civil suit filed on 611998 which came up for hearing before the Civil Judge (Sr.
Divn.
), Rewari on 811998.
An application for the grant of ad-interim injunction seeking to restrain the defendants in the suit from implementing the order of the suspension was also filed.
While issuing notice to the defendants, the Court restrained them from implementing the impugned order.
Feeling aggrieved by the ex parte order of injunction, the department preferred an appeal in the court of Additional District Judge, Rewari which came up for hearing before the respondent.
By his order dated 921998 the respondent allowed the appeal and set aside the ex parte order of injunction.
Petitioner then filed Civil Revision 603 of 1998 in this Court which was disposed of on 16.3.1998 with a direction to the trial court to dispose of the application for ad-interim injunction within two weeks from the date of receipt of the order without being influenced by any observation made by the respondent in his order dated 921998.
The trial Court then, after hearing both sides, as per order dated 1651998 disposed of the application granting ad-interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff-petitioner and against the defendants.
The State of Haryana filed Civil Appeal (Misc.) No. 16 of 1998 in the court of the Additional District Judge, Rewari which again came up for hearing before the respondent on 2751998.
Petitioner who was a respondent therein had filed a caveat through Shri NC Sachdeva, Advocate.
The petitioner also filed an application through counsel for the transfer of his case from the court of the respondent to some other court primarily on the ground that the respondent had already expressed his views while allowing the appeal of the State of Haryana on 921998.
This transfer application also came up for hearing on 2751998 before the District Judge at Narnaul.
The District Judge issued notice for 461998 to the State of Haryana in the transfer application and meanwhile stayed further proceedings before the Additional District Judge-respondent before whom the appeal was pending at Rewari.
It may be mentioned that Rewari is at a distance of about 50 kilometres from Narnaul.
The case of the petitioner is that since it was not possible for him to obtain a certified copy of the order passed by the District Judge on the same day, he on receipt of telephonic information from Narnaul regarding the stay order moved an application before the respondent stating therein that notice in the transfer application had been issued for 461998 and meanwhile the proceedings in the appeal had been stayed.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the application which had been typed earlier referred to only the filing of the transfer application before the District Judge and that the words "pending for 461998 and proceedings stayed" were written in hand after he received the information on telephone from Narnaul.
It is further alleged that when this application was filed before the respondent he only took note of the fact that the transfer application was pending for 461998 and ignoring the information regarding stay of proceedings before him, proceeded with the appeal and stayed the operation of the impugned order of the trial Court dated 1651998 to the detriment of the petitioner.
According to the petitioner, the respondent was biased against him and even though the respondent had been informed about the stay order granted by the District Judge, he continued with the hearing of the appeal and is, therefore, guilty of contempt of Court.
The prayer made in the petition is that the respondent be summoned and punished according to law.
2.
In the written statement filed by the respondent it is admitted that the appeal filed by the State of Haryana came up for hearing before him on 2751998 and that the petitioner did file an application on that day informing the Court that an application for transfer had been filed before the District Judge and that the next date fixed therein was 461998.
It is emphatically denied that the petitioner ever informed the respondent either orally or in writing in regard to the stay order granted by the District Judge.
It is pleaded that the prayer made in the application was for staying the proceedings in the appeal as the transfer application moved by the petitioner was pending before the learned District Judge at Narnaul.
It is also admitted that the application was supported by an affidavit wherein also the pendency of the transfer application for 461998 was mentioned.
It is further pleaded that in the application and the affidavit the words "pending for" and the figures "461998" were written by the petitioner in his hand and thereafter he initialled the same.
It is also the case of the respondent that the words "and proceedings stayed", initials of the petitioner and the date 2751998 were written by the petitioner in the application and also in the affidavit after the respondent had signed the order dated 2751998 and sent the file to the Ahlmad of the court.
According to the respondent, the petitioner did not inform him about the stay order on 2751998.
The insinuation is that the petitioner tampered with the application and his affidavit subsequent to the passing of the order on 2751998 by adding the words "and proceedings stayed."
It is, however, admitted that the respondent proceeded with the appeal on 2751998 and stayed the operation of the impugned order therein.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties and keeping in view their rival stands I sent for the original records in the appeal.
The application and the affidavit dated 2751998 filed by the petitioner before the respondent have been perused.
The sole question that arises for determination in this contempt petition is whether the respondent was informed on 2751998 about the stay order granted by the District Judge at Narnaul.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner informed the respondent that the next date in the transfer application was fixed for 461998.
As a matter of fact, the respondent in his order passed on 2751998 has noticed that the transfer application filed by the petitioner had been fixed before the District Judge for 461998 and observed that "No order of learned District Judge Narnaul to show that the proceedings of this case have been stayed by learned District Judge, Narnaul, has been produced before me."
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner knew about the next date fixed in the transfer application.
His version that he had received information on telephone from Narnaul is obviously correct because without such information he could not have possibly known of the date and mentioned the same in his application.
Sh. Gokal Chand Yadav Advocate rang up from Natural Dalip Singh son of Lala Ram at Rewari and informed the letter that further proceedings in the appeal titled `State of Haryana and other versus Dilwar Singh' pending before the respondent had been stayed by the District Judge at Narnaul and that notice had been issued to the State of Haryana for 461998.
He further directed Dalip Singh to inform the petitioner in the District Courts at Rewari.
Dalip Singh passed on the information to the petitioner who then moved the application before the respondent at Rewari.
The application had been typed before the receipt of the information and it was stated therein that an application for transfer had been moved before the District Judge and the prayer made therein was that till its decision the proceedings in the appeal be stayed.
Before filing the application the petitioner received the information regarding stay and added in his hand the words "pending for 4619998 and proceedings stayed" and initialled the writing by putting 2751998 as the date thereunder.
If the petitioner received the information as he obviously did and knew about the next date of hearing in the transfer application he would have naturally been told about the stay of proceedings as well as stated by Sh. Gokal Chand Yadav, Advocate in his affidavit.
Having known that proceedings in the appeal had been stayed it is unbelievable that he would not have informed the court about the same.
The petitioner, for whatever reason, was not wanting the respondent to hear the appeal and had engaged a counsel at Narnaul to move an application for the transfer of the case to some other Court.
Having obtained a stay order and having received the information about the same, it is unthinkable that he would not disclose the same to the court and keep it back.
In fact, when a stay order is granted it is but natural for a party to first point out the same to the court so that further proceedings are not continued.
In the circumstances I have no reason to believe that the petitioner did not bring to the notice of the Court the stay order passed by the District Judge.
A perusal of the order dated 2751998 passed by the respondent shows that he observed therein that the order of the District Judge had not been produced before him but it does not mention that the respondent was satisfied that proceedings before the District Judge had not been stayed.
I am, thus, constrained to hold that the version as put forth by the respondent cannot be believed and that the petitioner who was present in person pointed out to the court both in the application as also verbally that further proceedings in the appeal had been stayed but in spite of this the respondent continued with the proceedings ignoring the stay order and passed an interim order staying the operation of the impugned order in appeal to the detriment of the petitioner.
He is, thus, guilty of wilfully violating the order passed by the District Judge and has committed contempt of court.
It is rather unfortunate that a senior judicial officer of the rank of Additional District Judge should have proceeded with the appeal after being informed about the stay order.
Even if stay had not been granted and it came to the notice of the court that notice in the transfer application had been issued for 461998 it would have been more proper for the court to adjourn the matter rather than to hasten to hear and pass an interim order against the petitioner because no judicial officer is and should be interested in hearing any particular case.
4.
The respondent in his written statement has emphasised that the petitioner tampered with the application and the affidavit filed by him on 2751998 and that the words "and proceedings stayed" were added after the order had been signed and the file sent to the Ahlmad of the court.
It is admitted by him that the handwritten words "pending for 461998" were there in the application when it was put up before him.
Here again, if the petitioner had the information regarding the stay order which according to me he had, there is no reason to believe that the he would mention in the application only a part of the information and withhold the material part thereof for which he had filed the transfer application.
In my opinion, he added the words "and proceedings stayed" at the time of filing the application.
No doubt, there is some over-writing on the initials which he put after the words "pending for 461998" but this could have been done at the time of filing the application.
The petitioner has furnished a satisfactory explanation.
He first thought that he would add a separate line regarding the stay order but after putting his initials he changed his mind and added the words "and proceedings stayed".
There is nothing unnatural about it.
Moreover, the petitioner through his counsel produced in court at the time of arguments a certified copy of the application as also of his affidavit which he filed in the court on 2751998.
The certified copies were applied for and obtained on 2751998 itself.
This fact thus indicates that the tampering, if any, could not have taken place after 2751998.
The respondent has filed an affidavit of the District Attorney, Rewari stating that the appeal had been taken up for hearing at 830 am and that he appeared for the State of Haryana.
He has further stated that the petitioner brought to the notice of the Court that he had filed an application for the transfer of the case and that the proceedings should be stayed.
The District Attorney is said to have inquired from the petitioner as to whether the proceedings had been stayed to which the latter replied that those had not been stayed till the time when the appeal was taken up.
District Attorney seems to be more loyal to the King than the King himself.
I do not want to comment on this affidavit because it is clear from the record that the petitioner had filed a caveat and notice of the appeal had been served on the counsel for the petitioner Shri NC Sachdeva on 2751998 at 830 am If the notice on the counsel was served at 830 am the appeal could not have been heard at that time.
The respondent has not, however, stated in his affidavit that the appeal was taken up for hearing at 830 am Moreover, there are affidavits of other Advocates to the contrary and it is unfortunate that the respondent who is a senior judicial officer involved himself in such an unsavoury controversy.
5.
The question that now arises is what should be the punishment that should be awarded to the respondent.
Considering the fact that he is a senior judicial officer with long standing, I punish him with fine of Rs. 1,000/-.
6.
Since the order dated 2751998 was passed by the respondent after proceedings before him had been stayed by the District Judge, the same will be of no consequence.
I am informed that the case under the orders of the District Judge already stands transferred to the Court of Shri RK Bishnoi who will now hear the appeal as also the application for stay on merits.
The office is directed to send back the records forthwith.
The petition, thus, stands allowed with costs.
Petition allowed.