Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellant approached this court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution with a prayer that the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, be directed to grant him "seniority and consequential benefits" of the service rendered by him in the Air Force.
The claim having been rejected by the learned Single Judge on the ground of delay, he has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The appellant served in the Indian Air Force from August 1956 to August 30, 1971.
He was working as an Equipment Assistant which post is in the rank of a Sergeant.
After his discharge from the Air Force, it appears that the appellant got his name registered with the Employment Exchange.
On October 19, 1971, he was appointed as a Store-keepr with the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the `Institute').
On August 23, 1975 the appellant was declared substantive permanent.
He was given the benefit of the service rendered by him in the Air Force for the purposes of fixation of pay.
On August 31, 1976, the appellant represented to the Institute for the grant of seniority.
He claimed that the period of service from August 1956 to August 30, 1971 should be counted as service rendered in the Institute and that his seniority should be accordingly determined.
This representation was followed by various other representations.
The last one was submitted by the appellant on November 14, 1979.
Having failed to get the requisite relief, the appellant approached this court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
3.
The learned Single Judge has held that apparently, the claim made by the appellant was in conformity with the instructions issued by the Government of India vide letter dated December 4, 1959.
However, it was highly belated.
Thus, the writ petition was dismissed.
4.
Mr. RK Sharma, counsel for the appellant has contended that the learned Single Judge has erred in declining the relief on the ground of delay.
It has been vehemently contended that the respondents having not raised the objection, the appellant could not have been denied the relief on the ground of delay.
5.
It is the admitted position that the appellant was appointed as a Store- keeper on October 19, 1997.
It is also the admitted position that the benefit of increments etc. was given to him during the year 1971.
However, no benefit of the past service towards seniority was given to the appellant.
In fact, respondent Nos. 4 to 6 were confirmed as Senior Store-keepers in the year 1972.
Respondent No. 8 was confirmed as Store-Keeper w.e.f.
June 2, 1972.
The appellant did not raise his little finger against the confirmation of any of the respondents.
In fact, he remained quiet till August 31, 1976 when he submitted the first representation.
On that day, even the limitation for filing a civil suit to challenge the confirmation of the respondents or their appointments to the posts of Senior Store Keepers had actually expired.
Still further, the appellant, as conceded by the learned counsel, continued submitting representations till November 14, 1979.
It was only on July 30, 1980 that he had filed the writ petition.
By that time, the respondents had held the higher posts in a substantive capacity for a period of more than eight years.
The delay was apparent.
6.
Mr. Sharma submits that neither the Institute nor the private respondents had specifically raised the plea of delay.
Consequently, the counsel maintains that the court could not have declined the claim on the ground of delay.
7.
This contention cannot be accepted.
It is undoubtedly correct that it is the case pleaded by the parties that has to be found by the court.
It is equally true that if the case is decided on a plea which is not raised in the pleadings, the interest of a party can be prejudiced.
However, in the present case, we have repeatedly asked the learned counsel to indicate if he has even the slightest explanation for the inordinately long delay.
We even offered to give him time to explain the delay.
Learned counsel concedes that the appellant had raised no objection till August 31, 1976 when the first representation was submitted.
Thereafter, he had periodically submitted representations but had approached the court only in July 1980.
In this situation, it is apparent that the failure to raise a specific plea has not prejudiced the appellant's interest in any manner whatsoever.
He had filed the first representation on August 31, 1976.
He had claimed the benefit of seniority on the basis of the service rendered by him in the Air Force.
Subsequent reminders were issued.
However, in the process, the limitation for filing even a suit had elapsed.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the learned Single Judge had erred in rejecting the claim on the ground of delay.
It should be remembered that the duty to do justice is that of the court.
The failure of a party to raise a relevant plea cannot debar the court from taking the facts into consideration and arriving at a just and fair decision.
Ignoring the inordinately long delay would have resulted in injustice to respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
The decision only avoided that.
8.
Mr. Sharma has referred to three decisions of this Court in Ram Rattan Bakshi v. The State of Punjab and another, 1968 SLR 353, Surdershan Singh and others v. The Government of India and others, 1980(3) SLR 199 and Ex. Capt.
Gurnam Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1982(1) SLR 258.
These are decisions of different Single Benches of this court on the peculiar facts of the cases.
These do no lay down a binding rule which may be attracted in the circumstances of the present case.
Consequently, the appellant can derive no advantage from these decisions.
In Ram Ratten's case (supra), the learned Judge had taken the view that the State was under a statutory obligation to grant the benefit.
The State having failed to do so, it could not be permitted to raise the plea of delay.
The correctness of this judgment is extremely doubtful in view of the decisions of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in subsequent cases where delay was held to be fatal in spite of the allegation that the action was violative of the fundamental rights.
The decisions in the other two cases were based on the fact that the plea had not been specifically raised.
9.
In the present case, the failure to raise the specific plea has caused no prejudice to the appellant and, consequently, he can make no grievance on that ground.
10.
It also deserves mention that the learned Single Judge has, after consideration of the matter, exercised discretion.
We are not inclined to interfere with the exercise of the discretion especially when, as submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant, he has already retired from service.
11.
Mr. Sharma made an attempt to contend that on merits, the appellant has a good case.
He submitted that by virtue of regulation 40, the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the instructions issued by the Union of India vide letter dated December 4, 1959.
12.
We are extremely doubtful about the validity of this argument.
The conditions of service of the employees in the Institute are governed by the statutory regulations.
Regulation 34 specifically relates to the fixation of seniority.
It inter alia provides that the "seniority of employees of the Institute in each category shall be determined by the order of merit in which they were selected for appointment to the grade in question, those selected on earlier occasion being ranked senior to those selected later."
It adds a proviso that "the seniority inter se of employees, other than the teaching staff of the Institute, shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in a particular service."
Thus, persons who are selected and appointed earlier rank senior to those who are selected and appointed later.
The inter se seniority of the employees like the appellant is determined by the length of "continuous service on a post..." The appellant's seniority has been determined w.e.f.
October 19, 1971 when he had started continuously working on the post of Store-keeper.
Regulation 40 is basically intended to ensure that in respect of matters for which no provision has been made in the regulations, the "rules as applicable to Central Government servants such as regarding the general conditions of service, pay, allowances including travelling and daily allowance, leave salary, joining time, foreign service terms..." can be applied.
Since a specific provision regarding seniority exists, the application of the instructions issued by the Central Government is extremely doubtful.
However, at present, it does not appear to be necessary to go deeper into the matter as we are of the view that the learned Single Judge was right in denying the relief on the ground of delay.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this appeal.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.