THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner has been appointed as Helper in PWD (B&R) Department of the State of Haryana in Electrical Division, Karnal, on 16111991.
His services were terminated on 151993 without following the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The petitioner, therefore, raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court, Rohtak.
By an award dated 2895, the Labour Court set aside the termination and directed the reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service and 50% of back wages.
Challenging the said award, the Government filed a writ petition in this Court which was dismissed.
Thereafter, the petitioner was taken in service.
Since his services were not regularised, the petitioner approached this Court in CWP 657/97 for regularisation of his services.
In view of the policy decision taken by the Government in letter No. 6/38/95-GST dated 1831996, this Court by an order dated 16.1.1997 directed the respondents to decide the representation made by the petitioner in accordance with law by passing a speaking order within six months thereafter.
In pursuance of the orders of this Court, the Executive Engineer, Electrical Division, PWD (B&R) Karnal, passed an order dated 2797 rejecting the claim of the petitioner for regularisation.
According to the impugned order dated 2797, the petitioner cannot claim regularisation of his services since he was not on duty from the date of his termination in May, 1993, till the date of his reinstatment in January, 1996, but the fact remains that on termination of his services on 151993, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication and the Labour Court directed reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service.
The order of the Labour Court has become final with the dismissal of the writ petition filed by the department, therefore, when the Labour Court ordered that he shall be reinstated with continuity of service, it shall be deemed that the petitioner has been in service.
If he is deemed to be in service till the date of his reinstatement, then undisputedly he completes three years of service as envisaged by the Government policy as contained in Government Letter No. 6/38/95-GSI dated 1831996.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to have his services regularised since he has completed three years of service as on 31.1.1996 and also fulfilled the other conditions laid down by the Government in its letter of even number dated 7396.
Therefore, the impugned order dated 2797 cannot be sustained under law.
The impugned order is therefore quashed and the respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
With the above observations, the writ petition stands allowed.
Petition allowed.