THB Chalapathi, J - This petition is filed by the workman against the award of the Labour Court dated 3111984 denying him the back wages during the period of his absence while holding that his termination from service is bad and directing his reinstatement with continuity of service.
2.
The petitioner was employed in the respondent-corporation.
There was strike of the employees of the Corporation during July, August, September and October, 1978.
Thereafter, the petitioner, who is said to be the Union leader, was transferred from the ministerial post to non-ministerial post in November, 1978.
He was on leave from 23111978 onwards till 2011979 on the ground of illness.
He was examined by the Doctor on 24.1.1979, who found him fit to join the duty.
The workman replied that he was not yet recovered from illness and, therefore, the medical certificate issued by the Doctor of the Corporation did not reflect his illness correctly but the management issued an order on 1321979 terminating the services of the petitioner with effect from 25.1.1979.
Immediately thereafter the petitioner issued a demand notice.
On notice, the dispute was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication by an order of the Government dated 391979.
By the impugned order, the Labour Court held that the termination of the services of the petitioner were illegal and, therefore, set aside the same and directed to reinstatement of the petitioner in service with continuity of service but without back wages.
Therefore, the petitioner filed this petition claiming back wages.
The claim of the petitioner for back wages was resisted by the Corporation on the plea that the petitioner did not join the services even after he was declared fit by the Doctor who examined him on 2011979, therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
There is no dispute of the fact that when the termination is held to be bad, ordinarily the back wages should follow.
The reason given by the Labour Court is that the petitioner did not assume the duty even after he was declared fit by the Doctor, so he is not entitled to back wages.
But admittedly, the petitioner was on medical leave on the basis of the certificate issued by the Doctor working in the Employees' State Insurance Hospital.
The petitioner was challenging the opinion of the Doctor who examined him on 24.1.1979.
He also made a representation on the respondent- Corporation that the opinion of the Doctor who examined him on 24.1.1979 did not reflect his correct state of illness.
Undisputedly, the petitioner was not examined by any other Doctor.
The Corporation issued an order within 20 days terminating the services with effect from 25.1.1979.
Admittedly, no notice was given to the petitioner that his services would be terminated if he failed to join duty immediately.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the reason given by the Labour Court to deny the back wages to the petitioner cannot be sustained.
4.
I accordingly allow this petition, modify the award of the Labour Court dated 3111984 and direct the payment of back wages to the petitioner from the date of termination till the date of reinstatement within two months.
Petition allowed.