GC Garg, J - This revision petition is directed against the order dated 1631993 of the Executing Court.
Shri Pritam Singh Sahota filed a suit for declaration and mandatory injunction.
The suit was decreed to the effect that the order dated 161982 bearing Memo No. 3892/43/13 RE 115/82/2845 (received by the plaintiff on 2061982) vide which the representation of the plaintiff for condonation of break in his service from 23.4.1958 to 1541963 was rejected is illegal, mala fide, arbitrary, without jurisdiction against the principles of natural justice, discriminatory and against facts and law and is against the procedure, precedent, rules and is, therefore, inoperative, null and void and the plaintiff is legally entitled to the condonation of break in his service and is also entitled to emoluments and other benefits admissible to him from time to time with consequential relief for mandatory injunction directing the defendant-State to condone the break in service of the plaintiff and treat that period for all benefits including full pay and allowances etc.  2.
Plaintiff was paid the arrears in terms of the decree that had attained finality.
However, according to the plaintiff, he become entitled to promotion as Assistant with effect from 10.3.1974 and, therefore, he was entitled to promotion and payment of arrears from that date till the date of his retirement that is 3061981.
This benefit was not granted to the employee so consequently he took out execution.
The Executing Court vide order dated 3.9.1982 came to the conclusion that the decree holder cannot be denied the benefit of promotion to the post of Assistant due to him simply because he has not worked on the promotional post.
It consequently held that the decree holder is entitled to the promotion as Assistant with all consequential benefits.
3.
It is this order of the Executing Court which is under challenge in this revision petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Executing Court had no jurisdiction to order the promotion of the plaintiff/decree holder.
It was open to the employer to consider his case for promotion and in case the employer comes to the conclusion that plaintiff is entitled to promotion it was in that situation the employee could ask for the payment of benefits of the promotional post and not otherwise.
5.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the plaintiff/decree holder submitted that the effect of the decree of the trial Court is that the plaintiff is entitled to promotion and the State Government could not deny promotion to him and consequently the payment of arrears of salary of the promotional post.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on consideration of the matter, I am of the opinion that it is not for the Executing Court to go into this matter.
It is for the employer to consider, as per the rules, whether the employee is entitled to promotion or not from the due date.
The Court can only give direction to consider his case for promotion in accordance with law.
Thus, in terms of the decree passed by the trial Court in favour of the respondent, the executing Court could at the most give direction to consider his case for promotion to the post of Assistant with effect from the due date by leaving it open to the plaintiff to challenge the order passed by the State Government in this behalf before the appropriate forum.
After going through the order of the Executing Court, I find that the Executing Court instead of giving such a direction has in fact ordered promotion of the plaintiff-decree holder from the due date and further directed the employer to pay the arrears till the date of his retirement.
This in my opinion, the Executing Court could not do.
7.
In this view of the matter, this revision petition is allowed.
Order of the Executing Court is set aside and the judgment debtor is directed to consider the case of the plaintiff/decree holder for promotion from the due date in accordance with the service rules applicable to him at the relevant time and in case he is found entitled to promotion, to pass promotion orders in that behalf.
Since the controversy is pending for sufficiently long time, the defendant/petitioner shall take the decision in this behalf after hearing the petitioner, if need be, within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.