DM Dharmadhikari, J - By this petition under Articles 227 of the Constitution of India, the State of Madhya Pradesh, through its authorities in the Education Department, has assailed the order dated 16.8.1994 passed by the Additional District Judge, Kanker (Bastar) in exercise of powers of revision under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
2.
The facts leading to this petition briefly are as follows : Late Raghav Prasad Mishra, husband of Respondent No. 1 Smt. Rukmani Mishra, was Assistant Teacher Janpad Sabha, Kanker since 1953.
The school was taken over by the government and he was absorbed in government service.
He retired from government service on 15121967 on superannuation.
Since he had not completed minimum prescribed 10 years of pensionable service no pension was paid to him.
He died on 20111977.
After his death, the Respondent No. 1 as the widow filed Civil Suit No. 22-A/92 on 321992 in the Court of Civil Judge Case II, Kanker and made a claim for grant of family pension w.e.f.
141981 at the rate of Rs. 60/- per month under the Family Pension Scheme, 1986 of the government.
The State opposed the claim of family pension in the suit by stating that it is applicable only to government servants receiving pension and who died or retired prior to 1966.
The State also raised a plea of jurisdiction of the Civil Court by stating that as the State Administrative Tribunal was constituted w.e.f.
281988, the Tribunal alone had jurisdiction to entertain the claim and the Civil Court had no jurisdiction.
3.
The Civil Court on 22101992 decided the preliminary issue of jurisdiction and held that the claim by the wife of the deceased government servant for family pension was not barred in Civil Court.
No revision or appeal was preferred by the State against the order dated 22101992 passed by the Civil Court whereby the preliminary issue about jurisdiction was decided.
4.
The Civil Court then passed judgment and decree on 2011993 in favour of Respondent No. 1 holding that under the aforesaid Family Pension Scheme, she is entitled to pension at the rate of Rs. 60/- per month w.e.f.
141981.
5.
The State did not prefer any appeal against the judgment and decree of the Civil Court passed on 2011993.
The decree passed by the Civil Court was then put into execution by the Respondent No. 1.
It is at that stage in the course of execution that the State filed an objection under Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure stating that the decree passed by the Civil Court was a nullity as the Court lacked inherent jurisdiction to try the suit.
6.
The executing Court rejected the objection raised by the State under Section 47 of the CPC by order passed on 1611993.
The executing Court held that the order deciding the preliminary issue of jurisdiction passed on 22101992 and the judgment and decree passed on 2011993 having not been appealed against or challenged in a higher Court, such an objection on jurisdiction cannot be entertained in execution proceedings.
7.
Aggrieved by the order rejecting the objection of the State, a revision was preferred under Section 115 CPC to the Court of Additional District Judge.
The Additional District Judge as the revisional Court also by order passed on 16.8.1994 (Annexure P/7) rejected the objection to the execution raised by the State on same grounds.
The order of the revisional Court rejecting the objection of the State to the execution under Section 47 CPC has now been assailed in this Court by invoking jurisdiction of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
8.
Learned Counsel Shri Prashant Singh, Panel Lawyer, appearing for the State, contends that plea of nullity of decree can be raised even in execution proceedings.
Strong reliance is placed on Smt. Kaushalya Devi v. KL Bansal, AIR 1970 SC 838 and Urban Improvement Trust v. Gokul Narain and another, AIR 1996 SC 1819.
9.
Shri Vishnu Kosta, learned counsel appearing for Respondent No. 1, supports the order of the executing Court and the revisional Court and contends that the claim made by the widow of deceased government servant for family pension is not a `service matter' as defined under Section 3(q) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and, therefore, State Administrative Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain such a claim.
He placed reliance on Yogendranath Monge v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, 1993 MPLJ 65.
10.
There are more than one reason for this Court not to interfere with the order passed by the executing Court as maintained by the revisional Court.
The preliminary issue on jurisdiction of Civil Court decided in the suit on 22101992 was never questioned by the State in revisional proceedings.
The judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court on 2011993 which was appealable was not challenged in appeal.
The objection with regard to lack of jurisdiction of Civil Court was, for the first time, raised in execution proceedings.
As the objection of jurisdiction was not taken in time, the claim, if any, which could have been lodged by the widow of the deceased government servant in the State Administrative Tribunal has considerably been delayed and may now be held as barred by time.
This Court in is extra ordinary jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution, therefore, declines to interfere with the execution of the decree at such a belated stage.
11.
So far as the plea of lack of jurisdiction of Civil Court raised on behalf of the State is concerned, the decision of the Civil Court on the same may have been erroneous, but it cannot be held that the Court completely lacked jurisdiction to entertain the claim.
The claim of family pension was raised after the death of the government servant by his widow on the basis of the family pension scheme.
Such a claim is based on the claimant's husband being in government service, but it cannot be said to be a "service matter concerning the pension payable to the government servant."
It cannot, therefore, be held to be a "service matter" as defined under Section 3(q)(i) of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
The decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Yogendranath Monge's case (supra) also to great extent supports the view taken by the Civil Court on the question of jurisdiction.
In the case before the Division Bench (supra) the widow as the nominee of the deceased-employee had filed a claim for interest for delayed payment of retiral dues and dues under the family insurance scheme.
The Division Bench examined the scheme, the provisions and rules under the Administrative Tribunals Act, and came to the conclusion that the plaintiff, herself being not a present or past government servant, had no right to approach the Tribunal.
The relevant observation are as under :-  "The question of jurisdiction is thus linked with recruitment and matters concerning recruitment or service matters concerning member of any service or person appointed to service or post.
Section 3(q) has enumerated service matters.
Section 14 of the Act speaks about the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal.
Rules have been framed in exercise of the powers conferred by clauses (d), (c) and (f) of sub-section (2) of Section 35 of the Act.
Rule 4 says that an application shall be presented in Form 1 annexed to these rules under Section 19 of the Act.
Particulars of the applicant are required to be furnished as per this Form 1 and one of the particulars to be given is "designation and office in which employed".
What emerges from the scheme of the Act/Rules is that the applicant ought to be the present or ex- member or person so employed.
In other words, a nominee, like the petitioner, cannot approach the Tribunal........" 12.
The Civil Court had jurisdiction to decide the issue of its own jurisdiction.
If the State as party was aggrieved, it should have resorted to the remedy of revision against the order rejecting preliminary objection or appeal against the decree passed in the suit.
The State failed to adopt any of the remedies available to it.
13.
For the aforesaid reasons, it cannot be held that it is a case where the Civil Court lacked inherent jurisdiction to entertain the claim of the wife of the deceased government servant.
The decisions (supra) of the Supreme Court relied on behalf of the State are not helpful to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
14.
Consequently, this Court declines to interfere under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
The petition fails and is hereby dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.