HS Bedi, J - CWP Nos. 12083 and 12737 of 1998 are being disposed of by this judgment.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 12083 of 1998.
2.
Vide notification dated 2731998 the State of Punjab advertised the details with regard to holding of the Punjab Medical Entrance Test (hereinafter called the PMET) for the year 1998 to be conducted under the auspices of the Punjabi University Patiala respondent No. 3 for the MBBS and other Medical Course.
As per this notification 150 seats each in the MBBS course were notified for admission in the Government Medical Colleges at Amritsar and Patiala and 50 seats in the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College at Faridkot.
Two seats at the Medical College at Faridkot were reserved for the wards of the staff of the college under paragraph III(i)(xii) of the notification.
The petitioner the ward of a Doctor then on the Medical Staff of the Medical College at Faridkot appeared in the Entrance Test under that reserved category and was declared as qualified on the declaration of the result on 1261998.
It appears, however, that as he apprehended that he would not obtain the requisite merit to gain admission as a ward of the Medical Staff attached to the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, he filed the present writ petition challenging the validity of this reservation.
The case of the petitioner is that the aforesaid reservation was in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India being arbitrary and also contrary to the settled law on the subject.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and a reply has been filed on behalf of the State Government.
It has been pointed out that two seats in the MBBS course had been reserved for wards of the Medical Staff of Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, as an incentive for the reason that adequate staff to man the faculty in the college was not forthcoming as Faridkot being a far flung backward area there was a dearth of housing, educational facilities and the other civil amenities which were available to the staff in the Medical Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar.
It has further been pointed out that this reservation had been made for the first time in the year 1988 and after review in the year 1992, had been allowed to continue for the same reasons.
4.
Mr. SC Sibal, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised three basic points before me today.
He has first argued that reservation for a ward of an employee of an educational institution was not permissible as it was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and that it had been so held in a string of judgments of this court as also the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In this connection he has placed primary reliance on Chairman/Director, Combined Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Dass, 1992(3) SCC.
543, Unnikrishnan JP and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1993 SC 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) and more particularly on Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology v. State of Punjab and another, 1997(1) SCT.
24(SC) and on two judgments of this court in Parveen Hans v. The Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh and another, 1990(1) SLR 808 and Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala v. State of Punjab and another, A.I.R. 1995 Pb.
& H. 185 : 1995(2) SCT.
26, against which an appeal was taken and ultimately disposed of by the Supreme Court vide judgment reported as AIR 1997 SC 793 (supra).
Mr. Sibal has then argued that as per the clause under challenge the expression "medical staff" was to be construed as meaning only doctors on the faculty and only the wards of doctors who were in position on 27398 were eligible to apply for admission against the two seats.
He has finally argued that 50 seats in all had been notified for admission in the Guru Gobind Singh College at Faridkot and with these two seats 27 out of 50 seats stood reserved and as this was beyond 50% of the total number of seats, the reservation was bad for this additional reason as well.
5.
As against this Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General and Mr. KS Brar, the learned counsel who has filed an application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC by and on behalf of a candidate Jasmine Dhingra for becoming a party have argued that the ratio of the judgments cited by Mr. Sibal visualised that reservation of such a kind could still be made provided there was a reasonable nexus between the creation of such a reservation and the purpose for which it was created.
It has also been pointed out that the reservation envisaged was for the wards of the Medical Staff which would include not only Doctors but the other staff connected with the Medical College.
Mr. Sibal's final argument has also been controverted and it has been pointed out that the reserved seats in the three Government Medical Colleges had to be taken as one whole and in that situation it did not exceed 50 per cent and that as this point had not been taken in the writ petition, it was not, at this stage open to challenge.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have also gone through the judgments cited before me.
It would be evident that Mr. Sibal has placed primary reliance on Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology case (supra).
In this case the State Governments of Punjab and Haryana had issued directions that in the light of the Supreme Court judgment in Unni Krishnan's case (supra) reservation for the wards of the staff could not be justified.
These directions were challenged by the Thapar Institute, Patiala as also the Technological Institute of Textile & Science Bhiwani in this Court.
The writ petitions were dismissed vide judgment reported in AIR 1995 Pb.
& H. 185 (supra) and the appeals filed thereafter in the Supreme Court too were dismissed with the following observations :-  "In the context of admission to an institution imparting higher education in professional courses a question has often arisen whether the State can make provision giving preferential treatment to candidates seeking admission to the institution.
In dealing with this question the approach of this Court has been that such preferential treatment must be consistent with the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution guaranteeing equality of opportunity and that though reasonable classification is permissible, such classification must have a reasonable nexus with object of the rules providing such admission, namely, to select the most meritorious amongst the candidates to have advantage of such education."
In arriving at this conclusion the Court also relied on the Combined Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das (supra) wherein a similar matter had come before it earlier.
The court accordingly drew pointed attention to the following observations :-  "There is no dispute that the GB Pant University is aided and financed by the State Government and the University is an instrumentality of the State.
Any instrumentality of the State cannot give preferential treatment to a class of persons without there being any justification for the same.
The reservation of seats for admission to B Tech.
Course in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University is violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is no rational for the reservation of the seats in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University nor any such reservation has any rationale nexus with the object which is sought to be achieved by the University.
The State Government, in our opinion, rightly insisted on the University to do away with the reservations in favour of the sons and wards of the employees."
Mr. Sibal has also placed reliance on the two other judgments cited by him.
From a reading of the judgments referred to by Mr. Sibal, with specific reference to the observations quoted above, it is apparent that the reservation for the wards of employees of an institution is per se bad being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution unless it could be shown that there was a justification for making it and that it had a reasonable nexus with the object that was to be achieved.
The matter would have to be examined in this context.
It has been pleaded in the written statement that these two seats had been created in the year 1988 for the express reason that medical staff to man the college faculty was not forthcoming on account of the lack of basic civil amenities and teaching facilities in Faridkot which was a muffasil town at that time.
It has been pointed out that this limited concession had been given as an incentive so as to attract the requisite staff to Faridkot, failing which the very existence of the college would have been in jeopardy.
It has also been pointed out during the course of arguments that the college had been shifted from Faridabad in Haryana to Faridkot in 1978 and it is on account of the difficulty felt by the State Government in recruiting staff over a period of 10 years that the reservation had for the first time been created in the year 1988.
It has also been highlighted that the matter had been reviewed at the highest level by the State Government in 1992 as well and it had been decided to continue with the reservation for the reason that impelled its creation in 1988.
I had also summoned the record to examine the files myself but Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General Punjab, has informed me that the record relating to the creation of the reservation in 1988 was not traceable but the record pertaining to the review of 1992 has been produced before me today in court.
A perusal of the record reveals that the Medical Teachers Association of the Medical College, Faridkot had repeatedly represented that the reservation for these two seats be continued for the reason that the Staff was not willing to join at Faridkot as it was an out of way place.
It appears that a number of meetings had, thereafter, been held between the Association and the Director, Medical Education and Research, Punjab as also Secretary to Government Punjab, Health and Family Welfare.
A note was accordingly put up by the dealing assistant on 15.6.92 pointing out that it was necessary that the two seats which had been reserved for the wards of the Medical Staff in the year 1988 be allowed to continue as there was resentment amongst the staff and a feeling of discontentment vis-a-vis their counterparts in the Medical Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar who were better placed.
This matter was ultimately put up before the Secretary concerned who vide his note dated 22.6.92 accepted the proposal and directed that this incentive be allowed to continue in view of the representation filed by the Association and more particularly because it was difficult to find staff to serve in Faridkot.
This note was subsequently endorsed by the Minister Incharge.
It is apparent therefore that the reservation was created to tide over a particularly difficult situation.
There was, to my mind, a reasonable nexus between the creation of the reservation and the object behind it which was to get sufficient and suitable staff to man the faculty failing which the existence of the institution could well have been at stake.
The incentive could, therefore, be said to have the sanctity attached to a service condition.
Moreover, the stringent nature of the conditions of eligibility as laid down in the clause, make the intention very clear that the benefit would not be given to all and sundry and confined only to such staff who had put in a substantial length of qualifying service.
The reservation therefore fell within the exceptions envisaged in the judgments cited by Mr. Sibal.
7.
Mr. Sibal has then argued that the reservation as framed ought to be confined only to the wards of the Doctors/Teaching staff only in the Medical College and not to any other category of staff.
Mr. Sharma has, however, pointed out that from a bare reading of the clause in question it was clear that it would apply not only to the Doctors and teaching staff but also to the teaching/non-teaching and para-medical staff who otherwise fulfilled the qualifications laid down therein.
Clause XII which requires interpretation is reproduced below :-  "(xii) Ward of Medical Staff of Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, who have minimum five years continuous service in this college: (Two seats in MBBS only)."
It is apparent from a bare reading of the clause that the word 'Medical Staff' has been used which would include not only Doctors and the teaching staff but the supporting staff working in the Medical College as well and to limit the clause to wards of Doctors only would, therefore, give it an artificially restricted meaning.
Moreover, it is to be noted that the justification for the creation of these seats was that adequate staff was not willing to join at Faridkot and this difficulty would undoubtedly have arisen with regard to the recruitment of all categories of medical staff and not remain a feature peculiar to the recruitment of doctors alone.
8.
An ancillary argument raised by Mr. Sibal has now to be examined.
He has contended that from a reading of clause (xii) it was evident that a member of the medical staff who had put in a minimum of five years of continuous service in the college and was in position on 27398 could claim the benefit of this reservation for his ward.
Mr. KS Brar, the learned counsel representing the applicant Jasmine Dhingra has pointed out that the applicant was the ward of a Doctor who had served the Medical College Faridkot for more than 13 years continuously and was in position therein on 2731998 but had subsequently been transferred out in the normal course of duty and without his consent to the Punjab Health Corporation Chandigarh and as such the applicant was entitled to a consideration against the reserved seat.
I have considered this argument of the learned counsel and find that broadly speaking the interpretation given by Mr. Sibal merits acceptance as the words "who have five years continuous service in the college" used in clause (xii) are in the present tense and the benefit could not be intended to such members of the staff who had ceased to be in position prior to 2731998 but to (my) mind this principle would not apply to such members of the medical staff who have been posted out on administrative exigencies.
Mr. Brar has nevertheless clarified that Jasmine Dhingra had, in fact, been treated as a ward by the admitting authorities and that she had filed the present application by way of abundant caution.
To my mind, her application has been rightly entertained as a ward of the medical staff.
9.
Mr. Sibal's final argument with regard to the reservation being in excess of 50 per cent must now be dealt with.
In this connection Mr. Sharma has stated that as per the notification dated 27398 admissions to the three Medical Colleges at Patiala, Amritsar and Faridkot were one composite whole and that the PEMT held was for admission to all these institutions, with the seats being apportioned amongst the successful candidates in the three medical colleges not exclusively as per their choice but on the basis of their merit as well as determined by their standing in the PMET.
This argument appears to be correct as a bare look at the notification dated 2731998 reveals that the total extent of reservation has been given and no institution-wise break up has been carved out.
Moreover, this point had not been pleaded in the writ petition and being a question of fact, cannot now be urged.
10.
The present petition must also fail for yet another reason.
Yadvinder Singh the petitioner had himself applied under clause (xii) and after having taken the test and waiting for the result which was declared on 12.6.98, he cannot be permitted to challenge the reservation itself.
11.
For the reason recorded above, this writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
12.
A copy of the order be given dasti to the learned counsel for the parties.
Petition dismissed.