RA Sharma, J - The petitioner, who is Mines Officer in the Department of Geology and Mining, UP, has filed this writ petition challenging the order dated 2681997, by which he has been transferred from Sonebhadra to Gorakhpur.
By the same order Sri Ramayan Pratap Singh, respondent No 4, has been transferred from Gorakhpur to Sonebhadra.
2.
Sri Ramayan Pratap Singh (Respondent No. 4) has filed counter-affidavit and the petitioner has filed rejoinder-affidavit in reply thereto.
But neither the Government of UP nor the Director, Geology and Mining, UP (hereinafter referred to as the Director), have filed counter-affidavit, even though time was granted to them for the purpose.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the impugned order on two grounds, viz. (i) the Government has abused the power of transfer by transferring the petitioner four times within a period of about two months; and (ii) the impugned order has not been passed in public interest or on account of administrative exigencies.
It has been passed in order to implement the interim order passed by this Court in writ petition No. 27922 of 1997 and as that writ petition has already been dismissed as infructuous, the impugned order falls to the ground automatically.
Learned counsel for the respondents have disputed the above submissions.
4.
By order dated 1971997 passed by the Director the petitioner was transferred from Sonebhadra to Lucknow.
But the petitioner did not join at Lucknow; instead he got the said order modified by order dated 581997 by which he was transferred to Gorakhpur in place of Lucknow.
By the same order respondent No. 4, who was posted at Gorakhpur, was transferred from Gorakhpur to Sonebhadra.
The petitioner did not join at Gorakhpur and this order also remained uncomplied with.
He approached the Director again and thereafter the Director passed another order dated 1381997 transferring him back to Sonebhadra.
Consequently by the same order respondent No. 4 was transferred from Sonebhadra to Gorakhpur.
The order dated 1381997 was challenged by the respondent No. 4 before this Court by writ petition No. 27922 of 1997 on the ground that the Government has abused the power of transfer by transferring him four times in about four months without any plausible justification.
This Court on 22.8.1997 passed interim order staying the operation of the order dated 1381997.
Ultimately the Government of UP passed the impugned order dated 2681997 transferring the petitioner from Sonebhadra to Gorakhpur.
By that very order the respondent No. 4 was transferred from Gorakhpur to Sonebhadra.
5.
It is true that four orders on four different dates were passed transferring the petitioner from one place to another, but all those orders, except the impugned order, were merely paper transactions because he did not join at the places to which he was transferred by those orders and remained in Sonebhadra throughout.
The petitioner has not stated in the writ petition that he joined at Lucknow or at Gorakhpur pursuant to the orders dated 1971997 and 581997.
In paragraph 22 of his counter affidavit the respondent No. 4 has stated that the petitioner neither joined at Lucknow nor did he join at Gorakhpur pursuant to the transfer orders dated 1971997 and 581997 and he continued to remain in Sonebhadra.
The petitioner has not stated even in the rejoinder-affidavit that he joined at Lucknow or at Gorakhpur pursuant to the above orders.
By the third order dated 1381997 the petitioner's posting at Sonebhadra was restored to him.
For all practical purposes the impugned order dated 26.8.97 is the only order by which he has been transferred from Sonebhadra to Gorakhpur.
Hence it cannot be said to be a case of frequent/successive transfer in a short span of time.
The first submission, therefore, is rejected.
6.
The second submission is also devoid of merit.
It is true that there is no mention of public interest or administrative exigency in the impugned order, but that will not make the order bad.
In the absence of such a recital in the order the burden is placed on the Government to satisfy the Court by filing affidavit or by producing any other material that those conditions are fulfilled.
In this connection reference may be made to Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co Ltd v. State Industrial Tribunal UP, AIR 1961 SC 1381 and Narayan v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1977 SC 183.
But the Government is required to satisfy the Court about the fulfilment of those conditions i.e. that the order was passed in public interest or on account of administrative exigency only when the order is challenged on such a ground supported by appropriate pleadings in the writ petition.
In the present case although the petitioner has taken the ground that the transfer order has been passed on extraneous/political considerations, but there are no averments in the writ petition in support thereof.
In paragraphs Nos. 23, 24 and 25 of the writ petition it has been stated that the petitioner has been given arbitrary and discriminatory treatment by periodical transfer orders and the impugned order was obtained by the respondent No. 4 by manoeuvoring.
These paragraphs have been sworn on the basis of legal advice and not on the basis of personal knowledge or on the basis of record.
The questions as to whether the transfer order has been manoeuvred by respondent No. 4 and is based on extraneous considerations are essentially questions of fact.
Such pleadings should be verified on personal knowledge of the deponent who has sworn the affidavit or on the basis of relevant record.
But that has not been done in the present case.
That apart, there is no averment in the writ petition that the impugned order was not passed in public interest or on account of administrative exigency.
In absence of such pleadings it was not obligatory for the Government to come forward suo motu and satisfy the Court about fulfilment of the conditions precedent.
7.
The impugned order also does not indicate that it was passed in pursuance of any interim order passed by this Court.
In fact there is no order of this Court requiring the Government to pass any such order.
The interim order which this Court passed in Writ Petition No. 27922 of 1997 filed by the respondent No. 4 was merely an order by which the operation of the order impugned in that writ petition was stayed.
From perusal of paragraph 12 of the counter- affidavit filed by the respondent No. 4 it appears that after this Court granted stay order in the aforesaid writ petitions filed by the respondent No. 4, the learned Standing Counsel sent a fax message to the Government giving details of the case and the successive orders of transfer passed by the Director and the Government thereafter passed by the Director but this time the Government passed the impugned order cancelling all earlier orders of transfer.
All earlier orders of transfer were passed by the Director but this time the Government passed the impugned order in order to end the undesirable practice of the Director passing successive/frequent transfer orders in short span of time.
The impugned order was not passed in order to implement any interim order passed by this Court.
8.
In this connection it may also be mentioned that the petitioner remained in Sonebhadra as Mines Officer from 1986 till now except for about three years.
This is clear from the following facts as stated in the counter-affidavit filed by the respondent No. 4 :  The post of Mines Officer was created for the first time in 1986 for district Mirzapur of which Sonebhadra was a part at that time.
The petitioner was appointed as Mines Officer Mirzapur in 1986 and continued as such thereafter.
In 1989 district Sonebhadra was carved out from the territory of district Mirzapur and the petitioner thereafter continued as Mines Officer Sonebhadra up to 1991.
From 1986 to 1991 the petitioner was thus in Sonebhadra as Mines Officer.
Thereafter he was transferred from Sonebhadra, but he was transferred back to Sonebhadra again in January, 1995 and has continued as such since then.
In his rejoinder-affidavit the petitioner has not denied his posting at Mirzapur/Sonebhadra from 1986 to 1991 and thereafter from 1995 till now.
It is thus apparent that the petitioner is in Sonebhadra right from 1986 till now excepting for about three years.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case the impugned order passed by the Government cannot be said to be bad specially in view of the fact that the Director had created a mess by passing frequent transfer orders.
The Government order has now settled the controversy.
No exception can be taken to it.
9.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.