Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellant was appointed as an Assistant with the Punjab Financial Corporation in May, 1971, and was posted at Chandigarh.
On June 4, 1972, the appellant was confirmed.
On April 8, 1980, he was transferred to Ludhiana.
After about 2 years vide order dated May 10, 1982, his services were terminated.
Aggrieved by this order, he raised a dispute.
The Administrator, Union Territory Chandigarh, referred the matter to the Labour Court in the year 1985.
On September 3, 1990, the Labour Court held that the termination of his services was illegal.
The order of termination had been passed without holding any inquiry or complying with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and thus the workman was ordered to be reinstated with full back wages and continuity of service.
Aggrieved by the award, the Corporation approached this court thought Civil Writ Petition No. 14941 of 1990.
The petition having been allowed, the workman has filed the present appeal.
2.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
3.
On behalf of the appellant, it has been pointed out that he was a confirmed employee and that his services had been terminated without complying with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Still further, Mr. DV Sharma has stated that the appellant was reinstated in service and is continuing to work as an Assistant till today.
He submits that in this situation no useful purpose would be served by relegating the appellant to the remedy before the Labour Court by seeking a fresh reference of the dispute through the Punjab Government.
Mr. Sharma has stated that since the appellant has been working for the last so many years, he is willing to give up the claim for back wages for the period prior to September 3, 1990, and to buy his peace.
4.
Admittedly, the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act had not been complied with when the services of the appellant were terminated.
In this situation, a second trial before the Labour Court would only result in waste of time, money and energy by both the parties.
Still further, we find that the learned Single Judge while deciding the writ petition had relied upon the order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 14945 of 1990, wherein also the award of the Labour court was set aside on the ground that the reference had not been made by the appropriate government.
In spite of that, the "relief given to respondent No. 2 (the workman) by the Labour Court" was retained in his favour primarily in view of the fact that the matter before the Labour Court had been pending for a very long time and the interest of the workman could not be made to suffer on account of the reference having not been made by an appropriate government.
5.
The situation in the present case is not very different.
The services of confirmed employee were terminated without following the provisions of law.
The order of termination is per se illegal.
Even if a fresh trial takes place, the respondent Corporation shall not be in a position to persuade the court to sustain the order.
Still further, a very fair offer has been made by the learned counsel for the appellant inasmuch as he has categorically stated that no claim for back wages from May 10, 1982 to September 3, 1990 shall be made.
He has only claimed that the arrears of salary be paid from the date of the award with the benefits of continuity in service.
In the circumstances of the case, it is a very fair solution to the purely technical issue which was raised in the case by the respondent Corporation.
6.
In view of the above, while allowing the appeal, we direct that the order of termination shall be deemed to have been set aside and that the appellant shall be deemed to have continued in service without any break.
However, he will not be entitled to the back wages for the period prior to the date of the award.
The wages due to the appellant and the other consequential benefits shall be worked out and paid within three months.
If the needful is not done within the aforesaid period, interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment shall be paid.
7.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.