Swatanter Kumar, J - While hearing the application under Order 41 Rule 5 read with Section 151 CPC for stay of execution proceedings, as per the request made by the counsel for the parties, arguments on the main appeal itself were heard.
2.
This Regular Second Appeal is directed against the judgment and decree passed by the learned first Appellate Court dated 2441997.
The reference to basic facts would be necessary in order to determine the controversy arising in the present appeal.
3.
Kashmir Singh had joined the police force on 1041981 as Constable.
It is contended that he was promoted as Head Constable and was working as such till 21.10.1993 when he was dismissed from service vide order passed by the disciplinary authorities.
He claims that he worked sincerely and honestly which earned him the required promotion.
However, the respondent was charged with unauthorised absence from 331992 to 2031992, 3.8.1992 to 781992 and from 26.8.1992 to 4.11.1992 for a total period of three months without leave and permission.
The plaintiff contended that the disciplinary proceedings were bad and contrary to law and, in fact, his absence during this period was because he was suffering from prolapse of inter vertebral disc and he was in a bad shape and confined to bed as per medical advice.
As soon as the plaintiff got well he came and reported for duty.
The appeal preferred by the plaintiff was dismissed by the Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar.
Once the appeal of the plaintiff was dismissed he served a notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and filed the suit in question.
Upon notice, the defendants failed to file the written statement despite number of opportunities and their defence was struck off.
The learned trial court vide a detailed judgment decreed the suit of the plaintiff on 1651996 and set aside the order of dismissal dated 21.10.1993.
The learned trial court came to the conclusion that the impugned order was in violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Except the contention that the absence was not a grave misconduct which would entail penalty of dismissal upon the plaintiff, all other grounds were, however, rejected by the trial court.
4.
The department unsuccessfully assailed the judgment and decree of the learned trial court dated 1651996 before the learned 1st Appellate Court.
The learned District Judge, Amritsar vide judgment and decree dated 2441997 dismissed the appeal.
Even with the learned 1st Appellate Court the argument which weighed in dismissing the appeal was identical what had weighed with the learned trial court.
At this stage, it may be proper to refer to the findings recorded by the learned 1st Appellate Court.
".......In the ruling referred above, the plaintiff who was working as Constable in Punjab Police remained absent from duty for the period 3.8.1992 to 781992 and 26.8.1992 to 4.11.1992 but it has been observed by the Hon'ble Judges that it was incumbent upon the Punishing Authority to record findings that the misconduct attributed to the delinquent official was gravest act of misconduct and in the absence of such findings the order cannot be sustained.
In the case in hand the order dated 21.10.1993 was passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Majithia, vide which the services of the plaintiff were dismissed is silent (about), the fact that misconduct attributed to the official was gravest act of misconduct.
Even the appeal filed by the plaintiff against the order of dismissal was dismissed and the said order of Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar rejecting the appeal of the plaintiff is also silent on this point."
5.
The above findings of the learned 1st Appellate Court have been assailed in appeal by the department in this Regular Second Appeal.
6.
In view of the above facts, the learned counsel for the appellants has raised the following contentions:  (a) In view of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and of this Court, absence from duty has been held to be an act of grave mis-conduct which can entail the punishment of dismissal from service, consequently afore- finding recorded by the learned courts below is contrary to the law and facts of the present case.
(b) Consequently, it is contended that the order passed by the concerned authorities is just, legal and proper.
7.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondent while controverting the above contentions supported the judgments and decree passed by the learned courts below on the following grounds:  (a) the absence from duty cannot be stated to be mis-conduct of grave nature; (b) the authorities concerned had never applied its mind and the impugned order does not show that while passing the same, the authorities concerned directed themselves to consider the element of length of service and pensionary benefits of the petitioner and as such there is violation of statutory Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules; and (c) thirdly it is contended that the order of the appellate authority is a non-speaking order.
8.
Before I proceed to discuss the aforestated rival contentions, it needs to be noticed that since the defendants-appellants had failed to file the written statement in spite of adequate opportunities having been afforded, the learned trial court had struck off the defence of the defendants and the State did not assail that order at the relevant time and even now in the present grounds of appeal the said order of striking off the defence has not been challenged.
As such the said order has become final between the parties as it remains unassailed.
Obvious result of this is that the facts stated by the plaintiff in the suit remain unrebutted and the controversy essentially would have to be limited and determined on the basis of the legal issues.
9.
As far as the first contention raised on behalf of the appellants is concerned, it must succeed, in view of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and a Division Bench of this Court.
In the case of State of Punjab and others v. Bakshish Singh, JT 1997(5) SC 633 : 1997(3) SCT 401 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court while interpreting the same rules observed "that absence from duty was a "gravest mis-conduct attributable to the official concerned".
Similar view was taken by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ex. Constable Rakesh Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) R.S.J.
333.
10.
In view of the settled position of law, which is binding on this Court, the first contention raised on behalf of the appellants deserves to be accepted and as a necessary corollary the findings arrived at by the learned courts below, though they are primarily based upon evidence, are liable to be set aside in law.
Learned Courts below have not determined and decided the other pleas taken by the plaintiff in the suit, in other paragraphs of the plaint particularly paragraph 6 of the plaint.
The other contentions which are duly supported by law have not been deliberated upon by the courts below.
The judgment of the learned courts below is liable to be set aside for the aforestated reason but at the same time no fruitful purpose would be served by remanding the case to the court concerned for determination of other pleas taken in the plaint as the defence of the defendants-appellants had already been struck off and the said order remained unchallenged.
The parties have already litigated for a considerable period as the suit was instituted as back as in the year 1994.
Thus, no fruitful purpose would be served by remanding the matter and directing the parties to appear before the court concerned for determination on either point.
Rather, I consider it appropriate to deal with the various contentions raised on behalf of the respective parties and dispose of this matter in this Court itself.
11.
This takes me to discuss the second contention raised on behalf of the appellant that the impugned order is legal, just and fair.
The contention raised on behalf of the respondent saying that the inquiry is vitiated for violation of rules and principles of natural justice remains unrebutted.
Furthermore, according to Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, it is obligatory on the part of the disciplinary authority to consider the questions relating to the element of length of service and entitlement to pension while passing the impugned order.
Copy of the impugned order dated 21.10.1993 passed by the appellate authority certainly does not indicate anything that the authorities had applied its mind to these two essential elements which form the part of the statutory rules.
Furthermore, the order passed by the appellate authority is certainly a non-speaking order.
It is difficult for the court to assume the application of mind on the part of the authorities in the absence of any pleadings to that effect and specially when the order is silent in regard to discussions of those elements.
12.
In paragraph 6 of the plaint a specific contention was raised on behalf of the plaintiff based on facts.
This contention remains unrebutted and undisputed but inevitable result of absence of pleadings on behalf of the department has to go to the benefit of the plaintiff and the courts would not be in a position to draw any presumption in favour of the department.
The order passed by the disciplinary authority must prima facie show the application of mind to these elements, specially when the ground to that effect is raised.
The authorities cannot absolve themselves of the responsibility/duty imposed upon them by virtue of the statutory rules i.e. 162.
13.
Learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon the case of Punjab State through Collector v. Gurdip Singh, 1995(1) R.S.J.
641 : 1994(3) SCT 261 (P&H), judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Narinder Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) S.L.R.
77 : 1995(4) SCT 222 (P&H), (in this case, Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules 1934 was considered by the Division Bench which are also applicable to the State of Haryana), and Punjab State and another v. Gurmeet Ram (deceased and another, 1997(4) Recent Services Judgments 187.
14.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the appellate has relied upon the case of Constable Ram Krishan v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) Services Cases Today 561, to contend that once the record was before the authorities concerned, it is to be presumed that the authorities have applied their mind.
15.
I am afraid the case of Ram Krishan cannot be of much help to the appellant because there is no pleadings to that effect and to that effect there cannot be presumption in law of such a fact more particularly in the circumstances of the present case.
Nobody has pleaded the case what was pleaded in the case of Ram Krishan (supra).
16.
While on the other hand, the cases relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent are squarely applicable to the facts of the present case.
The department must discharge a primary onus placed upon it with regard to the consideration of these two elements under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules and application of mind in that regard.
This will be more necessary when a definite plea is raised by the plaintiff, specifically with regard to the non-application of mind, non-speaking order and absence of two requisite elements.
The plaintiff had discharged its onus by leading cogent evidence and making averment in his pleadings which remained unrebutted.
For this reason, I am of the considered view that the order dated 21st October, 1993 is still liable to be set aside though for a different reason than the one given by the learned trial court.
17.
In view of the above detailed discussion, the appeal is dismissed.
The impugned order dated 21st October, 1993 is hereby set aside.
Following the principle enunciated by Hon'ble Supreme Court and in the case of State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, JT 1996(3) SC 722 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC), the disciplinary authority is at liberty to pass any fresh order upon affording proper opportunity to the respondent in accordance with rules.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.