Satya Brata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated January 13, 1998 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Hon'ble Court in C.O.
No. 6066(W) of 1993.
In this appeal, an application for addition of party has been filed by one Sri Harendra Nath Biswas.
2.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties, we have allowed the said application and we have heard Mr. Amal Baran Chatterjee on merit of the matter.
3.
The fact of the matter lies on a very narrow compass.
4.
The Managing Committee of Radha Sundari Pal Choudhury Vidyapith (hereinafter referred to as `the said School') has sought for prior permission from the District Inspector of Schools (SE) in terms of the Recruitment Rules framed by the Director of School Education in exercise of his power conferred upon him under clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-rule (1) and by clause (i) of sub-rule (4) of Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non- Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 for filling up of a vacancy in Class IV Staff.
Originally on 1121996 name of 18 candidates were sponsored.
However, one Shri Ramendra Nath Mondal produced a letter from the Employment Exchange Officer showing that his candidature has also been sponsored in terms of the Recruitment Rules.
The Selection Committee was formed upon obtaining prior permission from the DI of Schools (SE) and the Selection Committee formed a panel which was approved by the Managing Committee.
The panel so approved was sent to the DI of Schools (SE) for his approval in terms of the Recruitment Rules.
It is stated that the said panel was approved on 26111996.
As no appointment was given to Shri Ramendra Nath Mondal whose name was at serial No. 1 of the said panel, he has come before this Court questioning inaction on the part of the District Inspector of Schools in according approval to the panel prepared by the Managing Committee.
By judgment and order dated 5th August, 1996, the said writ application was disposed of.
However, later on, it was found that the name of the abovementioned Shri Ramendra Nath Mondal was not sponsored at all by the Employment Exchange Officer.
The appellant before us filed a writ application before this Court claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :  "(a) Writs or a writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondent authorities particularly the DI of Schools (SE), Nadia to act in accordance with law and to approve the panel with the petitioner's name at the top which is lying with the said DI of Schools (SE), Nadia; (b) Writs or a writ in the nature of certiorari calling upon the respondents to send up to this Hon'ble Court the entire records of the case for doing conscionable justice."
5.
The learned trial Judge passed various orders, from time to time.
The Employment Officer-in-Charge, District Employment Exchange, Ranaghat was also directed to be present with the Despatch Register.
Such a direction obviously was made in view of the allegations made by the petitioner-appellant that the name of the aforementioned Ramendra Nath Mondal could not have at all been considered for being empanelled as his name was not sponsored by the Employment Exchange Officer and he has committed a fraud on the School authorities and also the District Inspector of Schools (SE).
6.
The learned trial Judge upon considering the statements made by the Employment Officer and also on perusal of the Despatch Register came to the conclusion that the purported Memo dated 19th November, 1992 is a manufactured document wherein the name of Ramendra Nath Mondal was allegedly sponsored by the Employment Officer for interview.
It was, therefore, held that such sponsorship should be treated as cancelled and the matter should be referred to the Investigating Agency for making a thorough probe in the matter.
7.
Upon arriving at the said finding the learned trial Judge further held :  "The School functionaries are given liberty to select Class IV Staff in the vacancy on the basis of the initial sponsorship being No. R/P/85/91/1427 dated 11th February, 1992 only from amongst the candidates who were given liberty to appear before the Selection Committee.
The Managing Committee will complete the exercise by 15th February, 1998 and the panel will be forwarded to the Dist.
Inspector of Schools within 20th February, 1998.
District Inspector of Schools will approve the panel within 28th February, 1998 and the Managing Committee will appoint the candidate who will be figured as No. 1 in the approved panel within 7th March, 1998."
8.
Mr. Dipak Banerjee, learned Counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that in view of the fact that the appellant's name was at serial No. 2 of the panel and as the name of Shri Ramendra Nath Mondal whose name was at Sl.
No. 1 having committed fraud should have therefore been directed to br struck off, the impugned direction issued by the learned trial Court is bad in law.
9.
Mr.
Dawn, learned Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 2, on the other hand, submitted that the learned trial Judge acted in accordance with law, inasmuch as, a panel must consist names of three persons.
The learned Counsel also contends that life of the panel having expired, the Court cannot direct extension thereof and in support of his contention the learned Counsel refers to a decision reported in (1997)3 SCC.
198.
10.
Mr. Chatterjee, learned Counsel, appearing on behalf of the added respondent supported the contentions of Mr.
Dawn and further added that in view of the fact that one of the candidates had committed fraud, the entire panel was vitiated.
The learned Counsel pointed out that a fresh interview has been taken and his client is now placed at serial No. 1 of the new panel and in this view of the matter this court should not at this juncture interfere in the matter.
11.
Before adverting to the question involved in this appeal we may note that keeping in view that date of grant of prior permission as also the date of interview the Recruitment Rules issued by the District of School Education dated 2nd December, 1989 in terms of Memo No. 2816(17) GA dated 4th December, 1989 effective from 4121989 as amended on 30th March, 1990 shall govern the case.
12.
It is beyond any cavil of doubt that in terms of the aforementioned Rules a Selection Committee is to be constituted in terms of Rule 4(a) thereof.
Rule 5(b), (c) and (d) which are material for the purpose read thus :  "5(b).
For selection and preparation of panel of candidates the Selection Committee shall assess only those qualifications of the candidates which are relevant to the post(s) and award marks to each candidate in the manner in the chart given below.
Marks will also be awarded separately for experience, extra-curricular activities and performances in the interview in the manner prescribed in the chart below and submit the same to the Managing Committee of the school with their definite recommendations.
(c) The panel will be framed with average of marks awarded by each of the members of the Selection Committee.
If any member of the Selection Committee wants to keep his opinion reserved the average will be calculated on the basis of marks awarded by other members.
(d) The Managing Committee after due consideration and approval shall forward the panel so prepared by the Selection Committee with all relevant papers to the District Inspector of School (SE) of the district for approval.
The Secretary after being authorised by the Managing Committee or the Administrator will issue intimation for appointment in order of position in the panel through Registered Post Card after receiving the panel duly approved by the District Inspector of Schools (SE).
The District Inspector of Schools (SE) will convey his decision ordinarily within a month from the date of the receipt of the panel.
The panel will remain valid for one year with effect from the date of approval of the District Inspector of Schools (SE) despite any of the empanelled candidates either not joining or leaving the post within the lifetime of the panel.
Names of such candidates who do not join within three months from the receipt of the appointment letter will be removed from the panel."
13.
In the instant case in view of the fact that the case of Shri Ramendra Nath Mondal had been considered wrongly is not in dispute.
His empanelment was therefore wholly illegal.
He was not entitled to any enquiry nor by reason of commission of any fraud he was entitled to be empanelled or appointed.
14.
It is a well known principle of law that fraud and justice never dwell together.
It is also well settled that fraud vitiates all solemn orders.
This aspect of the matter is although well settled, reference in this connection may be made to Indian Bank v. Satyam Fibres (India) Pvt. Ltd. Judgment Today, 1996 Volume VII SC 135.
15.
In this view of the matter the approval of the panel wherein the name of the aforementioned Ramendra Nath Mondal appeared at Serial No. 1 was not correct and in that view of the matter, the purported approval granted on 26111996 by the District Inspector of Schools is no approval in the eye of law.
16.
The question, however, which arises for consideration is as to whether the appellant and/or other eligible candidates against whom no allegation has been made and were entitled to take part at the interview should be deprived of the benefit of being empanelled.
The answer to this question, in our opinion, should be rendered in negative.
The appellant or other candidates who had appeared in the interview cannot be deprived of the benefit of being empanelled only because one Ramendra Nath Mondal committed fraud.
The person, who has committed fraud, may be punished and appropriately dealt with in accordance with law, but because of the sin committed on the part of one, the same could not deprive the others from being considered for appointment in accordance with law.
In other words only because the aforementioned Ramendra Nath Mondal appeared at the interview by producing a forged letter from the employment officer, the same does not mean that those candidates whose names had been sponsored by the Employment Exchange in accordance with law and appeared at the interview, would be derived of the right they had derived thereby i.e. consideration of their appointment in accordance with law.
17.
It is true, as has been contended by Mr.
Dawn and Mr. Chatterjee that the Selection Committee is to form a panel of three candidates.
It is further true that the life of the panel is for one year with effect from the date of approval of the District Inspector of Schools.
But in our opinion keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case the said Rules will not stand in the way of appellant in obtaining the appropriate relief.
It is accepted by all concerned that the appellant's position is at serial No. 2 in the old panel.
Clause 5(d) of the Recruitment Rules provides that in the case of employment candidate does not join or receive the post within the lifetime of the panel, names of such candidates who did not join within three months from the receipt of the appointment letter will be removed from the panel.
18.
The phraseology used in Rule 5(d) of 1990 Recruitment Rules, in our opinion, must be construed liberally, particularly in view of the fact that approval granted by the District Inspector of Schools in terms whereof the aforementioned Ramendra Nath Mondal was at serial No. 1 was not an approval so far his candidature is concerned.
In that view of the matter the learned trial Judge, in our considered opinion and particularly in view of the fact that the matter relating to appointment of Assistant Teachers in the Schools was pending for a long time ought to have directed the Selection Committee to form another panel consisting of three names on the basis of the marks obtained by the candidates and send the same for approval of District Inspector of Schools but he could not have directed taking fresh interviews.
There was absolutely no reason as to why keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case a direction should have been issued for taking fresh interview in view of the fact that all the eighteen candidates had appeared earlier and, the candidate could not, thus, have been directed to appear for the second time.
They could not have been punished for no fault on their part.
19.
The decisions relied upon by Mr.
Dawn reported in State of Bihar v. Md Kalimuddin and others, 1996 Vol. II SCC 7 and Bihar Public Service Commission and another v. State of Bihar and others, 1997 Vol. 3 SCC 198 : 1997(1) SCT.
501 cannot have any application in this case.
The said decisions were rendered in absolutely a different fact and situation.
20.
In is now well-known that the slight difference in fact or additional fact may cause a difference in the ultimate conclusion arrived at by the Court.
In Regional Manager and another v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, AIR 1976 SC 1766, the Apex Court has stated as follows :-  "We think the principles involved in applying Article 311(2) having been sufficiently explained in Shamsher Singh's case (AIR 1974 SC 2192) (supra) it should no longer be possible to urge that Sughar Singh's case (supra) could give rise to some misapprehension of the law.
Indeed, we do not think that the principles of law declared and applied so often have really changed.
But, the application of the same law to the differing circumstances and facts of various cases which have come up to this Court could create the impression sometimes that there is some conflict between different decisions of this Court.
Even where there appears to be some conflict, it would, we think, vanish when the ratio decidendi of each case is correctly understood.
It is the rule deducible from the application of law to the facts and circumstances of a case which constitutes its ratio decidendi and not some conclusion based upon facts which may appear to be similar.
One additional or different fact can make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases even when the same principles are applied in each case to similar facts."
21.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are in disagreement with the operative part of the judgment passed by the learned Trial Judge and direct that the old panel shall be sent back to the Selection Committee for Constitution of a new panel on the basis of the old interview and the same should be sent to the District Inspector of Schools for his approval in terms of the Recruitment Rules.
Constitution of such panel and approval thereof and passing of an order relating to approval by the District Inspector of Schools should be done at an early date and not later than one month from the date of communication of this order.
22.
It is made clear that the second interview which has been taken pursuant to the leave granted by the this Court stand cancelled.
23.
The appeal is allowed.
24.
There will be no order as to costs.
25.
Xerox certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Appeal allowed.