Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The petitioner approached this Court feeling aggrieved by the inaction of the College Service Commission not having recommended her name for appointment to a post of a teacher of a college, although one of the candidates having been placed much below in the merit list than the petitioner was recommended.
In pursuance of the advertisement being No. 1/88 the petitioner duly applied to the respondent commission for being selected for empanelment.
Admittedly the petitioner was qualified and was empanelled for the purpose of recommendation for appointment of teacher in Chemistry subject.
The panel was prepared in the year 1990.
It is the case of the writ petitioner that one Smt. Santoshree Chowdhury was also empanelled along with the petitioner in the same merit list and she has placed much below the position of the petitioner.
In January, 1995 superseding the petitioner the said Smt. Santhoshree Chowdhury was recommended for appointment as a lecturer in the post of Chemistry Subject in Vivekananda College, Thakurpukur.
Therefore, there is a gross discrimination without any reason against the petitioner for not recommending her name.
Accordingly, she was prayed for in this petition for issuance of writ of mandamus compelling the said Commission respondent to recommend the name of the petitioner to any college for appointment.
An affidavit-in-opposition has been filed denying that no person whose position was below than that of the petitioner in the merit list, was recommended.
The recommendation granted in favour of the said Smt. Santoshree Chowdhury has been withdrawn and no appointment ultimately was given to the said lady candidate.
It has been further stated after cancellation of the said panel advertisement has been issued for the purpose of selecting new candidates, for forming new panel.
It is submitted that since the old panel is not alive question of further recommendation does not arise.
It has also been explained in the affidavit-in-opposition "it is true that name of Santoshree Chowdhury was recommended in January, 1995 but when the turn of the petitioner came, the panel was cancelled".
2.
Mr. Bikas Ranjan Bhattacharjee, the learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the writ petitioner, submits that it is true that mere empanelment of candidate does not create any right to be appointed but when any recommendation is being made superseding the name of the petitioner she has certainly legitimate grievance against such discriminatory act and action in the matter of recommendation which is being done under the provision of the statute.
The respondent Commission is a statutory body and is expected to act in accordance with norms and provision of the law.
He submits that when the case of Smt. Santoshree Chowdhury was recommended from a panel even after expiry of the statutory period of one year from the date of formation thereof, the petitioner's case should have been considered and recommended.
Unfortunately, the petitioner has been left out and no recommendation was made.
So this action is absolutely unfair and inequitable.
Under such circumstances the said respondent to any College as under the provisions of the law that recommendation of the respondent Commission is a sine qua non for appointment of a teacher in a College.
In other words appointment of a teacher is automatic once the petitioner's case is recommended from the panel.
3.
Mr. Pulak Ranjan Mondal, the learned lawyer appearing for the respondent Commission, submits that the petitioners has not acquired indefeasible right to be appointed.
Empanelled candidate cannot claim to be appointed.
The empanelment does not create any vested right of appointment.
In support of his submission he cites and relies on a decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1994 SC 736 followed by another decision of the Division Bench of this Court reported in 1996(1) CLJ page 426 following the said Supreme Court decision.
He also argues that under the regulation 8 sub-rule 3 the life of the panel is valid for one year and furthermore the panel has been cancelled.
So the petitioner cannot enforce a stale and/or lapsed panel.
He also points out in support of his submission paragraph 9 of this Court's decision (supra).
4.
I have heard the respective submissions of the parties.
It appears from the admitted position that the petitioner was expanelled along with one Santoshree Chowdhury.
They were empanelled in the same list.
It further appears that Santoshree Chowdhury's name was appearing below the position of the petitioner in the merit list.
It appears subsequently the recommendation of Santoshree Chowdhury was withdrawn and/or cancelled after filing of this writ petition.
It further appears that there is no appointment in favour of Santoshree Chowdhury.
Under the law the panel is to remain valid for one year from the date of it finalsation by the Commission.
Admittedly the panel was finalised in 1990.
The present application has been made in the year 1995.
Therefore, by passage of time the life of the panel came to end in the year 1991.
So after expiry of the aforesaid period of one year the said panel lapsed and/or became stalid in the year 1991.
So in view of the said Division Bench judgment of this Court on the date of moving of this writ petition the panel was not subsisting.
So the right of the petitioner if any, extinguished by passage of time.
It is true in view of the aforesaid Supreme Court decision that mere selection and empanelment of a candidate does not create any vested right of appointment nor because of such empanelment, the candidate concerned acquires any indefeasible right to be appointed.
The aforesaid principle as laid down in the Supreme Court decision is of general rule but there can be an exception where the appointment is an automatic process once empanelled and selected.
In this case as it appears from the provisions of section 9 of the West Bengal College Service Commission Act, 1979 which says as follows :-  9.
Effect of recommendation of the Commission.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, custom or usage to the contrary, appointments to the posts of Teachers of a College shall be made on the recommendation of the Commission".
5.
The aforesaid provision is mandatory, because of use of non-obstante clause in the section.
Therefore it will appear that once the recommendation of the Commission respondent is made appointment is automatic.
So the empanelment of any candidate in the merit list prepared by the Commission respondent upon selection has got a greater value, and once the turn of candidate of being recommended from valid panel matures, it becomes statutory and vested right to be appointed.
Since no College which is receiving aid from the Government excepting the colleges established and administered by a minority whether based on religion or language, cannot appoint any teacher without recommendation of the Commission, the panel prepared by the Commission respondent is a very valuable piece of charter which gives a valuable statutory right to the candidate who is selected.
So the said Supreme Court decision is not applicable here in strict sense for the reason as stated above.
This view of mine is also supported by the aforesaid Division Bench of our Court which has explained the applicability of the Supreme Court decision and decided that Court cannot direct the authority concerned to give appointment in favour of any person unless a case has been made out that under the rule such appointment can be given in an automatic process or appointment in such a case is ministerial.
But unfortunately in this case though the petitioner could have got statutory vested right once her turn of being recommended would come but the said panel had become stale on the date of filing of the writ petition.
It appears from the admitted position that the respondent Commission has acted illegally and contrary to statute by recommending the various candidates even after expiry of the statutory period of one year from the date of finalisation of the panel.
In this particular case the said Smt. Santoshree Chowdhury was recommended after five years and such act of recommendation was patently illegal and invalid but ultimately the same has been rectified and/or remedied by withdrawing such recommendation.
So no relief can be granted to the writ petitioner as asked for in this petition, but the petitioner has brought to notice of this Court about illegal, arbitrary and irregular functioning of the respondent Commission with regard to the recommendation of a candidate from a panel which had lapsed by efflux of statutory time of one year.
This Court record it serious displeasure and further doubts in bona fide and lawful functioning of the Commission.
I find the act and activities in the matter of recommendation of a candidate and further preparation of the panel are not in consonance with the provision of the law.
No reason has been assigned as to why the case of Smt. Santoshree Chowdhury was recommended after a period of five years.
In that view of the matter I direct the Secretary, Ministry of Higher Education State of West Bengal to take appropriate measures for making an enquiry and investigation in this matter and make it sure that in future such patent illegal act is not repeated by recommending any name from any panel after expiry of the validity period.
6.
As I have already held that once a candidate is selected and finds his place in the panel prepared by the Commission /respondent for appointment to the post of a teacher of a college, he gets his inchoate right until his turn for recommendation becomes matured within the validity period of the panel.
The moment his turn for recommendation becomes matured within valid period, his right becomes a vested right created by statute.
So, it is the fundamental duty of the Commission to adhere to the provisions of the aforesaid Act and Regualtion framed thereunder strictly and without any departure therefrom whatsoever.
While discharging the duty by the Commission under the aforesaid law, a reasonable amount of transparency in its action is necessary.
Accordingly, it shall keep the candidates who have been emplanelled informed about their status and position of the panel whenever it is required by the empanelled candidates.
The following are the measures which shall be taken to act in consonance with the aforesaid provision of the Act and Regulation.
These measures will no doubt ensure transparency in its action.
(i) The said Commission shall strictly prepare the panel in accordance with its published regulation.
(ii) Under no circumstances any recommendation shall be made for appointment from the panel which had lost its force by efflux of time of one year from the date of finalisation thereof, till reglation with regard to period, is modified and/or amended.
(iii) No college which comes within the purview of the aforesaid Act by and under its provision of section 15 shall appoint any teacher even if a recommendation is made after expiry of the validity period of the aforesaid panel.
(iv) The Commission shall while making recommendation in writing mention the date of finalisation of the panel.
(v) During subsistence of the validity period of the panel the Commission must inform, if so asked for by the empanelled candidate, his status as to his turn of being recommended.
The Commission shall by a public notice notify the date of finalisation and cancellation of the panel.
7.
This judgment shall be circulated to all the Universities which in their turn shall circulate to the concerned colleges.
8.
No further step need be taken under Section 340 of the Criminal Procedure Code as I am satisfied that the inconsistent and contradictory averments were made because of bungling of draftsman lawyer in drafting the affidavits.
9.
However, the Commission respondent shall pay costs of this writ petition to the petitioner assessed at 30 G.Ms.
Orders accordingly.