Swatanter Kumar, J - CM 2439-C of 1998 was filed by the applicant-respondent with a prayer that this case is covered by the judgments of this Court in RSA 1872 of 1996 decided on 1291996 titled as State of Punjab and another v. Baldev Singh and RSA No. 2103 of 1995, decided on 3041996 titled as Punjab State v. Hansa Singh.
As such, the appeal be disposed of in terms of that judgments.
2.
Court heard the learned counsel for the parties on this application and with the consent of the learned counsel for the parties regular second appeal itself was heard on merits.
3.
It would be necessary to give bare minimum facts for disposal of the appeal.
Kulwant Singh plaintiff filed the suit against State of Punjab to the effect that the order bearing endorsement No. 2521-23/GM passed in the year 1990 by the General Manager stopping four annual grade increments with future effect and the order bearing No. 2521-23/GM treating the period from 29.11.1978 to 18.9.1981 as no work, no pay and not allowing allowances, are illegal, wrong, without jurisdiction and contrary to the provisions of Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
The plaintiff worked as driver in the Punjab Roadways.
He contended that the said Authority has no authority under the rules to pass the impugned orders.
The suit was contested by the defendants on the gound that Punishing Authority had jurisdiction to pass the impugned orders.
It was further contended that enquiry proceedings were not void as show cause notice was issued by competent Authority and the orders were passed in accordance with rules.
4.
Learned trial court framed the following issues:-  1.
Whether the impugned orders are illegal and void on the grounds mentioned in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether a valid and legal notice u/s 80 of the CPC was given to the defendants before filing the suit ?
OPP.
3. relief.
After permitting the parties to lead evidence and while relying upon the judgments of this Court in the cases of State of Punjab v. Chanan Singh, 1988(2) CLJ (Civil, Criminal & Revenue) 21 and Paresh Chandra Dutta v. Collector of Calcutta & Ors., 1979(1) SLR 44, the learned trial Court decreed the suit of the plaintiff for declaration and directed the defendants to pay benefits to the plaintiff with interest.
This judgment and decaree dated 1031994 of the learned trial Court was unsuccessfully assailed by the defendants before the learned Ist Appellate Court.
Learned Ist Appellate Court vide its judgment and decree dated 6.12.1994 dismissed the appeal with costs while maintaining the findings and conclusion arrived at by the learned trial Court.
This has given rise to the present regular second appeal.
5.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the State-appellant argued that the Manager who had been given limited powers restricted to drawing and disbursing officer, cannot be stressed to say that the said officer had become delegatory of the Disciplinary powers as well.
He further argued that no such document has been placed on record which would show that the concered Manager had been given powers of the General Manager of Depot for the purpose of taking disciplinary action against the plaintiff.
It was more or less conceded by the learned counsel for the appellant that there is no document on record which would show that the concerned officer had been empowered by the competent authority to exercise powers of disciplinary Authority for all purposes and intents.
6.
In view of this uncontested position, I am unable to see any error in the judgments of the Courts below.
Learned courts below have arrived at concurrent findings of fact based upon proper appreciation of evidence that said officer had no Authoirty to impose impugned punishment upon the plaintiff.
It can also not be disputed that the General Manager himself is delegatory and being delegatory himself he cannot further delegate his powers specially in the absence of any specific legislative stipulation to that effect.
7.
At this stage, it may be appropriate to refer to the judgment in the case of Hansa Singh (supra) where on identical facts, it was held as under :-  "Once the authority passing an order opted to restrict the authority of Mr. Baljit Singh it will neither be permissible to expand such authority by means of pleadings or arguments and order of appointment has to be construed in its true sense and must be given its lawful meaning and it is neither permissible nor proper to add anything to such a document which has not been actually written by the authority passing the order as nothing prevented the competent authority from passing a proper order which will keep complete powers of the post of General Manager even in officiating capacity to Mr. Baljit Singh.
As the authority concerned intentionally avoided to give such powers, these powers especially the disciplinary powers which are of very serious nature, cannot be inferred to have been given by an implication or an imagination as averred by the learned counsel for the appellants.
Under Rule 124, a Head of Office necessarily does not be a Head of Office for organisation it could be an officer as defined in Rule 216 of the said rules who has been empowered to act as Drawing and Disbursing Officer in accordance with rules.
Learned Counsel for the appellants had relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Gopalji Khanna v. Allahabad Bank and others, JT 1996(3) SC 84 : 1996(3) SCT 633 (SC).
In that case the appointment was made in furtherance of a resolution of the Board and due notification had been effected giving complete powers to the concerned Executive Director to act and officiate as Chairman and Managing Director of the concern and this was so understood by both the parties to that case.
The facts are completely distinguishable and the said judgment is of no help to the appellants before this Court."
For the reasons aforestated, this case is fully covered by the aforestated judgment and I find no reason to interfere in the judgments and decrees of the learned courts below in this regular second appeal.
Consequently, the regular second appeal is dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.