AM Mir, J - This petition calls in question Government Order No. 625-GR of 1990 dated 451990 whereunder the petitioner, who was working as a Junior Engineer in Public Health Engineering Department, was dismissed from service.
This order was passed because the conduct and activities of the petitioner were considered to be detrimental and prejudicial to the security of the State.
The order also records the satisfaction of the Governor to the effect that holding of an inquiry in terms of clause (c) of the proviso to sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir will not be expedient and, as such, inquiry was dispensed with.
2.
The grounds taken in the petition are as under :-  1.
That the allegations of petitioner's activities being prejudicial to the security of the State are totally unfounded as Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Shergarhi had informed the Executive Engineer P.H.E.
under whom the petitioner was working, that the latter was taken into custody in connection with case FIR No. 69/1988, Police Station Rajbagh, for questioning purposes only and nothing has been proved during the investigation against him; 2.
That no charge-sheet was framed, no notice issued and no inquiry was held; 3.
That the Governor while dispensing with the inquiry in terms of Sec. 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, has acted arbitrarily.
This petition was filed before the Court on 1681990.
Same was admitted to hearing on 2781991.
No counter in the petition was filed, as a result of which last opportunity was granted for doing so on 8.9.1992.
Even than no counter was filed.
The Court, as a result of this omission, closed the right of the respondents to file the counter, on 17111992.
Thus no official stand of the respondents in the case is available.
The questions that arise in the petition are as under :-  (i) Is the power exercisable by the Government in terms of clause (c) of sub- sec (2) to Sec. 126 of the Constitution of J&K open to judicial review ?
(ii) Is the material available against the petitioner, of such nature as not to allow an inquiry to be conducted in the case ?
(iii) Is the material relevant and sufficient to lead to a conclusion that the petitioner's activities are prejudicial to security of the State ?
Besides this, by way of corollary an additional question which also would arise is, as to what is the material in respect of which, an inquiry, if held, would endanger the security of the State ?
3.
The law on the subject of doctrine of pleasure is oft-beaten.
Art. 311 of the Indian Constitution (Sec. 126 of the Constitution of J&K) admits certain exceptions to this doctrine.
This provision of law on the one hand lays down as to which authorities are competent to dismiss or remove a public servant from service.
Clause (2) of Art. 311 provides that no such person shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank, except after an inquiry is held.
It also lawys down the procedure to deal with such an inquiry.
To this right of inquiry also some exceptions are laid down.
One of such exceptions provided in clause (c) of the 2nd proviso of Art. 311 is as under :-  "Where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry."
In the present case the Governor has exercised this power and the petitioner was dismissed from service without any inquiry as the Governor, according to the impugned order, was satisfied that such an inquiry was not expedient in the interests of security of the State.
Hence petitioner's challenge.
4.
The power of the President to dispense with the inquiry as also that of the Governor, cannot be questioned.
However, the question whether a Court of law will be within its powers to test the exercise of such a power on the anvil of a judicial review remained unsettled for long.
The apex Court of the country was confronted with this question on the eve of a proclamation made by the President of India under Art. 356 of Indian Constitution, dissolving some State Legislature on the strength of reports furnished by the respective Governors.
The report furnished by Governor of Rajasthan informed that the Government of Rajasthan had played an obvious role in the episode at Ayodhya; that B.J.P.
was virtually controlled by RSS, BHP and Bajrang Dal which were banned organisations but the ban was not actually implemented; that as a result of this role communal disturbances took place and arson and looting was witnessed etc. etc.
Likewise the proclamations of similar nature were made with regard to Governments of Himachal Pardesh, Madhya Pardesh and Nagaland.
The validity of such proclamations was challenged, besides others, on the ground that the report of the Governors was actuated by political mala fides.
The material on which the report was furnished was irrational and irrelevant.
The Supreme Court while addressing itself to the justiciability of such reports and also the Presidential proclamation replied the question in affirmative.
It was held that although the Constitution places implicit faith in a State Governor yet if his report is actuated by legal mala fides, President's action under Art. 356 was also capable of being vitiated.
5.
What is noticeable in this judgment is that sufficiency or relevance of the material upon which satisfaction was recorded by the President was also put to judicial scrutiny.
The dimensions of the President's action were also indicated.
6.
The questions involved in the present case directly came up for consideration before the apex court in case, Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, reported in AIR 1985 SC 1416.
In Tulsi Ram Patel's case also a Government servant was dismissed from service and inquiry, as required in terms of Art. 311(2) was dispensed with in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Governor by clause (c) to the proviso.
In this case the Supreme Court held that once a power under second proviso to Art. 311(2) has been exercised, an inquiry is ruled out as this proviso lays down exceptions to the requirement of holding an inquiry required under the general terms of clause (2) of Art. 311.
The phrase "this clause will not apply" was held to be mandatory and the assertion that a dismissed Government servant was left without any remedy was rebutted by holding that he had still two remedies available; one that of a departmental appeal and the other of a judicial review.
Hence the answer.
7.
The majority view taken by their Lordships in Tulsi Ram Patel's case held that the decision of the authority while dispensing with the inquiry in exercise of powers under second proviso to clause (2) of Art. 311 was justiciable.
A full-dressed discussion of clause (c) of the proviso, as is applicable in our case, was made by their Lordships.
The satisfaction of the President or the Governor according to this authoritative finding must relate to the expediency or inexpediency of holding an inquiry in the interests of security of the State.
The genesis of the word "expedient" right from its dictionary meaning to its use in political or legal parlance was traced out.
It was also laid down that satisfaction of the Head of the State may be based upon information received with the aid and assistance of Council of Ministers or the authorities.
Such satisfaction may be arrived at as a result of a secret information received by the Governor about the brewing danger to the security of the State.
Their Lordships in this judgment seem to have touched the marginal point involved in the case as also in our case.
The point is as to which material is of such a character in respect of which holding of an inquiry will be inexpedient and will endanger the security of the State.
In their wisdom their Lordships after touching the question seem to have left the same unreplied.
It was, however, held that disclosure of a source from which the information was received may result into liquidation of the source in future.
Such a situation would result in non-availability of future information.
Quoting their Lordships verbatim we find the ratio as under :-  "The question under clause (c) however is not whether the security of the State has been affected or not, for the expression used in clause (c) is "in the interest of the security of the State" may be affected by actual acts or even the likelihood of such acts taking place.
Further, what is required under clause (c) is not the satisfaction of the President or the Governor, as the case may be, that the interest of the security of the State is or will be affected but his satisfaction that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient to hold an inquiry as contemplated by Article 311(2).
The satisfaction of the President or the Governor must, therefore, be with respect to the expediency or inexpediency of holding an inquiry in the interest of the security of the State.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, defines the word "inexpedient" as meaning "not expedient; disadvantageous in the circumstances, unadvisable, impolitic".
The same dictionary defines "expedient" as meaning inter alia "disadvantageous, fit, proper, or suitable to the circumstances of the case".
Webester's Third New International Dictionary also defines the term "expedient" as meaning inter alia, "characterized by suitability, practicality, and efficiency in achieving a particular and fit, proper, or advantageous under the circumstances."
It must be borne in mind that the satisfaction required by the clause (c) is of the Constitutional Head of the whole country or of the State.
Under Article 74(1) of the Constitution, the satisfaction of the President would be arrived at with the aid and advice of, his Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister as the Head and in the case of a State by reason of the provisions of Article 163(1) by the Governor acting with the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head.
whenever, therefore, the President or the Governor in the constitutional sense is satisfied that it will not be advantageous or fit or proper or suitable, or politic in the interest of the security, or politic in the interest of the security of the State to hold an inquiry, he would be entitled to dispense with it under clause (c).
The satisfaction so reached by the President or the Governor must necessarily be subjective satisfaction.
Expediency involves matters of policy.
Satisfaction may be arrived at as a result of secret information received by the Government about the brewing danger to the security of the State and like matters.
There may be other factors which may be required to be considered, weighed and balanced in order to reach the requisite satisfaction whether holding an inquiry would be expedient or not.
If the requisite satisfaction has been reached as a result of secret information received by the Government, making known such information may very often result in disclosure of the source of such information.
Once known, the particular source from which the information was received would no more be available to the Government.
The reasons for the satisfaction reached by the President or the Governor under clause (c) cannot, therefore, be required to be recorded in the order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank nor can they be made public."
A perusal of the above reproduced para shows that a line of distinction was drawn between the orders to be passed in terms of proviso (b) and (c) of proviso to clause (2) of Art. 311.
Under clause (b) reasons for dispensing with the inquiry were required to be recorded, whileas no reasons are required to be recorded under clause (c).
Their Lordships seem to have been convinced that the material if made public in cases governed by proviso (c) was fraught with danger of imperilling the security of the State.
We do not find any exhaustive elucidation as to what material has the potential of endangering the security of the State.
8.
Suffice it to say that cases, where power in terms of clauses (b) and (c) and 2nd proviso to clause (2) of Art. 311 is required to be exercised, the power of judicial review is squarely available.
Judicial review is also available where the satisfaction of the Head of the State has been reached on legal mala fides or is based upon extraneous, irrelevant or irrational grounds.
9.
The question of judicial review of such an order again came up before the apex Court in case titled AK Kaul and another v. Union of India and another, reported in A.I.R. 1995 SC 1403 : 1995(3) SCT 15 (SC).
A distinction between a judicial review and justiciability was drawn.
It was held that an order passed under clause (c) of second proviso to Art. 311(2) is subject to judicial review and its validity can be examined by the court on the ground that satisfaction of Head of the State was vitiated by mala fides or being based on wholly extraneous and irrelevant grounds within the limits laid down in AIR 1994 SC 1918.
In this connection their Lordships of the Supreme Court (Aggarwal and Faizan-ud-Din, JJ) held as under :-  "We are, therefore, of the opinion that an order passed under clause (c) of the Second proviso to Article 311(2) is subject to judicial review and its validity can be examined by the court on the ground that satisfaction of the President or the Governor is vitiated by mala fides or is based on wholly extraneous or irrelevant grounds within the limits laid down in SR Bommai (1994 AIR SC 2946)".
In this judgment their Lordships also held that to enable the Court to exercise this power of judicial review effectively, it must have the necessary material before it to determine whether the satisfaction of the President or the Governor, as the case may be, has been arrived at in accordance with law and is not vitiated by mala fides and extraneous factors.
The view expressed by the apex court in this case was that non-existence of a requirement of recording reasons for not holding such an inquiry does not mean that the court cannot go into the legality or otherwise of the order.
The ratio laid down in SR Bommai's case (supra) was followed and it was held here also that the provisions of Art. 74(2) and 163(c) of the Constitution which preclude the Court from inquiring into the question whether any, and if so, what advice was tendered by the ministers to the President or the Governor, could not be resorted to by the Government for withholding the production of such material before the Court.
However, the privilege claimed under sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act in respect of a particular document or record would form an exception to this general rule.
Thus the Supreme Court in AK Kaul's case as also in SR Bommai's case, held that while exercising judicial review the Court can go up to the material which was placed before the Head of the State and from which the latter derived his satisfaction.
It is after going through these questions that their Lordships observed :-  "In our opinion, therefore, in case the validity of an order passed under clause (c) of the second proviso to Art. 311(2) is assailed before a court or a Tribunal it is open to the Court or the Tribunal to examine whether the satisfaction of the President or the Governor is vitiated by mala fides or is based on wholly extraneous or irrelevant grounds and for that purpose the Government is obliged to place before the Court or the Tribunal the relevant material on the basis of which the satisfaction was arrived at subject to the claim of privilege under section 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act to withhold production of a particular document or record.
Even in cases where such a privilege is claimed the Government concerned must disclose before the Court or Tribunal the nature of the activities in which the Government employee is said to have indulged in."
Coming home, a Single Bench of this Court (Khan, J) while deciding SWP No. 217/90 titled Nazir Ahmed Dar v. State and others, reported in 1995 SLJ page 19, has after relying upon Tulsi Ram Patel's case held that such an order is subject to judicial review and the material can be gone into by the Court.
10.
A Division Bench of this Court (Bhawani Singh and Kawoosa, JJ) in case Rais Ahmad Gazi and others v. State and others, reported in 1997 SLJ page 178, was confronted with exactly the same question.
Their Lordships drew a distinction between anti-national activities and activities with respect to which it will not be expedient to hold an inquiry.
It was held that howsoever grave the charges the nature of charges per se does not suggest that inquiry should not be based on some record.
It was also held that the Court should not be swayed by the words used in the order under challenge.
The Court is duty bound to see for itself whether there is any material or record available to uphold the order.
11.
I venture to reiterate that even after being clear about these prepositions, we have little case law before us to guide us on the point as to what material can be characterised as one, which if exposed, would imperil the security of the State.
12.
The term `security of the State' came under discussion before the Supreme Court in Ramesh Thaper v. State of Madras, reported in 1950 SCR 594.
"Which material could be characterised as such, the entry or sale of which in the State of Madras, would endanger the security of the State ?
"was the question before their Lordships of the apex Court.
Their Lordships expressed the view that "the security of the State must be restricted to those aggravated forms of prejudicial activities which were calculated to endanger the security of the State."
13.
In short security of the State can be said to have been endangered when there is a potential threat to the sovereignty of the State, either from internal turbulence or external aggression.
There may be no hard and fast rules to measure the scales of potentialities of prejudicial activities.
14.
Apart from the apprehension of defusion of the source of information referred to in AK Kaul's case supra, there may be cases where the Government servants may have dealt with some classified material and transmitted the same to an enemy country; there may be a case where the Government servant might have been involved in activities connected with some external agencies which, if exposed, again create insecurity in general public.
There might be a conspiracy of over-throwing or destabilising the Government which also the Head of the State may not deem proper to make public.
These are some of the situations where perceivably the Governor may not like to hold inquiry as the same will not be expedient.
Expediency to hold inquiry may be adjudged on scales of mental perception.
The material by every stretch of imagination should be considered explosive for security of the State.
Their lordships in Tulsi Ram Patel's case have not in their wisdom thought it necessary to dilate upon the contours of such mental perception.
15.
The instances referred to above reflect some of the exigencies but do not form any exhaustive list of such eventualities.
The final right of decision in this field is that of the President or the Governor.
16.
The object of above discussion, however, is that the Governor, while dispensing with an inquiry, under clause (c) of Second Proviso supra, must be genuinely satisfied that the activities of the delinquent were of such aggravated form which could be capable of endangering the security of the State.
In Ramesh Thaper's case, supra, the apex Court held that here (mere) act of incitement to violent crimes or causing disturbance to public order would not come within the mischief of `security of the State'.
17.
After discussing the above on the points involved, we find that the order impugned is subject to judicial review and the court can go through the material on which the Governor had relied while passing the same.
The relevance and sufficiency of the material can be gone into by the Court.
The Court can also see for itself as to whether or not the material against the petitioner was such which if put to an inquiry would be prejudicial to the security of the State.
18.
I have examined the record produced before me by Mr. Qadiri.
A joint dossier was prepared by the police Department in respect of seven Government servants and referred to the Governor.
The opening clause of the letter addressed to the Governor refers to seven communications received from DIG, CID(CI) suggesting that the Government servants named therein are under detention and be dismissed from service as their continuation in service will prove harmful to the security of the State.
Petitioner figures at S.No.
7.
The allegations against him as reflected by this communication are reproduced in verbatim as under :-  "The subject was arrested in case FIR No. 69/88 u/s 3/4 TADA P/S Rajbagh.
During the course of interrogation he disclosed that he was motivated to undergo the arms training to POK.
He did not however personally go for training but motivated two others to undergo to training.
He has not been detained formally under the PSA so far."
The concerned Advisor to Governor refers the matter to the Governor.
The latter in para 6 of the file takes the final decision by holding that all aspects of the case were considered and he was satisfied that in the interest of security of the State it was not expedient to hold an inquiry into this case.
As such the petitioner was removed from service.
Order impugned followed by way of implementation of that decision  19.
The allegation as reflected above against the petitioner is that he was arrested in FIR No. 69/88 under sec. 3/4 TADA P/S Rajbagh.
During the course of interrogation, according to the dossier he disclosed that he had motivated two others to undergo training in Pak-occupied Kashmir.
It is clear that he has not gone for training himself and was not formally detained under the provisions of Public Safety Act.
The allegation emanates out of his own statement, which ordinarily could not be read against him and there is no other material against him.
Even if this statement is believed to be an admission then also the prejudicial act he has committed is that of motivating two persons to go and receive arms training in P.O.K.
It is also not borne out by any testimony as to whether or not those two persons had while acting upon the advice of the petitioner gone to P.O.K.
for arms training.
The allegations on their own construction are so trifling that even ordinary law of the land would have taken care of them.
The petitioner has never been detained under P.S.A.
and as shown by the certificate issued by the Sub- Divisional Police Officer Shergarhi (annexure P3 to the writ petition) petitioner was taken into police custody for questioning purposes only and nothing adverse against him was found during the investigations.
The question that attracts our attention is whether this material was sufficient to terminate the services of the petitioner.
I find it was not.
I cannot resist the temptation of reflecting upon the nature of this material for determining its potential to endanger the security of the State.
I fail to understand as to how could an inquiry into the afore-mentioned conduct of the petitioner be prejudicial to the security of the State.
The allegations against the petitioner per se are wearing thin of their credibility.
The assertion of the Governor that it would not be expedient to hold the inquiry is a stand which falls down like a house of cards when thrashed on the touchstone of judicial scrutiny.
Not only that, the examination of the file reveals that the style in which satisfaction of the Governor has been recorded lacks application of mind also.
20.
That being so, I find that the material against the petitioner in the present case is not only insufficient but also irrelevant.
The satisfaction recorded by the Head of the State in respect of dispensing with inquiry is wayward and mala fide.
I call it mala fide because there is absolutely no basis on which such satisfaction could have been recorded.
21.
Therefore, I find that the order impugned is vitiated by law and, as such, not maintainable.
I accordingly allow this petition, quash the impugned order and direct the respondents to reinstate the petitioner into service with all consequential benefits which accrue to him after such reinstatement.
Record has been returned to Mr. Qadiri.
Petition allowed.