KS Kumaran, J - Petitioner-Chander Singh had been working with the second respondent-Haryana Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd (hereinafter referred to as "second respondent-Sugar Mills"), Rohtak as a press worker.
On 2211994, he was placed under suspension with immediate effect as per order Annexure P.1.
A chargesheet dated 3111994 (Annexure P.2) was issued to him alleging that he was on duty from 200 am to 1000 am on 2211994, but, he had left his place of duty at 915 am without any information, which amounted to a serious misconduct.
The petitioner sent his reply, Annexure P.3 dated 721994 denying the same and stating that he was in front of the workshop when the Managing Director abused him, and that the petitioner's objection to the language was resented by the Managing Director resulting in the issuance of chargesheet.
But, on 671994, vide Annexure P5, the petitioner was reinstated with immediate effect without prejudice to the departmental inquiry, and was also paid off with immediate effect.
The petitioner made a demand under Annexure P.6 dated 12121994.
The cancilation proceedings which followed failed as is seen from Annexure P.7 dated 3131995.
The petitioner approached the Government (Ist respondent) requesting that the industrial dispute may be referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Government rejected his request as per Annexure P.8 dated 29.12.1995 on the ground that the petitioner's case did not fall under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 "as it is a dispute regarding retirement".
2.
That is why, the petitioner has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus for quashing Annexure P.8 dated 29.12.1995 and for directing the firstrespondent-State of Haryana to refer the dispute for adjudication by the Labour Court.
3.
The first respondent-State of Haryana has filled the reply alleging that the management had stated that the petitioner was paid off on account of retirement from service and, therefore, the petitioner's case does not fall within the term 'termination' or 'retrenchment' as defined in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The first respondent has also alleged that the petitioner failed to contradict the stand of the management that he was retired from service since the petitioner had submitted a certificate issued by the Registrar of Births and Deaths, Rohtak wherein his date of birth has been shown as 2271934.
The first respondent also alleged that after retirement the petitioner submitted another certificate wherein his date of birth is shown as 321938.
According to the first respondent, since the petitioner was retired from service on his attaining the age of 60 years, there was no industrial dispute as contemplated under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and, therefore, his request was rightly rejected.
4.
The second respondent-Sugar Mills filled similar reply alleging that the petitioner was retired from service on 3171994 on his attaining the age of superannuation and also that the retaining allowance from 771994 to 3171994 and the suspension allowance from 2211994 to 671994 are ready for payment.
The second respondent also alleged that the gratuity has been paid to the petitioner on 2191996.
According to the second respondent, the final order on the chargesheet dated 3111994 was passed on 2971994 (Annexure R.1).
The second respondent has also taken the plea that since it was a case of retirement, the matter was not referred for adjudication by the Labour Court.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for both the sides and perused the record.
6.
Though the petitioner was suspended by order dated 2211994 and a chargesheet was issued to him on 3111994, no inquiry appears to have been held till 671994 when the suspension of the petitioner was revoked reinstating him into service and at the same time, paying him off with immediate effect.
The contention of the respondent is that the petitioner was retired from service on his attaining that age of superannuation since the date of birth of the petitioner was 2271934, though the petitioner subsequently produced a certificate to show that he was born on 321938.
According to the respondent, the petitioner's service was neither terminated nor was he retrenched as contemplated under section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and therefore, the Government was justified in refusing to refer the matter to Labour Court.
7.
We find that the charge against the petitioner was that though he was to be on duty from 200 am to 1000 am on 2211994, he had left the place of duty at 915 am without information and thereby, he had committed a serious misconduct.
No inquiry was held although an inquiry Officer was appointed.
But, on 671994 while reinstating him to duty, the petitioner was paid off with immediate effect.
The petitioner contends that no retirement order was issued to him nor was he paid the retirement benefits.
Though he is stated to have been paid off with immediate effect from 671994, the second respondent-Sugar Mills has stated in paragraph 5 of its reply that the petitioner has been retired from service on 3171994 on his attaining the age of superannuation and that the subsistence allowance for the suspension period amounting to Rs. 617476 and the retaining allowance for the period from 771994 to 3171994 are ready for payment.
There is also a dispute as to the date of birth of the petitioner.
Section 2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") defines `Industrial Dispute' as follows :-  "Industrial dispute means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which connected with the employment or non-employmment or with the conditions of labour of any person".
Section 2A of the Act provides as follows :-  "2A.
Dismissal etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute.
Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the disputes."
Section 2(00) of the Act defines 'retrenchment' as follows :-  "retrenchment means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not include -  (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or  (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or  (b) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or  (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health;" So, as per Section 2A of the Act, when the employer retrenches or otherwise terminates the service of a workman, any difference or dispute between the workman and his employer connected with or arising out of such retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute.
8.
In view of the definition of retrenchment, it is for the employer to show that the workman was retired on superannuation when it is questioned by the workman.
Therefore, whether the petitioner was retired on his attaining the age of superannuation or whether his services were terminated or was he retrenched was a disputed question of fact, which the State Government was not entitled to adjudicate upon, whereas the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon such a dispute lies with the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be.
The Government cannot abrogate to itself the power to decide the industrial dispute itself and refuse to refer the dispute for adjudication by the Labour Court stating that the petitioner's case was one of retirement.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the decision in Tollygunge Club Ltd v. The 5th Industrial Tribunal of West Bengal and others 1985 Lab.
IC 103, wherein it was held as under:-  "Sub-clause (b) of Section 2(oo) excluded the case of superannuation but in order to attract the provision of sub-clauses (b) in my opinion two tests are required viz. (i) a stipulation in regard to the time of retirement in the contract of service between the employer and employee, and (ii) the stipulation must be in regard to the age of superannuation.
In the facts of the instant case the contract of employment as contained in the letter of appointment dated 1091973 recorded that the retirement age and benefits would be as per the existing rules.
There was no proof of age.
Neither any rules were produced either before the Tribunal or before this court at the time of hearing.
The employer has failed to discharge the onus in terms of the requirement of Section 2(oo) of the Act."
10.
In these circumstances, we are of the view that the State Government cannot decide the dispute itself by holding that the petitioner's case is one of retirement and not of termination or retrenchment and, therefore, there is no need to refer the dispute for adjudication by the Labour Court.
Of course, the Government is entitled to prima facie examine the merits of the case only for the purpose of ascertaining whether an industrial dispute exists or not and whether the dispute raised is fictitions or a frivolous one.
But, the Government was not entitled to say that this is a case of retirement, meaning thereby that there was no retrenchment or termination.
11.
Therefore, we are of the view that the order Annexure P.8 dated 29.12.1995 passed by the Government declining to refer the dispute for adjudication by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
12.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed, and the order?
Annexure P.8 is quashed and the first respondent-State of Haryana is directed to consider the matter afresh in the light of the observations made above and refer the dispute for adjudication to the appropriate Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal for adjudication within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a copy or this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.