HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are privately managed Institutions presently engaged in giving instruction for the MBA Course.
60 seats in each Institution have been created with 30 seats deemed to be free seats and 30 seats to be payment seats.
It is the petitioners case that Guru Jambheshwar University (hereinafter called the University, had issued a Prospectus for admission for the academic year 1997-98 and in this circular, the University had kept 30 seats out of the total 60 seats reserved for candidates belonging to the NRI/NRL sponsored/Industry sponsored/foreign nation categories.
As per the prospectus, the fee made payable for the aforesaid categories was also stipulated.
The respondents, thereafter, issued Annexure P-1 dated 6th February, 1996 by which it was directed that private Institutions such as the petitioners would charge Rs. 3400/- for each free seat and Rs. 34,500/- for each payment seat.
This order was conveyed to the petitioners after the admission for the year 1996-97 had been finalised.
The petitioners, thereafter, filed representations Annexures P-2 and P-3 with the petition before the respondents pointing out that the fee structure fixed vide Annexure P-1 was arbitrary and contrary to the judgments of the Supreme Court.
In this connection, reference has now been made to Unni Krishnan JP and others etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others etc. etc., AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2178 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
511 as reiterated in TMA Pal Foundation and others v. State of Karnataka and others, (1996) 5 SCC 8 : 1996(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 167 : 1995(4) S.C.T.
447.
It was also pointed out that the University Govt. Institutions having identical courses had been permitted to charge higher fees than the petitioners and this too was contrary to the judgments of the Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra).
It appears that the representations mentioned aforesaid did not find favour within the respondents and no decision was taken thereon.
The petitioners have, accordingly, filed the present writ petition.
2.
A reply has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and it has been pointed out that the fee structure had been fixed by a Committee constituted by the State Government for the Session 1996-97 and another Committee had been constituted to fix the fee for the year 1997-98 and that the decision of the Committee had also been finalised during the pendency of this writ petition.
It has further been pointed out that the Committee that had been constituted earlier had fixed the fees for the three sessions i.e. 1994-95, 1995-96 and 1996-97 keeping in view the actual expenditure incurred by the self-financing Institutions as well as Government Colleges on actual basis as directed by the Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra).
Dealing in particular with the case of petitioner No. 1, the respondents have pointed out that the M.B.A.
Course that had been started by the said Institution had not been sanctioned by the State Government and as such, the case of the said petitioner was, in any case, distinguishable.
In Unni Krishnan's case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court directed as under :-  "(6) (a) Every State Government shall forthwith constitute a Committee to fix the ceiling on the fees chargeable by the professional college or class of professional Colleges, as the case may be.
The Committee shall consist of a Vice Chancellor, Secretary for Education (or such Joint Secretary as he may nominate) and Director, Technical Education.
The Committee shall make such enquiry as it thinks appropriate.
It shall, however, give opportunity to such professional Colleges (or their association(s), if any), to place such material as they think fit.
It shall, however, not be bound to give any personal hearing to any-one or to follow any technical rules of law.
The Committee shall fix the fee once every three years or at such longer intervals, as it may think appropriate."
3.
It has been averred by the petitioners and also argued by their learned counsel that the Committee even if constituted for the year 1996-97 had given no opportunity to the petitioners and similarly situated Instructions (institutions?)
to provide the data and inputs that were necessary in order to arrive at a fair fee structure and as this fact has not been denied by the respondents in their reply, the fee fixation was contrary to the Supreme Court judgment and could not be sustained.
To my mind, this argument of the learned counsel has merit.
The specific stand in the writ petition is that the Committee had not given any opportunity to the petitioners to produce any data etc. which to my mind, was necessary for enabling them to arrive at a correct decision.
As a matter of fact, in Unni Krishnan's case (supra) itself, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed that it was perhaps essential that educational institutions which were not receiving State aid, be allowed to charge a higher fee than the governmental institutions.
It is, therefore, apparent in the light of the admitted facts that the fee structure fixed by Annexure P-1 with respect to the petitioners and other private institutions was substantially lower than the fee that had been fixed by the Committee with respect to the Universities and Government Institutions.
To my mind - therefore, Annexure P-1 cannot be sustained.
4.
The argument of the State counsel with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition qua petitioner No. 1, however, has merit.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioners does not press this petition qua petitioner No. 1 in view of the objections raised by the respondents that the M.B.A.
Course had been started unauthorisedly, but states that as this matter was before the Civil Court, he would await its outcome.
5.
This writ petition is accordingly, allowed, Annexure P-1 is quashed and a direction issued to the respondents to refix the fee for the year 1996-97 keeping in view the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case (supra).
The petitioners may, accordingly, make a fresh representation to the respondents giving full details in respect of their claims and the representation will be disposed of within a period of four months thereafter.
It is also directed that till such time, the Committee takes a decision on the representation, the students who had sought admission to the petitioner Institutions would not be compelled to pay any higher fee on account of the quashing of Annexure P-1.
No costs.
Dasti Order.
Petiton allowed.