Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The sequence of events is - a summary of evidence - a "summary court martial" - an order of punishment - and the writ petition dismissed.
Hence this appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
The appellant was recruited in the Indian Army on December 28, 1977.
On November 1, 1985, a test was held.
It was noticed that certain answer sheets had been tampered with.
It was suspected that the appellant was involved in the case.
He was attached to the Zonal Recruiting Headquarters at Pune.
A summary of evidence was conducted.
Thereafter, summary court martial proceedings were ordered.
The charges were served on the appellant on November 5, 1986.
It was inter alia alleged that he "at Jamnagar on May 24, 1986, altered the answers to question No.-------" pertaining to the Matric Entry Rate of Clerks/Store Keepers Technical held at Jamnagar.
The charge was proved.
A penalty of "imprisonment in civil prison for six months; to be reduced in rank and to be dismissed from service------" was awarded.
The petition to the Army authorities having been rejected, he filed the writ petition.
The learned Single Judge found no merit and dismissed the writ petition.
2.
Mr. Johal, learned counsel for the appellant, has contended that the proceedings against the appellant are vitiated as the evidence recorded during the court of inquiry had been taken into consideration during the court martial proceedings against the appellant.
Secondly, it has been contended that Colonel Mehta who had conducted an inquiry could not have presided over the court martial proceedings.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the provisions of rule 39 of the Indian Army Rules in support of his submission.
3.
The claim made on behalf of the appellant has been controverted by Major Harish Mitra who has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
4.
As for the first contention, it deserves mention that the learned Single Judge, after examination of record, has come to a firm finding that "the evidence was recorded during the summary court martial.
The proceedings of the court of inquiry were not taken into consideration at all while deciding the case.
It was the evidence during the trial, on the basis of which the petitioner was found guilty and sentenced."
Nothing has been pointed out to show that this finding is not correct.
The observations having been made after perusal of the original record, we find no ground to take a different view.
5.
Regarding the second contention as advanced by the learned counsel, it may be mentioned that under the Army Act there are four kinds of court martial proceedings.
These are :-  (a) general courts-martial;  (b) district courts-martial;  (c) summary general courts-martial; and  (d) summary courts-martial.
So far as the summary court-martial is concerned, section 116 specifically provides that it may be "held by the Commanding Officer of any corps, department or detachment of the regular Army, and he shall alone constitute the court".
Thus, it is clear that so far as summary court martial proceedings are concerned, the Commanding Officer alone constitutes the court.
This is precisely what has been done in the present case.
Still further, the powers of the summary court martial have been delineated in section 120 of the Act.
The action taken against the appellant is in strict conformity with the provision.
It has not been shown that the provisions of section 120 were not followed.
6.
Mr. Johal contends that in view of the provisions contained in clause (2) of rule 29 of the Indian Army Rules, 1954, the Commanding Officer was not eligible to serve on the court.
7.
A perusal of this rule shows that an officer is disqualified from serving on "a general or district or a summary general court martial" if he has "investigated the charges before trial----------."
The provision is not applicable to a summary court martial.
8.
No other point has been raised.
9.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the appeal.
It is consequently dismissed.
However there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.