VS Aggarwal, J - Sohan Singh petitioner invokes Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the award of Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
2.
The relevant facts are that petitioner had joined the Haryana State Electricity Board on 2551956.
He was promoted as Line Man in December, 1958 and as Assistant Foreman in 1970.
The petitioner was a confirmed employee.
He had proceeded on leave.
He came to join the duties but he was not allowed to do so.
His services were terminated.
The petitioner challenged the termination of his service by raising an industrial dispute.
He had contended that he had rendered more than 21 years of service.
3.
Respondent No. 2 contested the claim of the workman and took up the preliminary objection that the head office of Haryana State Electricity Board was situated at Panchkula.
The Labour Court at Chandigarh had no jurisdiction to entertain the dispute.
The petitioner-workman is alleged to have served at Sadhaura.
The demand notice was served after 10 years.
The petitioner had not submitted any medical certificate.
No leave application was received.
4.
The learned Labour Court vide the impugned award held that the petitioner-workman had never served at Chandigarh.
There was no order passed against the workman at Chandigarh and the head office of respondent No. 2 is at Panchkula in District Ambala.
The petitioner was also held to be having no connection with the office of Chief Engineer at Chandigarh.
Accordingly, it was held that no cause of action had arisen at Chandigarh and with these findings the reference was dismissed for want of territorial jurisdiction.
This has led to the filing of the present writ petition.
5.
Notice had been issued to respondent No. 2.
But none appeared on behalf of Haryana State Electricity Board on 2791993.
Even when the writ petition had been listed for arguments, there has been no appearance on behalf of respondent No. 2.
In these circumstances, the Court did not have the advantage of hearing the counsel for respondent No. 2.
6.
The short question that comes up for consideration is as to whether the Labour Court at Chandigarh has the jurisdiction to entertain or hear the reference, or not.
It is not being disputed that the petitioner was posted in Haryana and not at Chandigarh and all the actions against the petitioner vis-a-vis not allowing him to join the duties took place in Haryana and not at Chandigarh.
On behalf of the petitioner it was urged that since the head office of respondent No. 2 at the relevant time was in Chandigarh and subsequently shifted to Panchkula, therefore, the appropriate Government would be the Government of Union Territory, Chandigarh.
Reference was, therefore, rightly made.
Reliance was placed by the petitioner on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M/s Lipton Ltd and another v. Their Employees, AIR 1959 SC 676.
In the cited case it had been found that Lipton Limited was incorporated in England.
Its registered office was in London.
It had been operating in India.
The business was carried on by a branch with its head office at Calcutta.
The Delhi office of Lipton Limited employed peons and sweepers etc.
The question that arose for consideration before the Supreme Court was as to whether the appropriate Government in case of disputes with respect to Delhi office would be the Government of Delhi or not.
It was held that such a dispute could be entertained and referred to at Delhi to the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal.
In paragraph 8 the Court observed :  "It may be made clear, however, at this stage that one of the points taken before the Industrial Tribunal on behalf of the Lipton Ltd was that the Industrial Tribunal had no jurisdiction to make an award in respect of employees of the Delhi office who were employed outside the State of Delhi.
This point of jurisdiction was decided against the appellant and the Industrial Tribunal pointed out that all the workmen of the Delhi office, whether they worked in Delhi or not, received their salaries from the Delhi office; they were controlled from the Delhi office in the matter of leave, transfer, supervision etc. and, therefore, the Delhi State Government was the appropriate Government within the meaning of Section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 relating to the dispute which arose between the Lipton Ltd and the Union and under Section 18 of the said Act the award made by the Tribunal was binding on all persons employed in the Delhi office.
The appellate Tribunal upheld the decision of the Industrial Tribunal on this point and though this question of jurisdiction was raised in the appeals before us, it was not seriously pressed by the learned Attorney General.
We are of the view that the Industrial Tribunal had jurisdiction to adjudicate on the dispute between the Lipton Ltd and its workmen of the Delhi office.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of M/s. Little Sons and Co v. Amar Nath and others, 1978 Lab.
IC 430 had considered the said decision of the Supreme Court and held that these observations do not serve as an authority for the proposition that reference of the dispute must be made within the territory in which the head office of the company was situated.
In fact as one reads the decision of M/s Little Sons and Co (supra), the Division Bench of this Court felt that it is not necessary that dispute be referred where head office is situated.
In paragraph 13 an example was quoted and it was felt :-  "Let us take an hypothetical case in which the workmen of a particular business are being victimised in State `A' and its controlling office is situate in State `B'.
If it is held that the Government of State `A' is not competent to make a reference, the affected workmen would necessarily have to approach the Government of State `B'.
That Government might not be concerned about the industrial unrest in a sister State or it might decide not to interfere in the affairs of that State.
Even if it does make a reference the dispute would have to be decided by a Labour Tribunal or a Court appointed by it which in a given case might be located far away from the place where the dispute actually arose.
In that case, both the parties to the dispute might be confronted with innumerable difficulties like appearance before a court which is situate at a great distance and procuring witnesses to appear before it.
Such a state of affairs would completely frustrate the object of the Act.
When this situation was put to the learned counsel for the petitioner-Company, he simply stated that if such was the requirement of law, the parties and their witnesses would have to undergo such ordeals.
However, a court of law cannot comprehend such situation without entertaining serious apprehensions in its mind."
The conclusions were drawn in paragraph 19 and the Court returned the findings :-  "From what has been stated above, it is obvious that for determining the appropriate Government competent to make a reference of the dispute due regard has to be paid to the place where a dispute arises.
When this principle of law is applied to the facts found by the learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court which have been extracted in the earlier part of this judgment, it becomes obvious that it was competent for the State of Punjab to make the impugned reference."
7.
Paying due regard where the dispute arose, the facts can again be delineated.
The petitioner was posted at Sadhaura in Haryana.
He was not allowed to join the duties at that place.
He never served at Chandigarh.
There was no order passed against the petitioner at Chandigarh.
The petitioner had no connection with the office of Chief Engineer at Chandigarh.
Therefore, giving due regard to the place where the dispute arose, it is patent that the reference could only be made in Haryana particular where the petitioner was serving and not at Chandigarh.
8.
Otherwise also at this stage, there is no ground to exercise the extra- ordinary jurisdiction of this Court in entertaining the writ petition.
During the pendency of the dispute before the Labour Court, the office of respondent No. 2 shifted to Panchkula.
The witnesses, if any, are more conveniently available in Haryana, normally the place where the incident took place.
Consequently, there is no ground to set aside the impugned award.
For these reasons, the petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.