VS Aggarwal, J - Khadi Ashram, GT Road, Panipat, is a registered society registered under the Societies Registration Act.
By virtue of the present petition, the petitioner society seeks quashing of the award of Labour Court Ambala dated 27th April, 1985.
The learned Labour Court held that the termination of the service of the workman Sat Narain (respondent No. 2) is illegal and unjustified.
He was entitled to reinstatement and continuity of service with full back wages.
It was directed that the workman shall account for all the losses and shortages and get the record completed.
2.
The relevant facts alleged are that Sat Narain, workman was in charge of Woollen Production Centre, Gohana.
During the years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976- 77, certain shortages in the stock were discovered by the auditors.
There were some embezzlement of money.
It was found that in the year 1974-75, the workman purchased woollen yarn but the register indicated that he had purchased the woollen yarn for a higher amount.
There was an enbezzlement of Rs. 300/- in three transactions.
Similarly in the year 1975-76, the audit report showed certain shortage of woollen goods in stock.
In the year 1976- 77, it was discovered that the woollen yarn received by the workman was not reflected fully in the books maintained at the Centre.
690 Kgs.
of woollen yarn had been received but in the stock, woollen yarn was not available.
Explanation of the workman had been called.
With respect to the year 1974-75, the workman had stated that he would deposit Rs. 100/- from his salary.
He even admitted the shortage with respect to the year 1975-76.
He was asked to give his reply.
Thereafter a charge-sheet was served on the workman.
Sh. Bhanwar Singh was appointed as the enquiry officer.
The enquiry officer went to the spot and submitted the report dated 22nd August, 1977.
Thereafter, the services of the workman were dispensed with.
3.
It is asserted that the award of the Labour Court cannot be sustained whereby it has been held that no enquiry officer has been appointed.
According to the petitioner, the order appointing the enquiry officer is not traceable but the record shows that the enquiry officer had been appointed and the workman had even admitted the shortage.
Therefore, the workman was rightly dismissed.
The findings of the Presiding Officer Labour Court, Ambala are, therefore assailed.
4.
In the reply filed, the workman opposes the petition and asserts that the Labour Court after appreciating the evidence had recorded the findings in his favour.
There is no error apparent on the face of the record.
It was denied that any domestic enquiry was held or any enquiry officer was appointed.
Plea was raised that the appellant even had been acquitted of the same charges in appeal by the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge Sonepat.
5.
As is apparent from the resume of the facts given above, the short question that comes up for consideration is if there was any domestic enquiry held before terminating the services of the workman or not.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, vide the a impugned award, had held that no enquiry officer was appointed nor was any enquiry held.
There were no reports submitted by the enquiry officer.
Even Bhanwar Singh, the alleged enquiry officer, has not been examined.
On basis of these findings, the impugned award was passed.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that an enquiry officer had been appointed but the order appointing the enquiry officer has been misplaced.
The learned counsel contended that the report of the enquiry officer is on record, copy of which is Ex. P4/T.
The respondent-workman's counsel, on the contrary, as expected, alleged that no such enquiry officer had been appointed.
In the present case, the order appointing the enquiry officer is not forthcoming.
A perusal of Annexure P4/T indicates that Bhanwar Singh had simply conducted the stock checking.
It is a letter written by Bhanwar Singh to the Secretary Khadi Ashram Panipat.
It opens with the following words :-  "According to your orders, the record pertaining to the year 1976-77 of Satya Narain Roll No. 164 was checked for Khadi Ashram Gohana.
The petition is as under........." 7.
Thereupon he reported that there is a shortage for which the workman is responsible.
Bhanwar Singh had not been produced to indicate as to how the proceedings, if any, of the enquiry were conducted.
In the absence of any order appointing the enquiry officer, proceedings having been conducted or even producing the said person it was rightly concluded that no domestic enquiry was held.
8.
Learned counsel in that event asserted that the workman, on the report Annexure P4/T, has indicated that the excess shortage is correct and has signed it.
Unfortunately during the course of the proceedings before the Labour Court when the workman stepped into the witness box, his attention was not drawn to any such writing.
As pointed out above and re-mentioned at the risk of repetition, even Bhanwar Singh had not been examined to prove the said endorsement purported to be of the workman.
In the face of the aforesaid what has been alleged at the Bar finds no support from the evidence on record.
The learned Labour Court rightly concluded that no domestic enquiry had been held before terminating the services of the workman.
9.
Faced with this situation, the attention of the court was drawn to the decision of this Court State of Punjab v. Nazar Singh, 1997(2) SLR 623 : 1997(3) SCT 63 (P&H).
It was held that where a workman has defrauded the management and he was dismissed after holding the enquiry he should not be reinstated.
The facts of the stated case are totally distinguishable.
As has been noted above, no such enquiry had been held.
No enquiry officer had been appointed.
Therefore, the ratio of the case Nazar Singh (supra) will not help the petitioner.
In these circumstances, there is no ground to interfere in the impugned award.
For these reasons, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.