HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was promoted to the post of Principal from that of Lecturer in 1993.
He was, thereafter, posted at various Colleges during the periods detailed below :-  1.
SGAD Govt. CollegE, Tarn Taran 111993 to 1711995.
2.
Govt. College, Malerkotla 18.1.1995 to 291996.
3.
S Govt. College of Science Education and Research, Jagraon, 391996 to 18101996 4.
Govt. Mohindra College Patiala 18101996 to date.
Vide Annexure P-3 dated 2991997 the petitioner has been posted to Govt. Ranbir College, Sangrur, whereas respondent No. 3 Parminder Singh Sidhu has been posted in his place at Patiala.
The order Annexure P-3 has been impugned in the present writ petition on three grounds, firstly that the petitioner had been repeatedly transferred from one place to another from 1993 onwards; secondly that he was due to retire on superannuation on 31.3.1999 and as such, his transfer was contrary to the guidelines for transfers issued by the State Government and appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition; and thirdly that the transfer was actuated by mala fide as it has been manoeuvred by respondent No. 3.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in the case on 1101997 and a direction was issued to the respondents to allow the petitioner to continue in his post at the Government Mohindera College, Patiala and consequent thereto the respondents have made order Annexure P-4 dated 8th October, 1997 - complying with the Courts order and it is the admitted position that the petitioner continues to remain posted as Patiala.
Two replies have been filed, one on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and another by respondent No. 3.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, the specific stand taken is that the order Annexure P-3 had been made at the instance of the petitioner's wife, who was earlier posted at Karamsar and both she as well as the petitioner had been posted at Sunam and Sangrur respectively to be near each other.
It has further been pleaded in paragraph 9 of the written statement that the petitioner had not been visited by repeated and unwanted transfers so had been alleged by him in his writ petition but on the contrary the transfers from Malerkotla, Jagraon and Patiala had been made by the Government at his request, whereas the transfer impugned now had been made at the instance of his wife.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, attention of the Court has been drawn to Annexure P-1 to contend that it was an extract of the document and the full text of it has been appended as Annexure R-3/1.
It has also been averred that the answering respondent's wife had been posted at Patiala since 3rd January, 1967 and the said respondent was to retire before the petitioner, it was prayed that he too should be posted at Patiala.
Replication has also been filed by the petitioner and various additional annexures have been appended thereto.
3.
Mr. Tiwari, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has first and foremost argued that the transfer of the petitioner was the 5th one in four years and as the petitioner was to retire by the end of March, 1999, he should be allowed to continue at Patiala.
This stand of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel representing the State as well as the private respondent.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion this argument of the petitioner's counsel cannot be accepted.
In para 9 of the written statement filed by the State, it has been specifically pleaded that the petitioner had been transferred from Malerkotla, Jagraon and Patiala at his own request and even the present transfer had been initiated on a request made by the petitioner's wife and as a matter of fact, it has been highlighted that after the transfer the petitioner and his wife have been brought close to each other as they were now separated by a distance of only 15 kms.
Moreover, a look at Annexure P-3/1/T which is the full text of the transfer order Annexure P-3 clearly shows that Nisha Sharad, i.e. the petitioner's wife had been transferred from Government College, Sunam, at her own request and no joining time and TA/DA had been authorised to be given to her.
This clearly indicated that the transfer impugned vide Annexure P-3 had been made at the instance of the petitioner's wife.
It is also clear from para 9 of the replication that the averments made in the written statement filed by the State that the petitioner had been transferred earlier at his own instance, has not been denied, although some documents, particularly Annexure P-6 have been put in as Annexures to contend otherwise but in the light of the fact that a specific averment has not been denied and Annexure P-6 has been put in with the replication, no reliance can be placed on this document as the context in which it was (if at all) issued, is not clear.
Mr. Tiwari has also drawn my attention to Annexures P-2 and P-5, two representations filed by the petitioner and his wife respectively in which it has been stated that the petitioner would undergo hardship in case he was transferred from Patiala and that his transfer had been manoeuvred by Parminder Singh Sidhu, respondent No. 3.
He has also argued that there were some posts lying vacant in Patiala against which the said respondent could be accommodated.
In the light of what has come above, these arguments do not arise for the reasons that the petitioner has been transferred at the instance of his wife, being a couple case, and in the absence of better particulars with regard to the alleged manoeuvring by respondent No. 3, it is not open to this Court to go into the matter, more particularly as the impugned transfer order has been passed by the State Government.
5.
Mr. Tiwari has then argued that the petitioner's transfer was against the policy framed by the Government on the subject and in this connection has brought to my notice paragraphs 3 and 3(i).
Both these paragraphs are being reproduced below :-  3.
"The mid-term transfer after 30.4.1997 to be done only in public interest or under exceptional compassionate circumstances or when the post remains vacant during general transfers or when it is necessary to fill the post becoming vacant on account of the following reasons :-  a) Transfer.
b) Resignation c) Dismissal from service.
d) Retirement.
e) Deputation in which deputation due to training for long period is included.
f) Promotion.
g) Creation of new posts.
h) Death.
3(i) Govt. employees, whether gazetted or non-gazetted, who are due to retire during the next two years, may be allowed.
If they do desire, to remain in the same district or at the place of posting."
It has, accordingly, been urged that the petitioner's transfer was a mid-term one and as he was to retire to end of March, 1999, the order was in violation of the transfer policy Annexure P-1.
In support of his plea, this Court must interfere in support of the transferred officer in case of violation of the guidelines relating to transfers, Mr. Tiwari has relied upon State of Madhya Pradesh and another v. SS Komar and others, 1995(2) SLR 16 : 1995(2) SCT.
195, Director of School Education Madras and others v. O Karuppa Thevan and another, 1996(1) SLR 225 : 1996(2) SCT 402, NK Singh v. Union of India and others, 1994(5) SLR 153 : 1995(1) SCT 269, Rajendra Roy v. Union of India and another, 1993(1) SLR 126 : 1993(2) SCT 65 and Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta, 1992(1) SLR 426 : 1992(2) SCT 161.
6.
The arguments raised by Mr. Tiwari have been controverted by the respondents' counsel placing reliance upon Union of India and others v. SL Abbas, AIR 1993 SC 2443 : 1995(4) SCT.
455 and Sharda Pathania v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(1) RSJ 814.
7.
I have considered this argument as well and find that it lacks merit.
Most of the judgments cited by Mr. Tiwari go against him as it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the transfer order cannot be struck down unless it is actuated by mala fides or is in violation of the service rules.
Mr. Tiwari has, however, relied upon Rajendra Roy's case (supra) wherein it was observed that a transfer order can be struck down if it can be shown that the transfer was without justification.
In SL Abbas case (supra) Hon'ble Supreme Court considering the matter with regard to the guidelines issued with regard to transfers observed as under :-  "Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the appropriate authority to decide.
Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of any statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with it.
While ordering the transfer, there is no doubt the authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the subject.
Similarly, if a person makes any representation with respect to his transfer the appropriate authority must consider the same having regard to the exigencies of administration.
The guidelines say that as far as possible, husband and wife must be posted at the same place.
The said guidelines however do not confer upon the Government employee a legally enforceable right."
In the light of the later decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is apparent that the guidelines Annexure P/1 are not enforceable at the instance of an employee even if they are violated unless the transfer is vitiated by mala fides or in violation of a statutory provision.
As already noted above, however, it has to be held as a finding of fact that the petitioner had now been transferred on account of the representations made by his wife as a couple case and this was in conformity and not in violation of the guidelines and that he had been repeatedly accommodated at various places of posting during his tenure of service.
The argument with regard to the mid-term transfer must also be repelled for the same reasons.
8.
Mr. Tiwari has also urged that even accepting the principles laid down by the Supreme Court, the transfer order was wholly arbitrary and as it had been manoeuvred by respondent No. 3 so that he could take petitioner's place at Patiala and the same was liable to be quashed on this score alone.
This argument is misconceived as no foundation for this assertion has been laid in the writ petition.
The transfer order has been made by the Secretary of the department and no details have been given as to how he was a party to the alleged maneouvring by respondent No. 3.
Moreover, the Secretary not having been impleaded as a party (by name), no allegation of bias can be raised against him.
Moreover the argument of the learned counsel that the transfer order was bad for the additional reasons that there were other posts available at Patiala against which the said respondent could be accommodated, does not make the petitioner's transfer unacceptable in the light of the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court quoted above, which clearly lays down that an order of posting is a matter purely between the employer and the employee (in this case the petitioner and the State Government) and it is not open to this Court to opine as to who should be posted at which place.
Moreover, as already noted, the transfer has been made at the request of the petitioner's wife as being a couple case.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Dasti order.
Petition dismissed.