Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Lieutenant Colonel in the Army, was served with a Show Cause Notice in March 1995.
On November 8, 1996, he was ordered to be removed from service.
Aggrieved by this order, he has filed the present writ petition.
He alleges that the order is contrary to the provisions of law.
He prays that it be quashed.
The respondents have controverted him claim.
2.
Mr. RS Randhawa, counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned order is liable to be set aside as there is "no material" to support it.
He further contended that the impugned action was based on an event of the year 1990.
Thus, the order of removal passed on November 8, 1996 was barred by limitation.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate who appeared for the respondents.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  i) Is there no material on the basis of which the Central Government could have ordered the petitioner's removal from service ?
ii) Was the action barred by limitation ?
Reg: (i) 3.
A copy of the show cause notice issued to the petitioner has been produced as Annexure P. 2 with the writ petition.
In this notice, it has been inter alia pointed out that "in response to an advertisement in the Sunday Times of India, New Delhi dated 12 April 1992, you have writen a letter dated 21 January 1994 to Mr. and Mrs. B Singh.
A copy of the advertisement and the letter was enclosed with the notice.
It was further pointed out that the petitioner's "involvement in such immoral and perverted sexual activities is likely to constitute a serious security risk due to contracts/relations with personnel of unproven background and antecedents....." The petitioner was also informed that "a discreet watch" on his "activities has revealed" that he had "become a member of `Satyam Linkers' agency presumbaly arranging contacts with other broad-minded couples and single females for nefarious sexual activities, including exchange of spouses."
He was further informed that he was "also in touch with the magazine `Apna Sansar' which provides addresses of such broad-minded people, circulation of which magazine extends to other countries, thereby accentuating your potential security hazard".
Still further, the petitioner was innformed that "the above facts were placed before the Chief of Army Staff" who was satisfied that his trial by a court martial is inexpedient but is of the opinion that "your further retention in service is undesirable."
The petitioner was, thus, called upon to explain as to why his services "should not be terminated by way of dismissal under the provisions of Section 19 of the Army Act, 1950 read with Rule 14 of Army Rules, 1954."
4.
The petitioner sent a reply vide letter dated April 9, 1995, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P 5 with the writ petition.
He did not deny having written the letter dated January 21, 1994 in response to the advertisement in the Times of India.
Equally, he did not even deny being a member of `Satyam Linkers' or being in touch with the magazine `Apna Sansar'.
He, however, submitted that "it is incumbent upon the Chief of Army Staff while informing me the inexpediency and impracticability of holding my court martial and undesirability of my further retention in service, to supply me with all reports adverse to me before calling upon my explanation."
He, consequently, asked for all the reports and materials on the basis of which the show cause notice had been issued.
Vide letter dated May 31, 1995, the petitioner was informed that the "material and knowledge of the activities, based on which the show cause notice has been prepared has already been supplied to the officer.
He may please be advised to forward his final reply within 30 days.
..." It appears that the petitioner did not submit any further reply and, thus, the order was passed.
5.
Still further, in the written statement, it has been pointed out that "the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner after observing his conduct over a period of time and when his involvement in immoral and perverted activities was fully established.
The authorship of letter written by the petitioner was fully verified and established before issue of Show Cause Notice.
The petitioner and his wife had also advertised liaison with `Broad Minded' in magazine called `Apna Sansar' run by the Kalyani Devi, Allahabad-3.
He became member of Satyam Linkers and started working for them.
Membership of such association by an officer is unheard of and strictly prohibited as it impugns one's reputation as a gentleman.
To curb such activities, detailed instructions were issued vide AGDV letter No...... dated 17 August, 1992.
Sexual relations have been the sole aim of the advertisers in the guise of pen friendship.....
There is unmistaken link between the advertisement and the correspondence made by the petitioner.
A formal enquiry into the matter was neither possible nor desirable considering the nature of subject matter.
Sufficient material was collected by intelligence sources."
6.
The above facts are self-eloquent.
These do not show the petitioner in a good light.
A man of such `easy virtue' could not be trusted with the security of the State.
He could be "an ideal target for hostile intelligence agencies."
The fact that in spite of specific instructions issued by the Army Headquarters that officers should not have any association with Clubs operating under different names with the underlying aim of promoting immoral sexual activities, the petitioner had chosen to advertise in `Apna Sansar' shows that he had not behaved in a manner expected of an officer of the Indian Army.
More than that, the petitioner has not even controverted any of the averments as made in the written statement.
This clearly shows that the facts as mentioned in the show cause notice as well as the written statement are correct.
In this situation, it cannot be said that there was no material on the basis of which the impugned action could have been taken.
7.
It is undoubtedly correct that Section 19 of the Indian Army Act, 1950 entitles the Central Government to "dismiss or remove from service any person...." This power is, however, "subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder...." Under Rule 14, an officer is entitled to show cause and submit an explanation.
Such an opportunity to show cause has to be real.
It must be an effective opportunity.
However, each case depends on its own facts.
In the present case, it is clear from the written statement as well as the other documents on record that the petitioner was indulging in wholly undesirable activities.
He was a potential threat to the security of the State.
A strict watch had been kept on him through the intelligence agencies for a long time.
It is only when the authorities were satisfied about his involvement that the impugned order was passed.
In the very nature of things, it could not have been possible to disclose more than what was actually pointed out to the petitioner.
The fact that he has not controverted any of the averments in the written statement or in the show cause notice, clearly shows that the allegations were true.
Thus, the first question is answered against the petitioner.
Reg: (ii)  8.
Mr. Randhawa contended that the petitioner has filed a writ petition soon after the issue of the show cause notice.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it was averred that he had started indulging in undesirable activities in October 1990.
No action on the basis of such activities could be taken after the expiry of a period of three years.
Thus, the action was barred by limitation.
9.
The contention is misconceived.
It is true that Section 122 of the Act provides a period of limitation for trial by a court martial.
By virtue of this provision "no trial by court martial of any person..... for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a period of three years...." However, in the present case, there has been no infringement of the provisions.
Firstly, the petitioner has not been tried by a court martial.
Secondly, the action is based on the petitioner's letter dated January 21, 1994.
The show cause notice was issued vide letter dated March 13, 1995.
It cannot be said that a period of three years had elapsed.
Even if the petitioner were to be tried by court martial, the action would not have been in violation of Section 122.
It is undoubtedly correct that the provision contains a safeguard for the members of the Armed forces.
However, in the present case, the protection has not been denied to the petitioner.
Thus, even the second question is answered against the petitioner.
10.
Before parting with the case, it may also be observed that on September 23, 1997, a direction had been given by a Bench of this court to the respondents "to take decision on the claim of the petitioner for pension on account of long service rendered by him in military within one month from today."
In pursuance of this direction, a notice was issued to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why his claim for pension be not rejected.
It was pointed out on behalf of the respondents that in spite of opportunity, the petitioner had not shown cause.
On November 4, 1997, a copy of the show cause notice was supplied to the petitioner and he was allowed to give reply within two weeks.
Ultimately, it was pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents at the time of the hearing of the case that an order granting 75% of the pension had been passed in favour of the petitioner.
Apparently, the action of the respondents was absolutely just and fair.
In the circumstances of the case, the petitioner could not have asked for more.
However, we need not dilate upon this matter any more as this order is not the subject matter of the controversy in this petition.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition It is, consequently, dismissed.
It is a fit case for the award of costs to the respondents.
However, we desist from doing so only in view of the fact that the petitioner is no longer in service.
Appeal dismissed.