Sat Pal, J - This petition has been directed against the order dated 7111997 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Sonepat.
By this order, the learned Additional District Judge has set aside the order dated 8101997 passed by the learned trial Court in terms of which the application of the petitioner under Order 39 rules 1 and 2 was allowed and the impugned order dated 3091997 was stayed.
Notice of this petition was issued to the respondents.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in Chottu Ram College, Rohtak on 25.11.1990 and she was confirmed on 1111991.
Thereafter the petitioner along with one JS Ahlawat who at the relevant time was working as a Lecturer in Tikka Ram College, Sonepat submitted a representation for mutual transfer from Rohtak College to Sonepat College.
The request for mutual transfer was approved by Governing bodies of both the Colleges at Rohtak as well as the College at Sonepat and the proposal was also approved by the Director Higher Education, Haryana on 30121991, though admittedly, management of the two colleges are different.
It may be noted here that no objection to the above-mentioned proposal was accorded by the MD University on 15.7.1993.
3.
After the approval was granted by the Director Higher Education, the petitioner joined the Sonepat College on 111992 and had been working there as a Lecturer till 3091997 when the impugned order was issued by the General Secretary of the newly constituted ad hoc governing body of the Sonepat College.
The aforesaid order dated 3091997 has been challenged by the petitioner in the suit filed before the learned trial Court at Sonepat.
Along with the suit, the petitioner filed an application under Order 39 rules 1 and 2 for interim stay of the impugned order dated 3091997 and the learned trial Court vide order dated 8101997 confirmed the ex-parte stay in favour of the petitioner.
The said order dated 8101997 passed by the learned trial court was challenged by the respondent governing body of Sonepat College before the learned lower Appellate Court who vide order dated 7111997 set aside the order passed by the learned trial court and vacated the stay.
Aggrieved by the order dated 7111997 the present petition has been filed by the petitioner.
This petition came up for hearing on 24111997 on which date the notice of motion was issued to the respondents and operation of the impugned order dated 3091997 was stayed.
4.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that the petitioner after surrendering her seniority in the College at Rohtak, joined college at Sonepat on 111992 and since then she had been working as Lecturer in the College at Sonepat till 3091997 when the General Secretary of the nominated Committee/Governing body of the College at Sonepat issued the impugned order.
He further submits that the petitioner has alleged mala fide also against the said General Secretary.
He has also drawn my attention to the letter dated 13101997 issued by the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh to the President, Governing body, Tikka Ram College, Sonepat wherein it has been stated that the petitioner was transferred to the college at Sonepat after the approval of the Director Higher Education and as such the action of the General Secretary of the newly appointed governing body vide order dated 3091997 was illegal.
He further submits that the petitioner shall complete his entire evidence on one date of hearing and the learned trial Court may be directed to dispose of the suit at an early date.
5.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submits that the initial transfer of the petitioner with effect from 111992 itself was illegal as the same was done contrary to the statute.
He further submits that the Director of Education had no power to accord approval of the mutual transfer.
He also submits that the services of the petitioners are no more required by the Sonepat College as there are two lecturers against one post.
He submits that in any case the petitioner shall not suffer any irreparable loss in case no stay in granted to the petitioner.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hazarat Surat Saha Urdu Education Society v. Abdul Sahib, 1985(5) SLR 768.
He further submits that the approval of the Director Education was granted in favour of the petitioner in the year 1991 as at that time her mother-in-law was Education Minister in Haryana Government and the father-in-law was President of the Governing body.
Mr. Sharma also submits that the Director Higher Education has subsequently issued another letter dated 27101997 wherein he has stated that the matter is still under consideration.
6.
From the facts stated hereinabove, it is clear that the petitioner was transferred to College at Sonepat with the approval of the then Director, Higher Education and no objection certificate was given by the MD University, Rohtak.
No bias has been alleged against the then incumbents i.e. the then Director, Higher Education and the functionaries of the MD University.
In any case, all these facts have yet to be gone into as the petitioner has also alleged mala fides against the present General Secretary of the nominated committee/governing body of the College at Sonepat.
From the facts, it is further clear that the petitioner is still working in the College at Sonepat, in view of the interim stay granted by the learned trial Court as well as by this Court when the notice of motion was issued.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has also stated that the petitioner shall complete her entire evidence on one date.
Keeping in view these facts, I am of the opinion that the interim stay granted by this Court on 24111997 should continue till the decision in the main suit.
7.
The judgment of Hazarat Surat Saha Urdu Education Society (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent is of no assistance to the respondents in the present proceedings as the facts of the present case are quite different from the facts of that case.
In that case, the terms of employment were based on contract but in the present case, as stated hereinabove, the petitioner was transferred to Sonepat College with the approval of the Director Higher Education as well as with the approval of the MD University and she is still working in the College at Sonepat by virtue of stay order granted.
Further the suit itself can be disposed of at an early date.
8.
In view of the above discussion, the petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 7111997 passed by the learned lower Appellate Court is set aside and the order passed by the learned trial Court is confirmed.
Consequently, order dated 3091997 shall remain stayed during the pendency of the suit.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, the learned trial Court is directed to dispose of the suit expeditiously preferably within three months from the receipt of copy of this order.
The petitioner is directed to complete her entire evidence on one date which shall be fixed by the learned trial Court.
It is, however, made clear that any observation made hereinabove shall not have any bearing on the merits of the case.
Copy of the order be given dasti to the learned counsel for the parties on usual payments.
Petition allowed.