M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner as well as the respondents being same in both the writ petitions and the questions arising for consideration being similar, the two writ petitions were heard together and are being disposed of by this common order.
2.
The petitioner in the above two writ petitions was at the relevant time Headmistress of the School administered by the 2nd respondent society.
By proceedings of the Correspondent dated 3131994, the petitioner was placed under suspension pending enquiry into certain alleged misconduct.
Thereafter, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet dated 1951994.
The petitioner submitted her explanation to the same denying the charges and the allegations made therein.
The same, however, were not found to be satisfactory and one Sri Muralidhar Gupta was appointed as the Enquiry Officer..
The Enquiry Officer appears to have conducted the enquiry and submitted his report and a show- cause notice was thereafter issued to the petitioner by letter dated 2971994 as to why she should not be dismissed from service.
3.
WPNo.14487 of 1994 was filed by the petitioner questioning the said show-cause notice dated 2971994.
At the stage of admission, this Court by orders dated 981994 observed that two questions are raised in the said writ petition.
The first is that the enquiry has not been properly conducted and therefore the show-cause notice against the proposed punishment of dismissal is based on defective enquiry.
Secondly, that the petitioner having been placed under suspension on 3131994, she is deemed to have been restored back to service on the expiry of two months from the date of suspension and should be allowed to resume office.
The Court briefly considered the said contentions and with regard to the 1st contention, it was observed that the petitioner may show-cause to the impugned notice dated 2971994 issued by the Managing Committee and in the event the Committee decides upon infliction of punishment the petitioner shall be afforded an opportunity by the District Educational Officer - 3rd respondent to grant opportunity to the petitioner before deciding the question of according approval of otherwise.
Notice with regard to deemed reinstatement of the petitioner based on the 2nd contention adverted to (supra) was therefore directed to be issued to the respondents.
4.
Meanwhile, however, the petitioner retired from service on 191995.
Neither the petitioner was reinstated into service nor any punishment was inflicted on the petitioner based on the impugned show-cause notice dated 2971994.
5.
It must be stated here that instead of proceeding with the show-cause notice dated 2971994, impugned in the above writ petition No. 14487 of 1994 and the orders of this Court dated 981994 adverted to (supra), the Respondent - Management issued the letter dated 791994 which is purported to be a "modified charge-sheet" stating that during the course of the enquiry, the delinquent did not participate and that certain other irregularities were noticed in the said enquiry, consequently, it was decided to issue a comprehensive Memo to the delinquent petitioner enabling her to give the explanation.
The petitioner by the said letter dated 791994 was required to give a detailed explanation to the charges annexed to the said modified charge-sheet.
A perusal of the modified charge-sheet shows that the charges are similar to the one framed against the petitioner in the earlier enquiry which was the subject-matter of WP No. 14487 of 1994.
The only distinguishing feature in the modified charge-sheet is that the particulars have been specified of the alleged misconduct which in the earlier charge-memo were rather omnibus.
The petitioner thereupon filed the 2nd writ petition.
6.
WPNo.16201 of 1994 is the second writ petition filed by the petitioner for declaration that the modified charge-sheet dated 791994 is illegal.
The contention of the petitioner being that a second enquiry into the very same charges cannot be conducted against the petitioner.
7.
Elaborate arguments were advanced before Court by Sri DV Seetharama Murthy, learned Counsel for the petitioner with regard to the validity of the modified charge-sheet and reliance was placed on several decisions of the Supreme Court and this Court in support of his said arguments.
8.
Sri Vilas Afzal Purkar, learned Counsel for the Respondent - Management sought to sustain the modified charge-sheet relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Assam and another v. JN Roy Biswar, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 2277 wherein it was held as under:  "... No rule of double jeopardy bars but absence of power under a rule inhibits a second inquiry by the Disciplinary Authority after the delinquent had once been absolved.
The appeal must fail and is dismissed with costs.
4.
We may however make it clear that no Government servant can urge that if for some technical or other good ground, procedural or other, the first enquiry or punishment or exoneration is found bad in law that a second enquiry cannot be launched.
It can be; but once a disciplinary case has closed and the official reinstated, presumably on full exoneration, a chagrined Government cannot re-start the exercise in the absence of specific power to review or revise, vested by rules in some authority.
The basics of the rule of law cannot be breached without legal provision or other vitiating factor invalidating the earlier enquiry.
For the present, this is theoretical because no such deadly defect is apparent on the record."
9.
Sri Vilas Afzal Purkar, learned Counsel for the Respondent - Management relied mainly on the clarificatory portion of the judgment that if for some technical or other ground procedural or other, the first enquiry is found bad in law, a second enquiry can be initiated.
10.
It may not be really necessary for this Court to consider the rival contentions as regards the validity of the 2nd enquiry in view of the fact, as already noticed above, the petitioner was allowed to retire on attaining the age of superannuation w.e.f., 191995.
It may be observed here that the post in question is not a post which entitles the incumbent the pensionary benefits on retirement.
11.
The short question therefore for consideration in the above two writ petitions is whether once an employee is permitted to retire, continuance of disciplinary proceedings against such employee, is valid or permissible.
12.
In C. Ramalinga Reddy v. Non Conventional Energy Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited, 1994(2) ALT 422 : 1995(1) SCT 532, similar contention was considered.
The learned Judge referred to the Supreme Court judgment in State of Assam v. Padmaram, AIR 1965 SC 473 wherein it was held that once an employment comes to an end, the authorities have no power to proceed with departmental enquiry and held as under :  "5.
For the reasons mentioned above, I am clearly of the opinion that the petitioner, who was permitted to retire on attaining the age of superannuation by the respondent, cannot be proceeded against by way of disciplinary proceedings.
If that is so, the respondent is not entitled to withhold the terminal benefits which are legitimately due to the petitioner including payment of gratuity, Employees Provident Fund and also the salary during the period of his suspension with effect from 13121988 to 16.1.1990, minus the amount paid towards subsistence allowance.
If any amounts are paid to the petitioner on account of the above accounts, they will be given credit to in calculating the amount due to him.
The petitioner shall be paid the amount due to him as indicated above within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order."
13.
In view of the above, this Court is of the view that the above two writ petitions can accordingly be disposed of with similar directions as have been issued by this Court in C. Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra).
14.
In the instant case, the petitioner was permitted to retire on 191994 on attaining the age of superannuation by the respondent and therefore the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner cannot be continued and consequently the respondents are not entitled to withhold the terminal benefits which are legitimately due to the petitioner.
15.
Accordingly, the above two writ petitions are disposed of with the direction.
(1) that the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner cannot be continued pursuant to the proceedings impugned in the above two writ petitions after the petitioner attained the age of superannuation on 191995.
It is so declared.
(2) the respondents are not entitled to withhold the terminal benefits which are legitimately due to the petitioner including payment of Gratuity, Employees Provident Fund and also the salary during the period of her suspension w.e.f.
3131994 to 191995 excluding the amounts already paid towards subsistence allowance together with any other amounts that may have been paid to the petitioner on account of the above accounts, the same shall be given credit to in calculating the amount due to the petitioner.
(3) the petitioner shall be paid all amounts that are legitimately due to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
16.
Writ petitions are accordingly allowed in terms as above.
But, in the circumstances without costs.
Petitions allowed.