AK Ganguly, J - The dispute in this matter is over the date of birth of the petitioner.
According to the petitioner's claim his date of birth is 30th June, 1940, whereas, according to the respondents the date of birth of the petitioner is 30th June, 1939.
2.
If the petitioner's assertion is accepted then the petitioner completes the age of 58 years on 30th June, 1998 and retires with effect from 1st July, 1998.
If the claim of respondent is accepted, that the date of birth of the petitioner is 30th June, 1939 then the petitioner retires on 1st July, 1997.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was initially appointed on 16th September, 1961.
If the petitioner's assertion about the date of birth is accepted, even then it cannot be disputed that the petitioner joined the service after attaining the age of majority.
3.
It appears from the averment made in the writ petition that the petitioner in support of his date of birth has annexed with this writ petition the following documents:  The admit card issued by the Bihar Vidhayalaya Pariksha Samitee and also the admission card issued by the Bihar School Examination Board on 1771960 which shows that the petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1940.
The certificate issued by the Bihar Vidhayalaya Pariksha Samitee which shows that the petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1940, and also the certificate issued by the school authorities from which the petitioner appeared.
It is not in dispute that the admission card on which the petitioner relied was issued by the Headmaster of the School concerned on 17th July, 1960 which was prior to the petitioner's joining the service which shows that the said document is of a date when there was no dispute about the petitioner's age.
Relying on those documents the petitioner asserts that his date of birth must be recorded as 30th June, 1940.
4.
As against that the respondents are relying on the service records of the petitioner.
The original of service records of the petitioner has been produced before the Court.
The Court has perused the original of the records at Annexure-A which has been disclosed in the counter-affidavit.
5.
From a perusal of the said service records, it appears that in the Column No. 4(b) which is meant for date of birth by Christian era there is mention of 22 years.
In the service records there is no mention of either month or date.
The only thing which is mentioned is 22 years.
On the basis of said recording that the petitioner's age is 22 years, the respondents are asserting that the petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1939.
6.
From the mere fact that 22 years is recorded on 27th September, 1961 in respect of petitioner's date of birth, it cannot be said that the petitioner was born on 30th June, 1939.
On the other hand, this Court feels that even if the petitioner's assertion is correct that he was born on 30th June, 1940 even then by the end of the month of September, 1961 he has crossed 21 years.
So when recording is made as 22 years in his service records, it is difficult for the petitioner who was seeking employment as a constable in Bihar Police Force to bargain and assert that he has not completed 22 years.
So from the said recording in which the petitioner's age has been recorded as 22 years, it cannot be said that the petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1939.
7.
In fact, it appears very strange to this Court that after the entry of 22 years, the year 1939 has been mentioned in brackets in the service records.
But it clearly appears to have been written subsequently.
The figure 1939 clearly has been written by a different hand.
When this was pointed out to the learned Counsel for the respondent, he also could not dispute the same.
Therefore, taking a practical view of the matter, this Court is not satisfied that the petitioner's date of birth, as asserted by the respondent, is 30th June, 1939.
8.
The learned Counsel for the respondent in support of their case has stated that if the petitioner had the document which he disclosed at Annexure-1 which is dated 1771960, he should have produced the same, and since he did not produce it at the time when the entry was made in the service records, therefore, such non-production by him of the said document will now estop him from relying on the same.
9.
This Court is afraid that there cannot be any estoppel against the records.
Apart from that this has not been asserted in the counter-affidavit that the respondent authorities asked the petitioner to produce anything in support of his date of birth at the time when the entry was made in the service records.
Neither in the counter-affidavit nor in course of argument the learned Counsel for the respondent has ever questioned the genuineness or correctness of the documents produced by the petitioner as mentioned above.
Learned Counsel merely submitted that since the documents have been produced by the petitioner almost at the end of his service career, the same cannot be entertained.
10.
It appears that the petitioner has stated in paragraph No. 11 of the writ petition that for the first time he came to know in Aurangabad that his date of birth has been wrongly mentioned in the service book as 30.6.1939 instead of 3061940.
Thereafter, the petitioner started making representation for correction of his date of birth.
It has been stated that three representations have been made which are dated 1.2.1996, 26.6.1996 and 291996.
11.
In answering the said paragraph in the counter-affidavit filed by the respondent no specific denial has been made.
The counter-affidavit does not show that there was any parawise denial.
12.
In the absence of denial categorically or parawise to the averment made in the writ petition, it is difficult for this Court to come to a conclusion that the respondent's claim for petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1939, has been established.
There is no entry in the service records to show that the petitioner's date of birth is 30th June, 1939.
There is only records about the year of birth of the petitioner which has discussed earlier and it shows that at the end of the month of September, 1961 the petitioner's age is recorded as 22 years.
Therefore, the petitioner's assertion regarding date of birth, i.e., 30th June, 1940, is accepted as correct.
This Court in the facts of this case cannot hold that the documents which have been produced by the petitioner in support of his date of birth can be ignored by the respondents.
13.
Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case of Mahendra Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar & Ors., reported in AIR 1995 Patna page 162 : 1995(1) BLJ 373, in which it has been held that the registers and records maintained in the regular course of business can be considered as reliable piece of evidence within the meaning of Section 35 of the Evidence Act especially when such records are relating to the date prior to commencement of the dispute and in coming to the said conclusion the Court relied on a ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Chandra v. State of Rajasthan, reported in AIR 1982 SC page 1057.
The relevant extracts of the said judgment in the case of Umesh Chandra (supra) are quoted hereinbelow:  "At the time when the age of the appellant was first mentioned in the admission form, there was absolutely no dispute about the date of birth or for that matter the exact date on which he was born and there could not have been any motive on the part of the parents of the accused to give a false date of birth because it was his first admission to a school at a very early age."
This Court is the view that the said principle of law can be applied in the facts of this case also.
14.
Learned Counsel for the respondents has also relied upon two decisions of this Court.
One of them is reported in the case of Md Muzaffar Hussain Khan v. State of Bihar & Ors., reported in 1993(1) BLJ 23.
The learned Counsel for the respondent has relied upon para-13 of the said judgment in which Rules 96 and 97 of the Bihar Financial Rules have been quoted.
15.
This Court is afraid that the provisions of the rules cannot be strictly applied to the facts of this case, inasmuch as, it is already noted that in the peculiar facts of this case the recording 22 years as the age of the petitioner, in the service record at the time of his entry in service cannot be called totally inconsistent with the petitioner's case that he was born on 30th June, 1940 having regard to the fact that by the end of September, 1961 the petitioner has virtually crossed the age of 21 years and stepped to the age of 22 years.
The Court can take judicial notice of the fact that when the petitioner was seeking employment the employer has a much stronger bargaining power than the employee (See the Judgment of the Apex Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. & Anr. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr., reported in AIR 1986 SC page 1571).
Then when a person is seeking employment, it is not expected of him to join issue with the employer and insist that the employer must record that his age as 21 years 3 months and not 22 years.
So this record of the petitioner's age is an incomplete one.
The employer must have realised the incompleteness of such record and tried to embellish it subsequently, as noted above, by writing `1939' in figures.
Therefore, judging from this angle this Court is of the opinion that the ratio of the judgement in the case of Md Muzaffar Hussain Khan (supra) in which Rules 96 and 97 have been quoted cannot be applied to this case.
16.
Insofar the other case is concerned, which has been cited by the Counsel for the respondent, namely, the decision in the case of The Secretary & Commissioner, Home Department and Ors. v. R Kirubakaran, reported in 1994(2) PLJR (SC) page 1 : 1993(4) S.C.T.
803 this Court is of the view that the said decision is also not applicable in the facts of this case.
In the said decision in the case of the Secretary & Commissioner (supra) the Learned Judges of the Supreme Court were considering the question of grant of interim relief to be issued by a tribunal for continuance in service of any employee where there was a dispute relating to the date of birth.
Here we are not concerned with any interim order.
But, however, while considering this question the learned Judges of the Supreme Court made the following observations :  "This Court has repeatedly pointed out that correction of the date of birth of public servant is permissible, but that should not be done in a casual manner.
Any such order must be passed on materials produced by the public servant from which the irresistible conclusion follows that the date of birth recorded in the service book was incorrect.
While disposing of any such application the Court or the Tribunal, has first to examine, whether the application has been made within the prescribed period under some rule or administrative order.
If there is no rule or order prescribing any period then the Court or Tribunal has to examine why such application was not made within a reasonable time after joining the service."
17.
From the aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court, it is clear that the correction of the date of birth of the public servant is permissible.
But the learned Judges of the Supreme Court were at pains to point out that the same cannot be done in a casual manner.
This Court is in complete agreement with the same view that any prayer for correction should not be done in a casual manner.
18.
Here the respondents are guilty of a casual approach in recording the petitioner's age at the time when the petitioner entered the service.
Then when the petitioner made representation for correction of his date of birth before his retirement, the said representations were not disposed of by the authority concerned, and possibly were not even adverted to.
In para 7 of the said judgment it has further been stated that whenever an application for alteration of the date of birth is made on the eve of superannuation or near about that time, the Court or the Tribunal concerned should be more cautious because of the growing tendency amongst a section of public servants, to raise such a dispute, without explaining as to why this question was not raised earlier.
Therefore, the Apex Court did not hold that such representation should not be looked into.
19.
In the instant case in para-11 of the writ petition some explanation has been given as to why the dispute was not raised earlier, but in the counter- affidavit the same paragraph has not been dealt with or denied.
Therefore, the ratio in the case of the Secretary & Commissioner (supra) is not against the contention of the Counsel for the petitioner.
20.
Taking an overall view and having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the opinion that the prayer of the petitioner to accept his date of birth as 3061940 on the basis of the documents mentioned above is not an unreasonable one as the said prayer is based on records which are reliable in character.
But the refusal of respondents to consider and dispose of those representations of the petitioner is not a reasonable stand in the facts of this case.
The respondent therefore must dispose of the petitioner's representation within a period of six weeks from the date of service of a copy of this order upon the concerned respondent.
They must dispose of the same by giving adequate reasons if they do not agree with the date of birth claimed by the petitioner.
They must bestow due care or caution while considering the said representation with reference to the documents mentioned above.
If the petitioner, as a result of such decision, becomes entitled to continue in service till 171998, the respondents must allow the petitioner to so continue and give him all the consequential financial benefits.
21.
As the matter has to be considered afresh, the impugned order passed against the petitioner regarding superannuation which has been disclosed in the supplementary affidavit at Annexure-6 is quashed, but the petitioner will not immediately put back in his service till the respondent takes a decision on the petitioner's representation as pointed out above.
22.
This writ petition is thus allowed to the extent indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.
The original service records of the petitioner is handed over to the Counsel for the respondents.
Petition allowed.