HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The facts relevant for the disposal of the writ petition are as under :-  The petitioner who was initially appointed as a Constable in the Haryana Police, was promoted to the rank of Inspector with effect from 941992.
In June 1992 he happened to be posted as Inspector/SHO at Police Station City, Kaithal.
On 2261992, one Ashok Kumar son of Prem Chand Saraf filed an application before the Police that he had been beaten up and threatened with death by one Chaman Lal Saraf an ex-M.L.A.
and his sons Arun Kumar and Rajesh Kumar.
Both the parties were summoned by ASI, Dharm Bir, on the same evening and in the presence of the petitioner, other respectables of the city and neighbouring villages, it was decided that the parties would come to a compromise and that the matter would be taken up on the next morning at 900 am However, it appears that a compromise could not be arrived at and there was a free fight between the parties in the police station itself on 23.6.1992.
Both the parties were accordingly locked up and produced before the Executive Magistrate and bound down in proceedings under Section 107/151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure but subsequently let off.
On 2561992, Indresh Kumar came to the Police Station at 600 pm alongwith his driver and three armed persons and misbehaved with the petitioner and other police officials.
At 900 pm the same evening while the petitioner was on patrol duty in Mohalla Bagrian he found that both the parties were once again geared up for a fight, on which the petitioner advised them to desist from doing so.
They, however, refused to relent on which Anil Kumar and Indresh Kumar were arrested once again at about 1000 pm under Section 107/151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and brought to the Police Station.
At about 1100 pm, Chaman Lal Saraf leading an unruly mob surrounded the police station and raised slogans against the police.
The petitioner, however, left the police station alongwith Anil Kumar and Indresh Kumar and returned after the mob had gone away at about 100 am on 2621992.
Anil Kumar and Indresh Kumar were medically examined on the next morning through ASI Gurcharan Singh and it was found that both of them had some injuries on their persons.
They were also produced before the Executive Magistrate and as Indresh Kumar refused to give bail bonds, he was once again put in custody.
Chaman Lal Saraf, using his connections, however, on the facts as alleged, got an order for a Magisterial enquiry and the Sub Divisional Officer (C), Gulha, ultimately reported that the police officials (including the petitioner) were not at fault.
Chaman Lal Saraf and his family still persisted with the matter and using his political clout was able to get another enquiry ordered.
This commission headed by Mr. OP Gupta, the then District & Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra, submitted its report to the Government finding the petitioner responsible for having tortured and beaten Chaman Lal Saraf and his sons.
In the meanwhile, it appears that a departmental enquiry had also been proposed against the petitioner by the D.I.G.
Ambala Range and he was also put under suspension on 2561992.
The Superintendent of Police, Kaithal, then sought the concurrence of the District Magistrate, Kaithal, for the purpose of holding a departmental enquiry against the petitioner as envisaged under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, as applicable to the State of Haryana (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
The District Magistrate vide his letter dated 241993, Annexure P-2 to the petition, granted the sanction.
The departmental enquiry was thereafter conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Bahadurgarh, and he submitted his report recommending action against the petitioner.
Acting on the report, the D.I.G., Rohtak Range, vide order dated 2931996, Annexure P-10 to the petition, ordered that a penalty of reduction in rank would meet the ends of justice and the petitioner was accordingly reverted to the rank of SI A Show Cause Notice dated 20.4.1996, Annexure P-11 to the petition, was, however, issued to the petitioner by the DGP Haryana, in which it was proposed that in view of the very serious and grave acts of misconduct attributed to the petitioner, he was provisionally of the opinion that the quantum of punishment awarded was inadequate and a punishment of dismissal from service was accordingly proposed.
It was also directed that the reply to the show cause notice be filed by 2741996.
The petitioner submitted his reply to the show cause notice on 2441996 vide Annexure P-13 to the petition.
Vide Annexure P-14, dated 2741996, the D.G.P., however, ordered that the petitioner be dismissed from service.
Annexures P-10 and P-14 have been impugned before this Court on various grounds.
2.
Mr. IS Balhara, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that though many issues have been raised in this petition, but the matter that he would first like to agitate is that the sanction granted by the District Magistrate for the initiation of the Departmental Enquiry was without application of mind and without examining the facts of the case and as such the present petition was likely to succeed on this ground alone.
He has pointed out that though a specific averment has been made by him to the above fact, there was no indication in the sanction order, Annexure P-2 or even in the written statement filed by the respondents as to the facts that had weighed with the District Magistrate persuading him to grant the sanction.
Mr. Balhara has relied upon Delhi Administration v. Chanan Shah, 1969 SLR 217, State of Punjab v. Raj Kumar, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 805 : 1988(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 639 and Union of India v. Ram Kishan, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1402, in support of his arguments.
3.
As against this, learned counsel for the respondent has argued that in the preliminary objection taken in the written statement, the facts and circumstances of the case which weighed with the authorities in ordering the departmental enquiry, had been clearly set out and as such there was no merit in the present petition.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records.
Rule 1638(1) of the Rules, is reproduced below :-  "Where a preliminary enquiry or investigation into a complaint alleging the commission by an enrolled police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public, establishes a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follow.
Where, however, the Superintendent of Police proposes to proceed in the case departmentally, the concurrence of the District Magistrate shall be obtained."
5.
The second part of the aforesaid Rule clearly indicates that where the Superintendent of Police proposes to proceed in the case departmentally the concurrence of the District Magistrate shall be obtained.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Raj Kumar, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 805, has held that the compliance with this Rule was mandatory in cases involving investigation in a departmental enquiry.
The question now arises is as to how the said Rule is to be applied.
In Delhi Administration v. Chanan Shah, 1969 SLR 217, the Hon'ble Supreme Court also observed that the District Magistrate had to decide as to whether a judicial prosecution or a departmental enquiry was to follow and for that purpose he had to apply his mind to the facts and to record his reasons for his decision.
Likewise, in Union of India v. Ram Kishan, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1402, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the District Magistrate had not passed a proper order while directing a departmental enquiry.
The order impugned in Ram Kishan's case (supra) is reproduced below :-  "MEMO Referring your memorandum No. 4425/T dated the 8th February, 1960 on the subject noted above.
I agree to departmental action being taken against FC Ram Kishan No. 4494".
6.
The facts of the present case, to my mind, are para-materia with the judgment quoted above.
Annexure P-2 which is the sanction order dated 241993, is in the following terms :-  "From  The District Magistrate,  Kaithal.
To  The Superintendent of Police,  Kaithal.
No. 1542/Peshi dated 241993  Sub : Concurrence under PPR 1638(1).
Memo :  Reference your office No. 8836 dated 1231996, on the above mentioned subject.
2.
Necessary concurrence as envisaged under PPR 1638(1) for taking departmental action against Inspector Ram Phal is hereby accorded.
The original papers received with letter under reference are returned herewith in original.
Sd/- District Magistrate,  Kaithal".
7.
This sanction by itself does not indicate any application of mind nor any special reasons have been set out for the grant of sanction to a departmental enquiry.
The pleadings are equally silent.
Paragraph 17 of the writ petition is reproduced below :-  "That the District Magistrate, Kaithal, without looking into the facts and circumstances of the case and without applying his judicial mind to the case in hand and without passing any speaking order or giving any reason simply passed one line order, which is as under :-  Reference your office letter No. 8863 dated 1231993 on the subject mentioned above i.e. concurrence under PPR 16.38(i).
Necessary concurrence as envisaged under PPR 16.38(i) for taking departmental action against Ram Phal Inspector is hereby accorded.
The original papers received with your letter under reference are returned herewith in original".
The reply to paragraph 17 is reproduced as under :-  "That the contents of para-17 as stated by the petitioner are wrong, hence denied.
The concurrence was given by the District Magistrate with full application of mind."
8.
It is evident from the pleadings quoted above that the respondents have not been able to show the reasons that weighed with the District Magistrate while passing the order Annexure P-2.
The argument of Mr. Rathee, the learned State Counsel to the effect that in the preliminary objection that the reasons had, in fact, been given is to my mind, unsustainable as the departmental enquiry, proposed by the State-respondent No. 1, the DGP Haryana-respondent No. 2 and Shri Kalyan Rudra-respondent No. 3, was unjustified as it was for the District Magistrate, who was the sanctioning authority, to take an appropriate decision.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the present petition deserves to succeed.
The orders dated 2931996, Annexure P-10 and 2741996, Annexure P-14, are accordingly quashed.
All consequential reliefs shall follow.
The respondents will, however, be at liberty to proceed against the petitioner in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.