TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petitions admitted.
2.
With the consent of the parties, these petitions are taken up today for final disposal.
3.
Migrant teachers working in private educational institutions getting grant in aid are seeking parity with teachers working in other institutions getting grant in aid.
According to the petitioners if the institution with whom they are claiming parity can be given all benefits which are given to persons holding Civil Posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Jammu & Kashmir, then there is no justification to deny that benefits to the migrant of private educational institutions.
The above is the narrow argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The larger question to be examined is as to whether these teachers can seek partity with teachers working in government schools.
4.
This order shall dispose of the writ petition mentioned in the schedule appended to this order.
5.
Facts have been taken from SWP No. 903/1991.
The petitioners in this writ petition are working in Gandhi Memorial College, Srinagar.
This institution is said to have been established in the year 1942.
This college is recognised by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
This has been categorized as `A' category institution.
The further fact which has been highlighted is that the institution is getting 100% grant in aid under the rules known as Jammu & Kashmir Private Educational Institutions Grant in Aid Rules 1975.
On account of the disturbed situation in the valley, the petitioners submit that they had to shift to Jammu.
This was the only course for physical survival.
They submit that they are entitled to allowances as were sanctioned by the State Government vide order No. 304-GR of 1990.
This order was issued on 14031990.
Para A (i) (ii) is relevant and is being noticed below:  "(A) (i) Employees belonging to Vacation Deptts.
both colleges and schools, who have migrated to Jammu shall immediately submit applications to the Director Edu.
Jammu indicating full name, designation, institution in which working, the post held, place of posting, the pay-scale in which working, the actual pay drawn, the drawing authority and details, if available of deduction etc. (iii) In the meanwhile, pay at the minimum of the scale of pay for one month shall be drawn and disbursed by the Director School Education, Jammu immediately.
Such payment shall be adjusted against the final salary drawn as above."
6.
It is a case of the petitioners that the Managing Committee of these institutions for some months did disburse the salaries to the petitioners but later on this was stopped, as some others staff was engaged for running the institution in Srinagar.
The Management of the institution felt that it would not be possible to bear double expense.
It accordingly stopped making payment.
The petitioners further submit that the respondent-State is paying salaries to another institution mentioned in para 15 of the petition.
It is stated that this institution is also getting grant in aid.
The argument advanced is that if salaries can be paid to the staff of the institution, referred to in para 15 of the petition, then there is no justification to not to allow similar treatment to the employees of respondent No. 4-Institution.
7.
The case projected by the petitioners be thus summed up as under :  (i) That the petitioner are employees of an institution which is getting grant in aid in terms of the rules referred to above.
(ii) The petitioners had to shift to Jammu on account of disturbance in Valley.
(iii) That the institution mentioned in para 15 is similarly situated; its employees are being disbursed salaries.
8.
It is accordingly submitted that there is no justification to decline this relief to the petitioners.
9.
The officials-respondents have filed objections.
The stand taken by them is that salaries are being paid only to persons holding Civil posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
With regard to the institution referred to in para 15 of the writ petition, it is stated that the set up of the institution is entirely different.
It is stated that the above institution is 100% funded by the State Government.
It has all the traits and features of Government Institution except that its management vest with the Board of Governors.
It is further stated that the Board of Governors has members which are nominated by the State Government.
What is being highlighted is that 70% of the members are nominated by the State government and 30% are nominated by another institution.
The fact is that the Chief Minister is the president of the Board of Governors has also being highlighted.
It is accordingly submitted that the petitioners can claim no parity with the staff of the institution which is referred in para 15 of the petition.
10.
Before examining the issues raised above, some Government order issued from time to item vis-a-vis Migrants and Migrant Staff be noticed, these are:  (i) On 240490 a direction was given by the respondent-Education Department to disburse salary to the institutions referred to in para 15 of the petition:  (ii) Vide order dated 14031990 bearing No. 304-GR of 1990 issued on 14/03/1990, employees belonging to Vacation Departments both Colleges and Schools, who had migrated to Jammu were held entitled to draw their salaries.
This order had been noticed above.
(iii) On 19/03/1990 vide order dated 19/03/90 bearing No. 324-GR of 1990, Government employees belonging to the Vacation and Non-Vacation departments of Kashmir Valley who had migrated to Jammu were held entitled to make applications for drawal of their pay or leave salary in Jammu region.
(iv) Vide Order No. 506-GR of 1990 issued on 19/04/1990, orders were issued for drawal of pay at Jammu in favour of officials who had migrated from Kashmir to Jammu.
(v) Letter dated 24/04/1990 bearing No. EDU-Coll/AC/Pay/90, reference to disbursement of pay to the migrant staff of the institution referred to in para 15 of the petition.
11.
Another order bearing No. 637-GR of 1990 issued on 05/06/1990, keeps the earlier order issued on 14/03/1990 alive.
Order dated 27/07/1990 permits drawal of pay in favour of migrant employees of public enterprises and autonomous bodies.
Order dated 26/06/1991 bearing No. 605-GAD of 1991 permits sanctioning of leave in favour of migrant employees.
This letter was followed by two other letters issued on 04/07/1991 and 14/10/1991.
These orders bears No. 629-GAD of 1991 and 1010-GAD of 1991.
Similar letter was issued on 31031992 bearing No. 257-GAD of 1992.
12.
Independently of the relief which was given to the employees working in connection with the affairs of the State and those working with public enterprises and autonomous bodies, relief has also been given to migrant families.
This would be apparent from the following letters issued from time to time:-  (i) Order No. Rev (ER) CR-138 of 1990 dated 26/09/1990;  (ii) Order No: GR/(REV)/ER-238 of 1990 dated 18/12/1990.
13.
The net result is that the State has been giving relief not only to the employees holding civil posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Jammu and Kashmir but has also been giving some relief in favour of migrant employees of public enterprises and autonomous bodies.
Package of relief to migrant families from Kashmir valley has also been allowed.
If this be the position then can it be said that the petitioners are not entitled to any relief from this Court or not well within the rights to contend that they are entitled to the same benefits which have been allowed to other employees and more particularly employees of the intuitions referred to in para 15 of the petition?
14.
The petitioners are thus seeking parity with an institution which is getting State Aid.
Independently of the above stand it be seen that there are some decisions of Supreme Court of India wherein observations have been made that employees of aided schools can seek parity in the matter of pay and allowances with teachers and employees of government institutions.
Thus in State of Haryana and others v. Rajpal Sharma and others in 1996(5) Suprme Court Cases 273 : 1996(4) SCT 75(SC) JV teachers in privately managed aided school were held entitled to the same scales of pay and privileges as were available to the counterpart in government Schools.
The Supreme Court noticed the view expressed earlier in the case reported as Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, 1990 Supp SCC 306.
In the Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana case the teachers of aided schools were held entitled to same pay and dearness allowance as were being given to teachers in government schools.
15.
In another case reported as 1997(3) Supreme Court Cases 571, even non-aided private educational institutions were held entitled to maintain a petition and seek parity in the matter of pay and allowances with Government employees.
In the above case it was observed:  "Where there is an interest created by Government in an institution to impart education, which is fundamental right of the citizens, the teachers who impart the education, get an element of public interest in the performance of their duties.
The element of public interest requires to regulate conditions of service of those employees at par with government employees.
Such employees are entitled to parity of pay scales as per executive instructions of Government.
State has obligation to provide facilities and opportunities to people to avail of right to education.
Private institutions cater to the needs of educational opportunities.
A teacher duly appointed to a post in a Private Institution is entitled to seek enforcement of orders issued by Government.
When an element of public interest is created and the institution is catering to that element, the teacher, the arm of the institution is also entitled to avail of remedy provided under Article 226; the jurisdiction part is very wide.
It would be a different position if the remedy is a private law remedy.
They cannot be denied the same benefit which is available to others."
It was, accordingly, held that even non-aided private institutions employees can seek equal pay at par with the government employees.
16-18.
In this regard it would also be apt to notice what was said by the Supreme Court in the case State of HP v. HP State Recognised & Aided Schools Managing Committees and others reported as 1995(4) Supreme Court Cases 507 : 1995(3) S.C.T.
648.
The teachers of aided schools were held entitled to the same benefits as were available to teachers in government schools.
It would be apt to notice what was said by the Supreme Court in paras 9 and 10 of the judgment:  "Para 9.
It is, thus, obvious that the State Government has a deep and pervasive control on the aided schools.
The government schools and the aided schools - specially after the Kothari Commission Report - have always been treated on a par.
It has been authoritatively laid down by this Court that the teachers working in the aided schools are entitled to the same salaries and allowances as are being paid to the teachers in the government schools.
In Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, Pathak, C.J.
speaking for this Courd held (SCC p. 573 para 3): "In our opinion, the teachers of aided schools must be paid the same pay scale and dearness allowance as teachers in the government schools for the entire period claimed by the petitioners..." Thus judgment was subsequently interpreted by this Court in Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana where Agrawal, J. speaking for the Court observed as under (SCC p. 314, para 10):  "The judgment of this Court dated 28/7/1988 also accepts the principle of parity in the matter of salaries and dearness allowance of teachers employed in aided schools and those employed in government schools, and there is nothing in the judgment which indicates that the said principle of parity is to be applied up to 31-12-1985 only, and not thereafter.
In the circumstances we are of the view that the direction of this Court in the judgment dated 28-7-1988 must be construed to mean that the respondents are required to maintain such parity and to revise, from time to time, the pay scales and dearness allowance of the teachers employed in aided schools as and when the pay scales and dearness allowance of teachers employed in government schools are revised.
It is, therefore, incumbent upon respondents to revise the pay scales of teachers employed in the aided schools so as to bring the same at par with the pay scales of the teachers employed in government schools with effect from 1-1-1986 and fix the salaries of the teachers employed in aided schools in the revised pay scales with effect from 1-1-1986 and pay the salaries and dearness allowance to these teachers on that basis."
Para 10.
It is, therefore, late in the day to say that the teachers in the aided schools are not entitled to parity in the matter of salary, allowances etc. with their counterparts in the government schools.
The question, for our consideration, however, is whether the State Government or the Management is to meet the consequent expenditure."
19.
From the aforementioned decisions of the Supreme Court it becomes apparent that the employees and teachers of aided schools are within their rights to claim parity with employees and teachers working in government schools.
If this be the position then the petitioners are on very sound footing and can legitimately contend that they should be given all those benefits which are being given to other employees working in connection with the affairs of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Looked from this point of view the State cannot deny benefits which are claimed by the petitioners.
20.
The petitioners are again well within their rights to contend that they are at par with the institution which is being given all benefits even though it is an aided institutions.
The only justification which has been pointed out by the State is that the State has pervasive control over these institutions.
In this regard all that is required to be mentioned is that all aided schools are under the supervision and control of the State Government.
The State Government can appoint inspecting officer under the Private Educational Institutions Regulation Act 1967.
The State Government can take over any institution or in the alternative depute its officer to head the institution in question.
Reference in this regard be made to section 11 of the Act.
Thus all private aided educational institutions are under the all pervasive control of the State administration therefore, the distinction pointed out by the State that the institution referred to in para 15 stands at different footing cannot be accepted.
21.
It be seen that even an ordinary citizen who has migrated from valley is getting some aid from the State.
The petitioners cannot be put at a position lower than the migrants who are not employees of the State and are also not working in any other institution.
I am accordingly of the view:  (i) That the State Aided Institutions should be treated at par with employees of Govt. schools in the matter of pay and allowances.
(ii) The pay, allowances and benefits which are being given to teachers and employees working in government institutions have also to be given to the employees working in State Aided Schools.
(iii) That in any case no distinction has been pointed out to differentiate between the teachers and employees in the present petition and those teachers and employees who are working in the institution referred to in para 15 of the petition.
22.
The net result is the petitioners are held entitled to all those benefits which are being given to the Government employees and also to the employees referred to in para 15 of the petition.
It is however made clear that in case these employees are getting any other relief under some other policy decision, then that much relief would be adjusted.
The petitioners would be entitled to only single allownace.
It would be again apt to get work from these migrant teachers by utilising their services in some other institutions.
There would be no order as to costs.