VS Aggarwal, J - The Sub Divisional Officer, UT Electricity Department has invoked Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and seeks quashing of the impugned award passed by the Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh dated 1031993.
By virtue of the impugned award the learned Labour Court had held that termination of services of respondent Tara Dutt is illegal.
He was directed to be reinstated with continuity of service and all benefits.
It was further directed that he will be entitled to back wages @ 50 per cent.
2.
The relevant facts are that respondent No. 2 was appointed as T. Mate w.e.f.
4.7.86.
He was later posted as Chowkidar at a monthly salary of Rs. 468/- pm He worked there upto 30688.
The services of respondent No. 2 were terminated w.e.f.
30688 by an oral order.
Respondent No. 2 served a demand notice contending that his services have been illegally terminated.
He has not been given any adequate or reasonable opportunity to show cause against the order terminating his services nor was he given one month's notice or one month's salary.
He has not even been given retrenchment compensation.
Reference was made to the Labour Court.
In the reply filed the petitioner contested the same.
It was asserted that respondent Tara Dutt had been engaged purely on daily wages through Employment Exchange.
He was engaged against deposit work i.e. building of Reserve Bank of India, Sector 17.
The work was temporary in nature.
Respondent No. 2 had been told that post was for duration till completion of the work.
When the work was completed, he was removed.
3.
The learned Labour Court held that petitioner failed to establish that respondent No. 2 was posted against the deposit work or that the said appointment was till the completion of said work.
It was further held that the termination order was in violation of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Accordingly, it was held that the order terminating the services was illegal.
Keeping in view the fact that respondent No. 2 had been working on his agricultural land, the learned Labour Court awarded back wages @ 50 per cent.
Aggrieved by the said award, the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that respondent No. 2 had been engaged to work against the deposit work in the Reserve Bank of India Building, Sector 17, Chandigarh.
On completion of the deposit work services of respondent No. 2 were no more required.
In these circumstances, the petitioner was left with no alternative but to terminate his services.
But the said averment and the contention must fail being devoid of any merit.
Before the Labour Court Rajinder Singh had appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
In his examination-in-chief he made a statement that respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Trade Mate against deposit work through Employment Exchange.
He worked as Chowkidar to watch and ward the Government material lying in the Reserve Bank of India building.
When the work was finalised, his services were terminated.
During cross-examination he did not know nor produced any record to show that respondent No. 2 was appointed against the deposit work in Reserve Bank of India building.
He could not even show that the said work was completed on 30.6.1988.
He admitted that one Vishnu Dutt was appointed as Chowkidar with respondent No. 2 but his services were not terminated along with that of respondent No. 2.
5.
The said statement clearly shows and establishes that there is no appointment letter and record to show that respondent No. 2 was appointed with respect to a specific work for Reserve Bank of India building.
It is patent that petitioner is feeling shy to produce the relevant record.
Adverse inferences are obvious that had the said record been produced, it would not have supported their case.
Other persons had been appointed as Chowkidar but their services were not terminated.
It leads one to conclude that it was not a case when services of a person would be terminated on completion of a work.
The plea so taken by the learned counsel for the petitioner is, therefore, devoid of any merit.
6.
The record does not show that termination order had been passed in compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
No notice had been issued at the time the service of respondent No. 2 were terminated.
No compensation had been paid.
In these circumstances, the learned Labour Court rightly held that the order terminating the services of respondent No. 2 was illegal.
7.
Confronted with that position it had been urged that respondent No. 2 had admitted that he was working on his agricultural land and, therefore, he should not have been paid any back wages.
But in this regard also the contention so raised is totally without any consideration to succeed.
The Supreme Court in the case Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. etc. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896 had considered the question with respect to the back wages to be given or paid.
It was held :-  "143.
Dealing with the complex of considerations bearing on payment of back wages the new perspective emerging from Acticle 43-A cannot be missed, as explained in Hindustan Tin Works.
Labour is no more a mere factor in production but a partner in Industry, conceptually speaking and less than full back wages is a sacrifice by those who can best (least) afford and cannot be demanded by those, who least sacrifice their large `wages' though can best afford, if financial constraint is ground urged by the latter (Management) as inability to pay full back pay to the former.
The morality of law and the constitutional mutation implied in Article 43-A bring about a new equation in industrial relations.
Anyway, in the Hindustan Tin Works' case, 75 per cent of the past wages was directed to be paid.
Travelling over the same ground by going through every precedent is supererogatory and we hold the rule is simple that the discretion to deny reinstatement or pare down the quantum of back wages is absent save for exceptional reasons."
Similarly in the case Surendra Kumar Verma etc. v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and another, AIR 1981 SC 422 the same question again came up for consideration and the Supreme Court held that there is a vestige of discretion left in the Court to make appropriate consequential orders with respect to the back wages.
In paragraph 6 the Court held :-  "It is as if the order has never been and so it must ordinarily lead to back wages too.
But there may be exceptional circumstances which make it impossible or wholly inequitable vis-a-vis the employer and workmen to direct reinstatement with full back wages.
For instance, the industry might have closed down or might be in severe financial doldrums; the workmen concerned might have secured better or other employment elsewhere and so on.
In such situations, there is a vestige of discretion left in the Court to make appropriate consequential orders."
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rajinder Singh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, and others, 1997 Labour and Industrial Cases 91 : 1996(3) SCT 840 had also looked at the said controversy in the same manner.
8.
In the present case in hand not only the discretion has been so exercised which cannot be described to be arbitrary but on its own merits, the said conclusion is meritorious.
Respondent No. 2 had simply admitted that during all those years, he was working on his agricultural land.
This does not imply that his earning was the same as that from his salary.
There is no further material on the record to indicate otherwise.
Therefore, the learned Labour Court rightly concluded that he would be entitled to back wages @ 50 per cent.
There is no ground as to why this Court in its extraordinary writ jurisdiction would interfere in the said discretion.
9.
For these reasons, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.