THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is directed against the award passed by the Labour Court in Reference No. 41 of 1979 dated 441981.
2.
The respondent Daya Singh Malik was appointed on 6121976 as Provident Fund Clerk in the petitioner Sugar Mills.
His services were terminated on 1681977 on the ground that the post of Provident Fund Clerk was abolished.
Thereupon the workman raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Labour Court held that the management violated the provisions of Sections 25(c) and 25(h) of the Industrial Disputes Act and therefore directed his reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
Aggrieved by the said award, the management preferred this writ petition.
3.
There is no dispute that the workman Daya Singh Malik was appointed on probation as Provident Fund Clerk.
There is also no dispute about the fact that the post of Provident Fund Clerk was abolished by an order of the Managing Director dated 681977.
The order of appointment clearly stipulates that during the period of probation the services of the workman can be terminated for the reasons of misconduct or otherwise.
It is an admitted fact that the workman was appointed on the newly created post of Provident Fund Clerk for the purpose of compulsory deductions under the Compulsory Deposit Act, 1975.
The compulsory deductions under the Compulsory Deposit Act, 1975.
The compulsory deductions under the Compulsory Deposit Act, 1975 were stopped by the Government, Therefore, the post of Provident Fund Clerk became surplus.
Therefore the Management terminated the services of Dayal Singh Malik, respondent, on 1681977.
Therefore, it cannot be said the termination of services of the workman was illegal.
4.
The learned counsel for the workman argued that subsequently on the introduction of the Provident Fund Scheme, a post of Provident Fund Clerk was created and some other person was employed for the same.
Therefore the provisions of Section 25(c) and 25(h) of the Industrial Disputes Act are attracted.
But it is not the case of a retrenchment and the services of the workman were terminated only because of the abolition of the post created for the purpose of compulsory deductions under the Compulsory Deposit Act.
If another post, though with the same designation, was created later, the workman is not entitled to claim that he should be appointed against that post which has been newly created.
In fact, the new post was created only after the reference was made to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court had to see whether the termination of the services of the workman was justified and in order.
There is no question of application of principle first come last go.
When the post is created for a different purpose, there was no obligation on the part of the management to offer the said post to the workman.
I am, therefore, of the opinion, that the order of the Labour Court is liable to be set aside.
5.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and quash the order of the Labour Court dated 441981.
However, the matter does not end here.
In pursuance of the award of the Labour Court, the workman was re-employed in the Sugar Mills in some other capacity in the year 1984.
Therefore the workman has been in service of the petitioner-Sugar Mills since more than a decade.
It is unjust to throw him out of job after elapse of several years.
I, therefore, direct the petitioner-Management to continue the services of the workman on the post against which he has been re-employed, but the workman will not be entitled to back wages and continuity of service as ordered by the Labour Court as the award of the Labour Court has been set aside.
Petition allowed.