THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed challenging the award of the Labour Court, Ludhiana in Reference No. 1463 of 1980 dated 451982.
2.
The petitioner was employed with the respondent as a Compositor.
Since the workman absented himself, the Management terminated his services from 961980 and thereafter the workman raised an industrial dispute contending inter alia that his termination from service is illegal.
The said dispute was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
On the basis of evidence on record, the Labour Court held that the termination of the petitioner was invalid, but the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the workman has been gainfully employed and awarded a compensation of Rs. 1500/- to the workman.
Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner filed this writ petition challenging the award of the Labour Court.
3.
The learned Counsel for the writ petitioner contended that once the Labour Court held the termination of the petitioner invalid, then the relief of reinstatement with back wages should follow.
Therefore, the petitioner should be reinstated in service.
4.
The writ petition was filed in the year 1982 i.e. more than 15 years back.
The Labour Court on the basis of evidence on record came to the conclusion that the petitioner was gainfully employed with the City Printing Press.
Since the Labour Court was of the opinion that the petitioner was gainfully employed, it did not order the reinstatement of the petitioner, but awarded the compensation.
The services of the petitioner were terminated in the year 1980 i.e. more than 15 years back.
In the circumstances of the case, I do not think it just and proper to order reinstatement with back wages especially when the petitioner has been employed elsewhere.
I feel that the ends of justice will be met if the compensation is increased from Rs. 1,500/- to Rs. 5,000/-.
5.
Subject to the modification of the amount of compensation payable by the respondent No. 2 to the petitioner, the writ petition is dismissed.
The amount of Rs. 5,000/- shall be paid to the petitioner within two months.
If the respondent has already paid a sum of Rs. 1,500/- as awarded by the Labour Court to the petitioner, the balance shall be paid within the aforesaid period.
Petition dismissed.