VK Bali, J - Joginder Kaur and 26 others through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to make up the shortfall of vacancies for scheduled castes upto 1021995 in the cadre of Superintendent Grade II/Superintendent Grade I by operating the running roster on vacancies and consequently give to the scheduled caste employees including the petitioners their due share in the running roster on vacancies in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab & Ors., JT 1995(2) SCT 646.
2.
Brief facts on which aforesaid relief is sought to rest reveal that on 27th of April, 1982, the Government of Punjab vide circular letter conveyed its policy decision that the date of occurrence of vacancy shall be taken as the relevant date for determining eligibility for promotion to next higher post.
From 1987 to 10th of February 1995 in the cadre of Superintendent Grade II which has strength of 20, 130 vacancies occurred.
During this period, it is the case of the petitioners that not a single vacancy was given to the scheduled caste candidate on the basis of reservation or on seniority-cum- merit, even though 26 vacancies were required to be filled up from amongst the scheduled caste candidates on the basis of 20 per cent reservation.
From May 1993 to 10th of February, 1995, 14 vacancies in the cadre of Superintendent Grade I occurred but no post was given to the reserved category.
The cadre of Superintendent Grade I is of 130 posts.
It is further the case of the petitioner that Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal's case (supra) held that the judgment in Joginder Singh Sethi's was not correct and the same was accordingly reversed.
However, with regard to working of roster, it was held by the Supreme Court that the roster of reservation for scheduled castes has to be made applicable on the posts instead of vacancies.
It was consequently directed that the working of the roster and findings with regard to that point shall be prospective i.e. 10th of February, 1995.
It was further held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sardul Singh v. State of Punjab, SLP No. 4017 of 1979 decided on 27th of November, 1995 that so far as vacancies subsequent to the decision in RK Sabharwal's case are concerned, the principle laid down in the said decision would be applicable in the case of earlier vacancies.
On 22nd of March, 1996, Punjab Civil Secretariat Scheduled Castes Employees Welfare Association made a representation through its President requesting for making up the shortfall of vacancies for scheduled caste candidates upto 1021995 by operating the running roster of vacancies.
On 1st of April, 1996, without considering the representation and implementing the law laid down in RK Sabharwal's case (supra), respondent No. 1 issued office order promoting general category candidates from the post of Superintendent Grade II working in the Punjab Civil Secretariat against the vacant posts of Superintendent Grade I Identical but separate orders were also issued promoting the general category candidates to the post of Superintendent Grade II.
It is in the wake of facts referred to above that the present writ for relief as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment has been filed.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 it has, inter alia, been pleaded that the petitioners are working as Superintendent Grade II and Senior Assistants in the Punjab Civil Secretariat.
In RK Sabharwal's case (supra) it has been held thus :-  "When all the roster points in a cadre are filled the required percentage of reservation is achieved.
Once the total cadre has full representations of the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes in accordance with the reservation policy then the vacancies arising thereafter in the cadre are to be filled from amongst the category of persons to whom the respective vacancies belong."
Besides in Ajit Singh Janjua & Ors. v. State of Punjab & Ors., 1996(2) SCT 278 Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the circular of the Punjab Government dated 4th of May, 1974 shall be deemed to be invalid insofar as it lays down that the reservation prescribed shall be given effect in accordance with a roster to be maintained which will be implemented in the form of a running account on the basis of year to year.
4.
The promotions of Superintendent Grade I and II were ordered on 2nd of April, 1996.
The cadres position before promotions were as follows:  Name of posts Sanctioned posts Prescribed share of SC Present representation shortfall.
Superintendent Grade I 130 19 20 1 Excess Superintendent Grade II.
20 4 6 2 E xcess.
The scheduled caste category of the officials are already occupying excess posts than that were due in their shares in both the cadres.
Therefore, the vacancies in these cadres are to be filled from amongst the category of persons to whom the respective vacancies belong.
This is only way to maintain the balance between the reserved category and the general category as held by the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal's case (supra).
It has further been pleaded in the written statement that petitioners in this writ have been given accelerated promotions on the rule of reservation and they cannot claim accelerated consequential seniority.
They shall be considered for promotion alongwith general category candidates with reference to inter-se seniority in the lower grade i.e. seniority they had in the cadre in which they were appointed for the first time.
Reservation in the cadre has to be given on posts and not on vacancies.
Once the posts earmarked for members of the scheduled castes/tribes and backward classes on the roster are filled, the reservation is complete.
Roster cannot operate any further and is stopped.
Any post falling vacant in a cadre thereafter has to be filled from the category - reserve or general - due to retirement etc.
It has further been pleaded that in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra) petitioners challenged the reservation policy in the year 1989 before the Apex court.
Their appeal was accepted.
By a combined reading of the judgment of the Apex Court in RK Sabharwal's case (supra) and Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra) it is clear that the roster in the reservation policy is to be followed to the extent till the prescribed percentage of scheduled castes is completed and not beyond that.
It is further the case of the respondents that after decision in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra) on 1st March, 1996, the reserve category officials in FC's establishment apprehended that some of them may be reverted as they were occupying posts in excess of prescribed percentage, moved application in the Supreme Court wherein it was prayed as follows :  A. Clarify that the Judgment and Order dated 131996 passed by this Hon'ble Court in Civil Appeal No. 4763-65 of 1989 to the extent that the said decision of this Hon'ble Court is prospective in operation.
B.
Pass appropriate directions to the State of Punjab not to revert the members of Scheduled Caste, who have been promoted hearing the present Appeals, on the basis of accelerated seniority and merit.
C. Pass such other and further orders as may be deemed fit and proper in the facts of the present case."
The Supreme Court declined to give any clarification and dismissed the application on 2nd of June, 1996.
A copy of the order has been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1.
5.
When the matter came up for hearing on 8th of January, 1997, after hearing the parties at some length this Court required specific reply to the averments made in para 7.
It may be mentioned that in para 7 of the writ it was pleaded by the petitioners that as per the roster position vacancies-wise with effect from 451974 i.e. the date from which the reservation for scheduled castes in Class I and II services at the rate of 14 per cent was introduced upto May 1993 i.e. when the ad-interim stay was granted in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra) 392 vacancies in the cadre of Superintendent Grade I had arisen/filled up.
Fourteen per cent share on account of reservation comes to 55 vacancies whereas only 44 vacancies were given to the scheduled castes.
As such there was a shortfall of 11 vacancies.
From May 1993 to 10th of February, 1995, 14 vacancies had fallen vacant which have now been filled up but no post has been given to the reserved category of Superintendent Grade I, Similarly in the cadre of Superintendent Grade II which has strength of 20, 130 vacancies had occurred from 1987 to 10th of February 1995 but not even a single vacancy has been given to scheduled castes either on the basis of reservation or on seniority-cum-merit although 26 vacancies were required to be filled up from amongst the scheduled castes on the basis of 20 per cent reservation in the cadre.
Not even a single person had been promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade II since 1987.
However, upto the year 1987 due share had been given.
In pursuance of the orders passed by the Court as referred to above, Shri BS Sudan, Joint Secretary, Secretariat Administration on behalf of respondent No. 1 has filed an additional affidavit wherein it has been pleaded that as per roster from 451974 to May 1993, there were 392 vacancies out of which 55 could have gone to scheduled caste, whereas 44 were given.
No promotion was made with effect from 13.5.1993 till the decision of the Supreme Court on 131996, when promotions were made on 241996.
No vacancy was given to scheduled castes as the prescribed percentage of the scheduled castes had already been achieved.
However, promotion of backward class candidates was made as they were occupying less number of posts than prescribed.
It has been admitted that 14 more vacancies have occurred in the cadre of Superintendent Grade-I from May 1993 to 10th of February, 1995 and no post had been given to the reserved category as they were already occupying one post more.
It has further been pleaded that there are 20 posts in the cadre of Superintendent Grade II.
Roster points from 325 to 446 have been filled from January 1987 to 29th of April, 1993.
Roster points No. 325, 331, 336 and 341 were given to scheduled castes from 1121987 to 1571987.
Eight employees were promoted on 14th May, 1993 but had to be reverted as Supreme Court of India had granted stay against promotions on 13th of May, 1993.
Therefore, on 13th of May, 1993 there were 6 scheduled caste employees working as Superintendent Grade II.
As per prescribed percentage, they could have occupied only four posts and therefore, held two posts in excess of the prescribed percentage.
Four scheduled caste Superintendent Grade II were promoted as Superintendent Grade I and therefore, two scheduled caste employees were promoted as Superintendent Grade II on 29th of September, 1996 and the quota of the reserved candidates was complete.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel representing the parties, we are of the view that there is no merit in this petition whatsoever.
It has been demonstrated that the quota of reserved category be it in Superintendent Grade I or Superintendent Grade II is already in excess.
As per law that has been settled by the Apex Court in RK Sabharwal's case and Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra) the petitioners have now to stand in queue alongwith general category candidates for securing promotion to the next higher post.
The promotion, as has been authoritatively held now, is permissible on the basis of posts and not on the basis of vacancies.
In so far as the prospective operation of declaration of law in RK Sabharwal's case (supra) in concerned, suffice it to say that it only means that the promotions already made on the basis of the law earlier holding the field would not be affected i.e. those already appointed on the next higher posts shall not be reverted but that does not mean that those who have not been promoted shall be promoted on the basis of vacancies occurring upto 10th February, 1995.
We find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same in limine.
Appeal dismissed.