Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - Plaintiff-appellant is challenging the impugned judgments and decrees whereby his suit has been dismissed by the trial Court which was affirmed by the appellate Court.
2.
Adumbrated facts of the case are that the plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for declaration to the effect that his services were wrongly terminated by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar-II on the basis of enquiry report, which is illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory, biased, based on no evidence, cryptic, against the principles of natural justice and provisions of Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Plaintiff pleaded that he was working as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways.
On the basis of false report of the Checking Staff, he was placed under suspension and was charge- sheeted vide order dated 1811988.
Charges were that he committed fraud to the extent of Rs. 855 by not issuing tickets to two passengers, who were travelling from Sumeha to Tohana in his bus.
He denied the charges, filed reply.
Departmental enquiry was held against him.
Plaintiff pleaded that the enquiry was not conducted in accordance with rules, reasonable opportunity to defend himself was denied to him; Enquiry Officer submitted report holding him guilty of charges.
On the basis of the enquiry report, the General Manager terminated his service illegally.
He gave notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, and prayed that the impugned order of termination dated 7.10.1988 be declared void and illegal.
3.
Defendant-respondent contested the suit.
In their written statement, they inter alia pleaded that the Civil Court at Jalandhar has no jurisdiction to try the suit and no valid notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, was given to the defendant before filing the suit.
Merits were also controverted and it was denied that the departmental enquiry was vitiated on any count.
4.
Parties led their evidence.
The trial Court recorded a finding that the departmental enquiry was held in accordance with rules of Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 and the rules of natural justice.
Evidence was also recorded.
Even those tickets which were issued by the plaintiff to those two passengers were seized and produced in evidence.
Report of the Enquiry Officer was thus, based on evidence.
Thus, findings on all issues were recorded against the plaintiff and his suit was dismissed.
5.
Plaintiff was unsuccessful in appeal as well.
6.
Appellant-plaintiff's learned counsel strenuously argued that the passengers to whom allegedly tickets of less amount were issued, were not examined.
Cash was not checked at the time of checking.
In the departmental enquiry also, those passengers were not examined.
Thus, there was no evidence on the basis of which the alleged charge could be said to have been proved.
7.
Appellant's learned counsel further submitted that Rule 8 of the said Rules was violated.
The plaintiff-appellant was never informed by the Enquiry Officer that he is entitled to get assistance of co-employee; therefore, he could not get assistance of co-employee and, thus, he has been denied opportunity to defend himself.
To support this contention, he has relied on Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, AIR 1983 Supreme Court 454.
8.
Lastly he argued that this was his first fault; removal from service is the harshest punishment.
He also pointed out that the lower appellate Court has wrongly held that the plaintiff-appellant admitted his guilt before the Enquiry Officer.
Rather, while submitting his reply to the charge-sheet, he denied all the allegations emphatically.
Hence, according to him, both the Courts below have fallen into an error in dismissing the plaintiff's suit/appeal.
9.
Respondents' learned counsel submitted that during enquiry, plaintiff admitted his guilt.
Reference to Rule 8 of the said Rules is not relevant in this case because this point was not raised before the lower Court.
Further, he never asked that assistance of co-employee be rendered to him.
Further, according to the respondents' learned counsel, plaintiff-appellant could not show how he is prejudiced if assistance of co-employee was not rendered to him.
10.
After hearing the rival contentions, in my considered view, appeal deserves to be dismissed.
11.
From the lower Court's judgment, it is evident that in the departmental enquiry, charges were framed against the plaintiff.
He submitted his reply; evidence was recorded; statements of the Checking Staff were recorded and those alleged tickets were also produced in evidence.
No doubt, the passengers to whom tickets of less amount were issued by the plaintiff, were not examined, but at the time when the plaintiff's bus was checked by the Checking Staff, they enquired from those two passengers and recovered the tickets also from them and thus, they found that tickets of less amount were issued to those two passengers and thereby the plaintiff caused a loss of Rs. 855 to the Roadways.
Hence, it cannot be said that the report of the Enquiry Officer is based on no evidence.
Both the Courts below have rightly arrived at this conclusion.
12.
So far as provision of Rule 8 is concerned, plaintiff is a Conductor by profession and thus, is a literate person.
Bhagat Ram's case (supra) is distinguishable on facts.
In that case, two employees were facing departmental enquiry.
Bhagat Ram was Class IV employee.
In the departmental enquiry, three witnesses were examined in the presence of Bhagat Ram, who could not even cross-examine them.
Thereafter, he availed the opportunity of being represented by an officer of his choice to defend him.
Thereafter those three witnesses, who were examined earlier, were not recalled for cross- examination.
On these facts, the Apex Court observed as under:-  "....
But if the delinquent officer is not informed of his right and an overall view of the inquiry shows that the delinquent Government servant was at a comparative disadvantage compared to the disciplinary authority represented by the Presenting Officer and as in the present case, a superior officer, co-delinquent, is also represented by an officer of his choice to defend him, the absence of anyone to assist such a Government servant belonging to the lower echelons of service would, unless it is shown that he had not suffered any prejudice, vitiate the inquiry."
13.
The Apex Court further held that if those three witnesses, who were examined earlier in the departmental enquiry and who were not cross-examined by the appellant-Bhagat Ram, would have been recalled for cross-examination after Bhagat Ram got the assistance of an officer of his choice, the defect in the enquiry could have been said to be cured, but that was not done.
Bhagat Ram, being class IV employee, a Forest Guard, was recruited either in late fifties or early sixties when the expectation of higher educational qualification for service as a Forest Guard could not have been expected, he was to participate in disciplinary proceedings.
He was pitted against a Presenting Officer representing the disciplinary authority and a co-delinquent who was his superior being defended by another officer.
Considering all these facts, the Apex Court held that the enquiry against appellant-Bhagat Ram was vitiated and his appeal was allowed.
He was reinstated in service.
14.
Thus, it is obvious that Bhagat Ram's case (supra) is distinguishable and does not help the plaintiff-appellant, who is an educated person.
During departmental enquiry, he never sought assistance of any co-employee, he himself filed his reply and cross-examined the witnesses examined in the departmental enquiry.
Lastly, no fact and circumstance could be pointed out by the plaintiff-appellant's learned counsel to show as to how the plaintiff is prejudiced if the said assistance of a co-employee was not rendered to him during the departmental enquiry.
15.
Thus, in my considered view, the lower Courts have not fallen into any error in dismissing the plaintiff's suit/appeal.
No infirmity or illegality could be pointed out in the concurrent finding recorded by the Courts below.
16.
Hence, on all counts, the appeal, being meritless, is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.