K Sreedharan, CJ.
- Petitioner is the son of an ex-serviceman who retired from military service on November 1, 1994.
In connection with service in the Army, petitioner's father, though a permanent resident of Haryana, stayed outside the State.
Consequently, petitioner had his education outside Haryana.
He passed All India Senior Secondary School Examination which is recognised by respondent-University as equivalent to the 12th Class examination of the Board of Secondary Education, Haryana in 1994.
He applied for taking the entrance test for admission to the Bachelor of Pharmacy Course in accordance with the prospectus published by the respondents.
Pursuant to the application, he was issued Roll No. 15330 at Centre No. 502 for taking the test for admission in 1996.
In the entrance test, he came out successful and his name was shown at Serial No. 1 in the merit list in the category of children of freedom fighters/physically handicapped candidates/wards of ex- servicemen.
To this category, one seat was reserved as per the prospectus.
On the basis of his rank in the merit list, he was called for interview.
He was denied admission on the ground that his father retired from military service prior to 141995 and so he was not entitled to the benefit of reservation.
This action on the part of the respondents is under challenge.
Petitioner inter alia prays for issuance of a direction to the respondents to admit him to the Bachelor of Pharmacy Course (4 years) 1996 and to declare that benefit of reservation as a dependent to ex-serviceman are available only to the wards of those ex-servicemen who retired after 141995 as illegal, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
A detailed written statement was filed by the Registrar of the Maharshi Dayanand University on behalf of the respondents.
It is contended therein that the provisions contained in the prospectus issued by the respondents on previous occasion was upheld by this Court and the Supreme Court when the Apex Court dismissed the Special Leave Petition Nos. 16149/1994, 16093/1994 and 18871 of 1994.
Consequently, it is contended that the eligibility criteria fixed in the prospectus is not open to challenge.
Petitioner is one who had not studied in any of the schools situated in Haryana.
Hence, he is not entitled to seek admission to the said Course.
Petitioner was to go through the provisions of the prospectus.
The prospectus made it abundantly clear that he was not having the eligibility to seek admission to the Course.
Wards of ex-servicemen retired recently alone were given the benefit of reservation.
One who retired from Army earlier to 141995 could have got his ward educated in Haryana in the 12th standard.
If the student had his 12th year study in one of the schools in Haryana, he could have claimed the benefit of reservation.
Petitioner's father having retired prior to 141995, could have had the petitioner's education in one of the schools in Haryana during 1995- 96.
Had the petitioner studied in a school in Haryana, he could have claimed the benefit as per the prospectus.
Petitioner had completed his 12th Class in 1994 from a School outside Haryana.
Therefore, it is contended that the petitioner cannot seek admission to the Course claiming the benefit of reservation.
3.
Prospectus for admission to Bachelor of Pharmacy Entrance Examination in 1996 was published by the Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak in June 1996.
Last date for receipt of the application forms by the Controller of Examination of the University was fixed therein as 971996.
Prospectus provided that candidates will be provisionally admitted to the examination subject to verification of their eligibility.
Further, it went on to state that candidates allowed provisionally to appear in the entrance examination cannot claim admission if found ineligible on verification of documents/certificates etc. at the time of interview.
This provision makes it clear that on account of taking the entrance examination and on getting a rank in the merit list, no candidate can put forth a claim for admission unless he is found eligible on verification of documents and certificates at the time of interview.
Petitioner applied for admission.
He was given admit card provisionally subject to verification of his eligibility.
With that admit card, he took the examination.
He came out successful.
He was put at rank No. 1 amongst the candidates who were to get the benefit of reservation in the category of children of freedom fighters, physically handicapped candidates/wards of ex-servicemen.
He was called for interview.
At the interview, he was denied admission as he was not found falling within the category entitled to reservation.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner rightly and fairly submitted that he is not putting forth any claim based on the principle of estoppel or promissory estoppel on account of the respondents having allowed the petitioner to take the entrance test.
Result in the entrance test and the ranking given, did not confer on the petitioner any right to claim admission if he is not otherwise entitled to.
So, the question that arises for consideration is whether the petitioner is otherwise entitled to seek admission to the course, as per the prospectus as a ward of ex-serviceman.
5.
Learned counsel appearing on either side made available to us copies of prospectus issued by Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak for admission to the Bachelor of Pharmacy Course (4 years).
Chapter I therein deals with distribution of seats to various categories of students.
Clause (c)(i) deals with reservation categories.
Sub-clause (c) therein relates to children of freedom fighters/physically handicapped candidates/children/wards of ex- servicemen.
Candidates of these categories are treated as a Group and one seat was reserved for that group.
6.
Eligibility conditions are contained in Chapter II of the prospectus.
Clause (i) states that candidates who have studied 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes as regular candidates in recognised Institutions in Haryana/Chandigarh are eligible.
As per this provision, admission is restricted to such candidates who had their courses of study for 10th and 10+2 classes in any of the recognised Institutions in Haryana/Chandigarh.
This provision of the prospectus was challenged in many writ petitions before this Court.
This Court upheld the said provision.
Matter was taken up before the Supreme Court.
SLP Nos. 16093/94, 16149/94 and 18871/94 filed against the decisions of this Court were dismissed.
Consequently, it has to be held that admission to the course is limited to the candidates who have studied in recognised Institutions in Haryana/Chandigarh.
Clauses (iv) and (v) of Chapter-II deal with children/wards of ex-servicemen etc. As per clause (iv), the children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependants of the ex-employees of Indian Defence Services/Para- Military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service record who retired from service after 141995 are also eligible to seek admission.
Similarly as per clause (v), children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependants of the Ex-employees of the Indian Defence Services/Para-Military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service record, provided the candidate has studied 10+2 class as a regular student in a recognised Institution in Haryana/Chandigarh.
Combined effect of the above two clauses can be stated in the following way :-  "Children of Ex-employees of Indian Defence Services who studied in one of the recognised Institutions in Haryana or Chandigarh in 10+2 Classes is eligible to seek admission."
Children of Ex-employees of Indian Defence Services who retired after 141995 are also eligible to seek admission even if they have not studied in any of the recognised Institutions in Haryana or Chandigarh.
What is the reason behind this provision ?
Children of Ex-employees who retired from service after 141995 will not be in a position to have one year study in any of the Institutions in Haryana or Chandigarh before 5th July, 1996.
It was only to safeguard the interest of the wards of such Ex-servicemen who belong to Haryana State, Clause (iv) of the prospectus was incorporated.
Ex-servicemen who retired prior to 141995, could have had their children educated in Haryana or Chandigarh in 10+2 class or more classes prior to 571996.
In this view of the matter, we do not find any vice in fixing the date of retirement of Military personnel as 141995.
The date 141995 according to us has been fixed with the purpose of achieving the object that a student must have had his one year study at least in Haryana or Chandigarh in case of personnel who retired from Defence Service prior to 141995.
The object sought to be achieved is that in the case of students who could undergo a course of study at least for one year, should have studied during that period in one of the recognised Schools in Haryana or Chandigarh.
Only those children who could undergo such a course of study because of the retirement of their parents belonging to Haryana are to get the benefit as per Clause (iv).
Petitioner completed his 10+2 in 1994 from a School outside Haryana and Chandigarh.
During the academic years 1994-95 and 1995-96, he was not studying in 10+1 or 10+2.
In his case, neither clause (iv) nor clause (v) of the eligibility conditions referred to above apply.
It, therefore, follows that he is not entitled to get the benefit of reservation as per provisions contained in the prospectus.
7.
Main attack levelled by the petitioner against clause (iv) of the eligibility conditions is that the date of retirement of employees in the Indian Defence Services was arbitrarily fixed as 141995.
It is argued that an employee who retired just prior to 141995 cannot be differentiated from one who retired on or after 141995.
According to the learned counsel, Ex- employees of Indian Defence Services form of a homogeneous category, they cannot be differentiated on the basis of the date of retirement.
In support of this argument, learned counsel relied on observations made by the Supreme Court in DS Nakara and others v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130.
We are not impressed with this argument.
The purpose of fixing 141995 as the date of retirement of the personnel is to know whether the child of the Ex- serviceman had the opportunity to study for at least one year in a recognised school in Haryana or Chandigarh.
Since the said date has been fixed for achieving the object underlying the policy, we do not find any ground to upset the said provisions on the ground that it is violative of the principles stated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara's case.
Petitioner got the prospectus in June 1996.
He was aware of the provisions contained in Chapter II regarding eligibility conditions.
So in June itself, he came to know of his ineligibility to get the benefit of reservation.
In spite of that, he applied for admission and took the test.When he was denied admission in conformity with the provisions of the prospectus, he approached this Court on 8.1.1997 challenging the provisions of the prospectus.
The delay caused in approaching this Court in the instant case is fatal to the petitioner.
We are at a loss to understand the reason for the delayed attack against the provisions in the prospectus.
In view of what has been stated above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.