Bilal Nazki, J - Petitioners are working as Workshop Instructors.
Petitioner No. 1 has done his three years course in Civil Engineering, whereas petitioner No. 2 has done his three years course in Mechanical Engineering.
It appears that the petitioners had been appointed in the J&K Technical Education Department as Workshop Instructors and subsequently they were deputed by the Government for undergoing three years diploma training course in the year, 1989, by virtue of an order contained in Annexure ``A'' to the writ petition.
They successfully competed the said courses and joined back the department.
Petitioners are at present working in the grade of Rs. 2000- 60-2300-EB-3200, which according to them is a grade higher than that of the Demonstrators working in Technical Education Department.
The Demonstrators, according to petitioners are placed in the grade of Rs. 1700-3200.
2.
The State has framed J&K Education (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1977.
Part-III of Schedule-B of the said rules lays down the mode and criterion for appointment of lecturers in Polytechnics.
According to this schedule, which has been given by the writ petitioners in the petition also, the posts of Lecturers are to be filled 50% by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion from Class-V and Demonstrators.
The grievance of the petitioners is that a Demonstrator can be promoted to the post of Lecturer, whereas the Rules do not provide a Workshop Instructor to be considered and promoted to the post of a Lecturer, although the present petitioners as Workshop Instructors have the same qualifications which a Demonstrator has, and the Workshop Instructor has a higher grade than the grade of a Demonstrator.
He is not considered for promotion to the post of a Lecturer.
The petitioner want this Court to issue mandamus, for commanding the respondents to include the post of Workshop Instructor in Part-II of Schedule-B of Jammu and Kashmir Education (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1977, and to promote the petitioners on the posts of lecturers.
3.
The respondents have appeared and filed their counter.
Rejoinder has also been filed by the petitioners.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
5.
The main ground on which this petition has been resisted by the respondents is that the Jammu and Kashmir Education (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1977, were framed vide SRO 470 of 1977, which SRO has been issued while exercising the powers conferred on the Governor under Section 124 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, and this is basically a Legislative power.
Mr. Chauhan GA appearing for the respondents submits that as per the settled position of law, it is not appropriate for this Court to issue direction to the Executive in respect of a sphere which is exclusively within domain of the State in its legislative power.
He further submits that the power under Section 124 to frame rules is essentially a Legislative Power, and the Power has already been exercised by the Governor.
And no directions can be issued to the Governor to frame a particular Rule or to amend a Rule in a particular fashion.
In this context, he has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1989 SC page 1899.
This was a case which had arisen out of a judgment passed by this Court.
While dealing with the matter regarding selection to the MBBS course, this Court had observed.
"Before parting with the case and even at the cost of repetition, I would like to emphasize on the State Government that to ensure fairness in the selection to the professional colleges, an autonomous independent statutory body, with security of tenure for its members, should be created expeditiously, to function as far as possible, on the lines suggested by the Division Bench in Jyotshana Sharma's case and the stop-gap arrangement made by reconstituting the competent authority comprising three gentlemen, as noticed earlier, should not be considered as a substitute for it.
In the interim period, the reconstituted Competent Authority should also function keeping in view the guidelines given by the Apex Court and this Court in various judgments, including the one in Jyotshna Sharma's case and the submission of Mr. BA Khan''.
6.
The direction to constitute an autonomous statutory body was challenged before the Supreme Court on the ground that it was an interference in the powers of the Legislature and the Executive.
The Supreme Court accepted that argument and held :  ``When a State action is challenged, the function of the Court is to examine the action in accordance with law and to determine whether the Legislature or the executive has acted within the powers and functions assigned under the Constitution and if not, the Court must strike down the action.
While doing so the Court must remain within its self-imposed limits.
The Court sits in judgment on the action of a coordinate branch of the Government.
While exercising power of judicial review of administrative action, the Court is not an appellate authority.
The Constitution does not permit the Court to direct or advise the executive in matters of policy or to sermonize qua any matter which under the Constitution lies within the sphere of legislature or executive, provided these authorities do not transgress their constitutional limits or statutory powers.''
While relying upon the said judgment, Mr. Chauhan submits that since the power to frame rules or to amend the rules under Section 124 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, is essentially a Legislative power of the State, this Court cannot direct the respondents to frame a particular Rule.
7.
Mr. Lehar on the other hand has drawn my attention to a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1988 SC page 1033.
He submits that the petitioners who have been trained by the State at their own expenses, have no chances of further promotion, and the Supreme Court has not appreciated, but deprecated the practice of denying promotional prospects in public service.
The Supreme Court in the said judgment has held :  ``Reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of public service.
That generates efficiency and appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of promotional prospects, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly.''
The Supreme Court went ahead and directed in the said case the respondents to create at least two promotional opportunities for the writ petitioners.
Mr. Lehar further submits that in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court passed in the year 1989, which is later than the judgment passed in the year 1988, this Court can order amendment of the Rules.
I do not agree with Mr. Lehar.
Both the said judgments of the Supreme Court are not in conflict with each other.
On the matter of principle, it is very much settled that this Court cannot direct the State Government to exercise its Legislative or Executive powers in a particular manner.
In the present case, this Court cannot order amendment of the Rules, which have been framed by the Governor in exercise of a Constitutional and Legislative power.
The judgment of the Supreme Court (1989 supra) only lays down that State should create promotional avenues in all wings of public service in order to avoid stagnation.
8.
Keeping in view the mandate of the said judgment, while dismissing this writ petition, I direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners who have been trained at the State exchequer, but have no chances of future promotions.
It is for the State to devise methods for utilising the services of the petitioners to the maximum benefit and to avoid their stagnation at a particular post.
Petition dismissed.