M. Ramakrishna, CJ.
- 'Atul Sharma, appellant herein was the petitioner in W.P. No. 913/96 seeking certain reliefs at the hands of the learned Single Judge in the said writ petition.
They learned Single Judge having declined to grant that reliefs, the writ petitioner has presented this appeal challenging the correctness and legality of the orders made by the learned Single Judge on 12-3-1997, in the above said writ petition.
2.
A few facts which are necessary for the disposal of this appeal are as follows :-  3.
Respondent No. 2, J and K Public Service Commission, through its Secretary issued a Notification duly published in the newspapers on 2191995 calling applications for examination to Combined Service (Preliminary Competitive Examination).
Pursuant to the said Notification the appellant filed an application as one of the candidates.
It is stated that he was also permitted to take the preliminary examination.
He has successfully completed the preliminary examination and the results were declared.
On the completion of the preliminary examination successfully he had to take main examination to be conducted by the Public Service Commission, but the respondent No. 2 has pointed out by an endorsement issued to the appellant that the appellant was not eligible to appear in the examination to which he has applied as on the last date fixed in the notification for receiving application, he was not qualified inasmuch as, the BA final examination results came to be declared some time after the last date fixed by the Public Service Commission i.e. 31- 10-1995.
It is not in dispute that though the final examination of BA had been held earlier, there has been some delay in declaration of the results.
It is stated that as per annexure 'A' produced in the appeal a declaration was made by the appellant on 15-10-1995 in which he has produced a copy of annexure-B addressed to Secretary, J and K Public Service Commission, Srinagar saying that the following certificates would be submitted shortly before the examination starts :-  (i) Graduate qualification certificate (result awaited); (ii) Permanent Resident Certificate of self, which is under process.
However, photocopy of father's permanent Resident Certificate is enclosed.
Thus, even on 15-10-1995, the appellant did not possess a certificate in regard to academic qualification, when the matter came before the writ court, it was pointed out as on 31-10-1995, the last date fixed in the Notification for receiving applications by the Public Service Commission, the appellant did not possess the qualification of BA Degree.
There is no dispute about that.
Therefore, the appellant was denied the Roll No. slip to enable him to take the final examination to be held by the PUblic Service Commission, according to the scheme.
Therefore, a question arose before the learned Single Judge whether the action taken by the PUblic Service Commission in cancelling the candidature of the appellant to take the main examination was justified.
The learned Single Judge referred to the legal contentions urged in support of the writ petition considering the real questions at pages 3, 4 and 5 of the judgment.
He has pointed out that if as on the last date of receiving applications being 31-10-1995 if the appellant did not possess necessary prescribed qualification required to become eligible to apply for the examination, such a person is not to be found eligible to take the main examination, though he has appeared and passed through the preliminary examination, held by the Public Service Commission.
The learned Single Judge placed reliance upon the Supreme Court judgment in UPSC V/s Alpana, reported in 1994 (2) SCC 723.
Following the said judgment he held that the writ petition has no merit.
While up holding the action taken by the respondent No. 2, the writ petition came to be dismissed.
Hence this appeal.
4.
We have heard Mr. Jalali, learned counsel for the appellant, who after quoting certain documents produced in Support of the appeal, argued (i) Regard being had to the provisions of Rule 7 of the SRO 161 of 1995, the appellant had necessary eligibility to appear for the main examination; (ii) In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar v/s Chander Shekher, reported as 1993 Supp(2) SCC 611, a Division Bench of the Supreme Court has held that such a person cannot be said to be in eligible and that the view taken by the Supreme Court in that case has not been followed by the learned Single Judge.
5.
The last contention urged by Mr. Jalali, the learned counsel for the appellant is that the court must take into consideration the equity prevailed in favour of the appellant since the appellant having been allowed to take the preliminary examination, after depositing the requisite fee and he having passed through successfully that examination, at the tail end of the process the respondent No. 2 ought not to have prevented the appellant from taking final examination, particularly in view of the fact that t for the last 13 years no such examination could be conducted in the Jammu and Kashmir State on account of the peculiar circumstances prevalent in the State.
6.
We will take the first contention raised by Mr. Jalali, learned counsel or the appellant.
He drew our attention that Rule 7 of the SRO deals with the eligibility of candidates for preliminary examination, who have submitted their applications in the prescribed form alongwith the fee payable in terms of the notification.
It says, 'candidates who have not produced necessary certificates such as Scheduled Caste Certificate, Permanent Resident Certificate,e etc. such person are allowed to comply with the said condition and to produce such document at a later stage at the time of holding main examination.
If that is the interpretation why a lenient view should not be taken to enable such a candidate, as the appellant is to take the examination, was had successfully passed through the preliminary examination.
He has also submitted that Rule 7 should not be construed as Rule of law, berefit of human considerations as it would result in harsh and in human results.
7.
It appears to us, we can consider contentions No. 1 and 2 together.
At the very out set we may point out that Rule 7 of the J and K Public Service Commission (Conduct of Examination) Rules, 1973, followed by the State of J and K for the purpose of such examinations reads as under :-  "7.
Candidates for the preliminary examination shall submit alongwith their applications prescribed fee and attested copies of certificates in support of their claims regarding age, educational qualifications, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, other Backward Classes and holding of a civil post in the State which will be verified by the Commission at the time of main examination only.
They shall ensure that they fulfil all the eligibility conditions for admission to the preliminary examination on the last date fixed by the commission for receipt of application.
The admission to the preliminary examination shall be purely provisional and if on verification at any later date, it is found that the candidates had claimed eligibility for such examination by mis-representation, fraud or concealment of material fact or impersonation,his candidature shall be concealed and he will be liable to prosecution/disciplinary action by the Commission.
The candidates who are declared by the Commission to have qualified for admission to the mind examination will have to apply again alongwith prescribed application form, which would be available in the Commission."
By looking at the language employed in this Rule, it is made clear that a duty is cast upon the candidates seeking to appear for the examination that such candidate shall ensure that they fulfil all the eligibility conditions for admission to the preliminary examination on the last date fixed by the Commission for receipt of applications.
Construing this language found in Rule 7, the learned Single Judge held that if on the last date of receiving applications fixed as 31-10-1995, the appellant-petitioner was not eligible in asmuchas he did not possess a certificate of BA Pass, then such person cannot be said to be eligible.
This view of the learned Single Judge, which is supported by the authority of Supreme Court in Alpana's case (supra).
Hence it is difficult to accept the argument of Mr. Jalali, learned counsel for the appellant that this view is either incorrect or illegal.
8.
Another argument advanced in support of the appeal by the learned counsel for the appellant is that this view of Division Bench of Supreme Court in Alpana's case is contrary to the view taken by the larger Bench of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekher's reported in (1993 Supp (2) SCC 611 : 1993(2) SCT 208(SC).
He has pointed out that in similar circumstances Supreme Court permitted a candidate, who having not fulfilled the academic qualification on the last date of receiving application, taking humantarian considerations, that such a person must be allowed to take examination.
9.
As a matter of fact in considering the case of Alpana (supra), the Division Bench of Supreme Court did refer the case of Ashok Kumar (supra), wherein it was held as under:-  " If the principle of Rule 37 if by analogy applicable, the fact that notice of provisional entertainment of applications, subject to passing of the examination before the date of interview, is a requirement in the interest of candidates who fell within that category.
The appellants are by analogy persons of that category, but they have no complaint on any such ground."
Indeed, this aspect of the matter has been considered by the learned Single Judge in the writ petition and he has pointed out that as on the date when the application was received by respondent No. 2 in the instant case by virtue of the Notification, this Rule 37 of the J and K Public Service Commission Rules, was no longer on statute book.
Therefore, the question of applying analogy on these facts would not arise.
10.
It is brought to our notice by Mr. DC Raina, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 that the judgment of Ashok Kumar is under review before the Supreme Court.
11.
Considering the last submission of Mr. Jalali, learned counsel for the appellant we are of view that it is true that since the appellant having been permitted to take the preliminary examination and having passed through the examination successfully land while he was hoping to take the main examination, this provision has come in his way resulting in hardship, but that we found on the real question of law and interpretation of the statute correctly.
Therefore, we cannot take a different view from the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
12.
Before parting with this matter, it is necessary to mention here that according to the argument advanced by Mr. Jalali, learned counsel for the appellant that Rule 7 of the SRO 161 cannot be construed to be mandatory, but it is only directory.
We have carefully considered the language in this Rule 7 and the objectives which are to be achieved and we must hold that regard being had to the intention of the legislation, the eligibility condition for taking the examination on the last date fixed by the commission for receiving the applications must be taken into consideration to hold a candidate eligible.
Merely, because the respondent No. 2 allowed the appellant to take the preliminary examination perhaps by a mistaken notion, that would not give any right to the appellant.
In this view of the matter, it is not correct to say that Rule 7 is directory and not mandatory.
In view of the foregoing, the appeal stands dismissed.