VK Gupta, J - The cut-off date of 1st January, 1986 in the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Employees) Pension Rules, 1995 (1995 Rules, for short) is at the centre of the controversy between the petitioners and the respondents in this petition.
The petitioners claim and contend that by prescribing the cut-off date as 1st January, 1986 in the 1995 Rules, the respondents have discriminated against them in the matter of determining the eligibility for the grant of pension on superannuation and that if this discrimination is removed, the petitioners also become eligible for this benefit.
2.
This writ petition has been filed by the Retired Insurance Employees Association, petitioner No. 1 which claims to be a society registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 and six other petitioners individually and as representatives of all former employees of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC, for short), who all retired prior to 1st January, 1986.
Petitioners 2 to 7 claim to have been in the service of LIC, having retired therefrom on varying dates, say October 82, October 83 or February or December 85 and so on and so forth.
In any case all of them retired form the service of LIC prior to 1st January, 1986, which means, in other words that none of them was in the service of the LIC on or after 1st January, 1986.
3.
In exercise of the power conferred by Section 48 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, the Central Government promulgated 1995 Rules under which, the employees working in the LIC were granted the benefit of pension after retirement, instead of the then prevailing Provident Fund Scheme, after having rendered the minimum prescribed qualifying service in the Corporation.
Broadly speaking 1995 Rules, even though applied in the matter of grant of retiring pension to all employees prospectively who are in the service of the LIC, in respect of the past employees it provided that such of the employees who were in the service of the Corporation on or after 1st January, 1986 but had retired before 1st November, 1993 and those who retired on or after 1st November, 1993 but before the notified date etc. etc. would be eligible for the grant of the benefit of pension after retirement, subject to certain other eligibility considerations, to which we are not concerned in this case.
Our sole concern, rather the only one is about the fixation of the cut-off date as first January, 1986.
Other speculations in Rule 3 of 1995 Rules regarding the eligibility criteria, apart from the cut-off date do not concern us at all in this case.
4.
LIC was set up in 1956 under the Life Insurance Corporation of India Act, 1956.
In 1957, in terms of the Life Insurance Corporation (Alteration of Remuneration and other Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Order 1957, it was provided that all confirmed employees of the LIC shall contribute to the provident fund at the rate of 813 per cent of their salary with an equal contribution by the Employer and that a separate Trust shall be established in respect of such fund.
Subsequently the Life Insurance Corporation of India Provident Fund Rules, 1956 were also brought into force to deal with the matters relating to the Provident Fund.
Some time in 1989 the quantum of contribution towards the provident fund was raised to 10 per cent of the aggregate basic pay.
5.
The Fourth Pay Commission was constituted by the Central Government to enquire into the pay structure and other terms and conditions relating to the employees of the Central Government and the Central Public Sector Undertakings etc. etc. As a consequence of the recommendations of the Fourth Central Pay Commission, pension scheme was introduced in respect of such employees of the Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) who had not been receiving pension hitherto.
6.
The explanation of the respondents with regard to fixing 1st January, 1986 as the cut-off date is indeed very simple.
The respondents say that because the recommendations of the Fourth Central Pay Commission became effective from 1st January, 1986, the pensions scheme as recommended by the Pay Commission and as introduced, also became effective from 1st January, 1986.
It is contended by the respondents that Reserve Bank of India had also introduced the same pension scheme for its employees and brought it into effect from 1186 and similarly all the nationalised Banks adopted the same pension scheme effective from 1st January, 1986.
According to the respondents, Central Government as a matter of policy fixed 1st January, 1986 as cut-off date for the introduction of the pension scheme and eligibility of the employees to receive the benefits flowing therefrom and the LIC being one of the PSUs of the Central Government, also adopted the Pension Scheme by fixing the cut-off date as 1st January, 1986.
7.
Despite the aforesaid explanation having been rendered by the respondents in their affidavit-in-opposition, the contention of the petitioners is that the respondents have discriminated against the petitioners, thus violating Articles 14 and 16 the Constitution of India in the matter of excluding the petitioners from the purview and applicability of 1995 Rules, thus denying to them the benefit of receiving pension on retirement, even though other former employees of LIC, similarly placed as the petitioners are, have been given this benefit.
The petitioners contend that there is no rationale for fixing 1st January, 1986 as the cut-off date and that this was arbitrarily fixed, without any objective criteria.
In the petition various facts and figures were quoted by the petitioner to very strongly contend and submit that LIC is financially very sound and it is in a position to pay the pension to even those employees who had retired prior to 1st January, 1986.
8.
Very strong reliance has been placed by the petitioners upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of DS Nakara v. Union of India reported in AIR 1983 SC 130.
The respondents on the other hand have relied upon subsequent judgments of the Supreme Court whereby the judgment in DS Nakara was distinguished by the Apex Court.
9.
DS Nakara v. Union of India was a case in which the Supreme Court was dealing with the constitutional validity of a memorandum issued by the Government of India on 25 May, 1979 whereby the formula for computation of pension was liberalised but was made applicable to such Government servants who were in service on or after 31st March 1979.
This liberalised pension formula was applicable to employees governed by the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1973.
By the introduction of the aforesaid office memorandum on 25th May, 1979 therefore the pensioners covered by 1972 Rules were accordingly divided into two categories, namely those who retired from Service on or after 31st March, 1979 and those who had retired prior to this date.
The liberalised pension formula was applicable to only those employees who retired after 31st March, 1979 and such of the employees who had retired prior to 31st March 1979 were denied the benefits of the liberalised pension formula.
In other words the office memorandum dated 25 May, 1979, even though dealing with the pensioners as a whole sought to discriminate between one set of pensioners against another set of pensioners, both sets of pensioners were governed by 1972 Rules and yet, whereas one set of pensioner who had retired prior to 31st March, 1979 were denied the liberalised benefits of pension, the other set of pensioners who retired after 31st March, 1979 were given these benefits.
The Supreme Court therefore was dealing with the question of discrimination and violation of Articles 14 and 16 vis-a-vis the two classes of pensioners as such.
The question posed for consideration of Supreme Court was whether the pensioners as a whole constitute a class and was it permissible for the State to discriminate between two sets of pensioners, only with reference to their dates of retirement.
Their Lordships were clearly of the view that it was not open to the State to do so because the pensioners of the Central Government formed a class for purposes of pensionary benefits and there could not be a mini-classification within the class designated as pensioners.
The following observations may be quoted with advantage :  ``Primary contention is that the pensioners of the Central Government form a class for purpose of pensionery benefits and there could not be mini-classification within the class designated as pensioners.
The expression `pensioner' is generally understood in contra-distinction to the one in Service.
Government servants in service, in other words, those who have not retired, are entitled to salary and other allowances.
Those who retire and are designated as `pensioners' are entitled to receive pension under the relevant rules.
Therefore, this would clearly indicate that those who render service and retire on superannuation or any other mode of retirement and are in receipt of pension are comprehended in the expression `pensioners'.''
10.
Supreme Court thus rejected the contention of the respondents in that case that the pensioners who retired from Central Government service all did not form a class by themselves but pensioners who retired prior to certain dates and those who retired after a certain date formed distinct and separate classes.
What was suggested was that when a pension scheme underwent a revision and was enforced effective from a certain date, the date so specified became a sort of a rubicon and those who retired prior to that date formed one class and those who retired on a subsequent date formed a distinct and separate class and no one could cross the rubicon.
After discussing various aspects of the matter, their Lordships finally observed as under :  ``If it appears to be undisputable, as it does to us that the pensioners for the purpose of pension benefits form a class, would its upward revision permit a homogeneous class to be divided by arbitrarily fixing an eligibility criteria unrelated to purpose of revision, and would such classification be founded on some rational principle ?
The classification has to be based, as is well settled, on some rational principle and the rational principle must have nexus to the objects sought to be achieved.
We have set out the objects underlying the payment of pension.
If the State considered it necessary to liberalise the pension scheme, we find no rational principle behind it for granting these benefits only to those who retired subsequent to that date simultaneously denying the same to those who retired prior to that date.
If the liberalisation was considered necessary for augmenting social security in old age to Government servants then those who retired earlier cannot be worse off than those who retire later.
Therefore, this division which classified pensioners into two classes is not based on any rational principle and if the rational principle is the one of dividing pensioners with a view to giving something more to persons otherwise equally placed, it would be discriminatory.''
11.
DS Nakara v. Union of India (supra) fell for consideration in a subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Krishena Kumar v. Union of India, and a batch of other cases reported in 1990(4) Supreme Court Cases 207.
The following observations of their Lordships may be quoted with advantage at page 1501 of Lab IC :  ``Admittedly, the entire case of the petitioners is sought to be based on the decision in Nakara case.
Mr. Kapil Sibal submits that the petitioners' basic assumption is erroneous inasmuch as Nakara case did not hold that whenever there was a liberalisation of pension all other pension retirees and PF retirees must be given option and that the older system of pension or Provident Fund was always insufficient.
According to counsel the only question decided in Nakara can be gathered from the following paragraph of the report at page 172 (SCC p. 311, para 2) : ``Do pensioners entitled to receive superannuation or retiring pension under Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (`1972 Rules', for short) form a class as a whole ?
Is the date of retirement a relevant consideration for eligibility when a revised formula for computation of pension is ushered in and made effective from a specified date ?
Would differential treatment to pensioners related to the date of retirement qua the revised formula for computation of pension attract Article 14 of the Constitution and the element of discrimination liable to be declared unconstitutional as being violative of Article 14 ?''
The basic question of law that has to be decided, therefore, is what was ratio decidendi in Nakara case and how far that would be applicable to the case of the PF retirees.''
12.
After making the aforesaid observations, their Lordships went on to say :  ``The question then is, has the Court said in Nakara that what was applicable to pensioners vis-a-vis liberalisation of pension was to be equally applicable to PF retirees ?
In Nakara case petitioners 1 and 2 were retired pensioners of the Central Government, the first being a civil servant and the second being a member of the service personnel of the Armed Forces.
The third petitioner was a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, formed to ventilate the legitimate public problems and was espousing the cause of the pensioners all over the country.
The first petitioner retired in 1972 and on computation, his pension worked out at Rs. 675/- per month and with dearness allowance he was drawing monthly pension of Rs. 935.
The second petitioner retired at or about that time and at the relevant time was in receipt of a pension plus dearness relief of Rs.
981.''
13.
After examining various aspects of the issue involved in Nakara's case their Lordships in Krishena Kumar v. Union of India accordingly held as under :  ``Thus the Court treated the pension retirees only as a homogeneous class.
The PF retirees were not in mind.
The Court also clearly observed that while so reading down it was not dealing with any fund and there was no question of the same cake being divided amongst larger number of the pensioners than would have been under the notification with respect to the specified date.
All the pensioners governed by the 1972 Rules were treated as a class because payment of pension was a continuing obligation on the part of the State till the death of each of the pensioners and, unlike the case of Contributory Provident Fund, there was no question of a fund in liberalising pension.''
14.
It thus becomes clear that the Supreme Court in Krishena Kumar, after discussing in details the submissions made, observed that in DS Nakara's case the Court had never held that both the pensioner retirees and non- pensioner retirees formed a class and that any further classification among them would be violative of Article 14.
In fact the Court in DS Nakara had clearly observed that it was not dealing with the problem of fund.
15.
DS Nakara v. Union of India came up for consideration before another Bench of Supreme Court in the case of All India Reserve Bank Officers Association v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1992 SC 767.
In this case Reserve Bank of India Pension Regulations, 1990 came up for consideration before the Supreme Court whereby, as in the present case before us, a pension scheme was introduced under which the pension benefits were made available to the serving employees of Reserve Bank of India, that is the employees who were in service of the Reserve Bank of India as on the date of the introduction of the scheme and such former employees of the bank who had retired from the bank service between 1st January, 1986 and 1st November, 1990.
Regulation 3(3) of the aforesaid 1990 Regulations came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in this case.
The petitioners in that case also were such former employees of the bank, as in the present case before us, who had retired from the service of the Bank before 1st January, 1986.
The ratio in DS Nakara was strongly relied upon by the petitioners in the Reserve Bank of India case.
After taking into account all contentions raised by the parties their Lordships held that this scheme introduced by the Regulations was a totally new one and that it came into existence only upon its introduction with effect from 1st November, 1990.
The employees of the Bank, who had retired prior to that date were admittedly governed by the CPF scheme and had received the benefits of the employer's contribution under that scheme and on superannuation the amount to their account had been duly disbursed to them and was made (sic) was of also.
It thus meant that the retirement benefits admissible to them under the extant rules of the Bank had been paid to them.
Because of the demands of the Bank Employees the Central Government had approved a pension scheme in lieu of the CPF scheme and consequent upon such approval pension scheme was introduced with effect from 1st November, 1990.
Their Lordships held that if by the introduction of the Pensions Scheme, if the CPF retirees were not included in this new scheme, they could not make any grievance in that behalf.
Since they could not claim coverage under new Pension Scheme as they had already retired and had in fact collected the retirement benefits from the employer.
However, their Lordships observed that the moot question was whether it was open to the employer to grant the benefit of the Pension Scheme to one group of CPF retirees who had retired from Bank service on or after 1st January, 1986 and deny the same to all those who had retired on or before 31st December, 1985.
The moot question as was proposed by their Lordships may be reproduced as under :-  ``But the moot question is whether it was open to the employer to grant the benefit of the pension scheme to one group of CPF retirees who had retired from Bank service on or after 1st January, 1986 and deny the same to all those who had retired on or before 31st December, 1985.
Is this division of CPF retirees discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution ?''
16.
After proposing the aforesaid moot question, their Lordships held as under :  ``The underlying principle is that when the State decides to revise and liberalise any existing pension scheme with a view to augmenting the social security cover granted to pensioners, it cannot ordinarily grant the benefit to a section of the pensioners and deny the same to others by drawing an artificial cut-off line which cannot be justified on rational grounds and is wholly unconnected with the object intended to be achieved.
But when an employer introduces an entirely new scheme which has no connection with the existing scheme, different considerations enter the decision making process.
One such consideration may be the financial implications of the scheme and the extent of capacity of the employer to bear the burden.
Keeping in view its capacity to absorb the financial burden that the scheme would throw, the employer would have to decide upon the extent of applicability of the scheme.
That is why in Nakara's case this Court drew a distinction between continuance of an existing scheme in its liberalised form and introduction of a wholly new scheme; in the case of the former all the pensioners had a right to pension on uniform basis and any division which classified them into two groups by introducing a cut-off date would ordinarily violate the principle of equality in treatment unless there is a strong rationable discernible for so doing and the same can be supported on the ground that it will subserve the object sought to be achieved.
But in the case of a new scheme, in respect whereof the retired employees have no vested right, the employer can restrict the same to certain class of retirees, having regard to the fact situation in which it came to be introduced, the extent of additional financial burden that it will throw, the capacity of the employer to bear the same, the feasibility of extending the scheme to all retirees regardless of the dates of their retirement, the availability of records of every retiree, etc. etc.
It must be realised that in the case of an employee governed by the CPF scheme his relations with the employer came to an end on his retirement and receipt of the CPF amount but in the case of an employee governed under the pension scheme his relations with the employer merely undergo a change but do not snap altogether.
That is the reason why this Court in Nakara's case drew a distinction between liberalisation of an existing benefit and introduction of a totally new scheme.
In the case of pensioners it is necessary to revise the pension periodically as the continuous fall in the rupee's value and the rise in prices of essential commodities necessitates an adjustment of the pension amount but that is not the case of employees governed under the CPF scheme, since they had received the lump sum payment which they were at liberty to invest in a manner that would yield optimum return which would take care of the inflationary trends.''
17.
The clear observations of the Supreme Court therefore in the aforesaid two judgments, in Krishena Kumar's case and in Reserve Bank of India case, clearly set at rest any controversy with regard to the charge of the petitioners that they were discriminated against by respondents by fixing the cut-off date as 1st January, 1986.
Reading the three Supreme Court judgments together, it clearly emerges that in DS Nakara the Court, while dwelling upon the concept of class legislation had clearly in mind the fact that pensioners as a whole constituted one class whereas, in the later two judgments, it was clarified beyond any doubt that the serving employees and the retired employees, that is the employees in service as on the date of introduction of the Scheme and those who had retired prior to this date formed two separate and distinct classes and that one could not complain of discrimination by one against the other.
Since the retired employees constituted a different class altogether, it could safely be said that they could not be clubbed with the serving employees.
18.
The retired employees have to lay the foundation for establishing a right of getting pension.
In the absence of any right as such, they cannot claim that a new scheme which was introduced for the benefit of serving employees should be made applicable to them.
Their only grievance could be the arbitrariness in fixing the cut-off date.
With regard to the cut-off date enough explanation has already been given by the respondents.
If by fixing a cut-off date in arbitrary exercise of power or without any proper application of mind, an artificial division of a homogeneous group, not based any logic or rationale or having any nexus to the object sought to be achieved, has been created, such artificial creation undoubtedly offends Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
There is no doubt whatsoever that whenever the State promulgates or brings into force any new Rules or Regulations having the force of law, the choice of the cut-off date which, by the very nature of the things has to be introduced to effectuate such benefits is always open to scrutiny by the courts and must be supported on the touch-stone of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India.
If the choice of the date results in a classification which is impermissible or which is not based on objective criteria, and which creates irrational classification or forms division of members of a homogeneous group, contrary to the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, it would be open to the Court to insist that it be shown that the classification is based upon intelligible differentia and has a direct nexus to rational considerations and the purpose and object sought to be achieved.
The differential and separate treatments given to those who retired prior to a specified date and those who retired subsequent thereto, must therefore be explained on the touchstone of Article 14, otherwise it would be contrary to the concept of equality before law.
19.
In the case of Mrs. Sushma Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, reported in AIR 1985 SC 1367, while dealing with the question of fixing a particular cut-off date, their Lordships of the Supreme Court even went to the extent of holding that the prescription of a particular date from which the period should begin and the date on which it is to end were merely incidental to the purpose and that perhaps any date could have served the purpose.
20.
Coming to the argument of the learned advocate for the petitioners that the LIC has the means to pay the pension to the petitioners and others who retired before 1st January, 1986 and that the LIC is also maintaining the records of all such pre-January 1986 retirees, it has to be clearly stated that the considerations of the capacity to pay or the maintenance of records are not relevant to the issues involved in this case.
The mainstay of the petitioners' grievance revolved around the charge of discrimination, as being opposed to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In support of this charge, the requirement is for the petitioners to assert that they had a right to be treated at par with post-January 1986 retirees.
In the light of the observation made in earlier parts of this judgment, it has clearly been found and held that neither the petitioners succeeded in proving nor establishing that any hostile discrimination was practised against them by the respondents nor could they establish or assert any vested right in being treated at par with post-January 1986 retirees.
In other words, once it is found and held that the classification of the former LIC employees, for the purpose of their entitlement to receive pension, based on the cut-off date of 111986 was objective, and reasonable as well as legitimate, the court is not required to go into any question relating to the capacity of the LIC to grant pension or the fact that the LIC is still possessed of the records of all pre-1986 employees.
Undoubtedly in the body of the writ petition, the petitioners have furnished elaborate figures and submitted detailed facts regarding the means of the LIC in order to prove and establish that LIC is a profit-making organisation and that sufficient funds are available for it to pay pension to even pre-1986 retirees, the fact still remains that unless, either the petitioners had a right to receive pension or that they could successfully establish discrimination against them, no directions can be issued for including them in the list of such retirees who are entitled to receive pension.
21.
For the foregoing reasons therefore I am of the opinion that the petitioners have not been able to make out any case for the grant of any relief.
The writ petition has no merit and is accordingly dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.