Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was employed as a Lineman with the Bhakra Beas Management Board.
He proceeded on leave from October 18, 1984 to October 26, 1984.
The petitioner did not report for duty on October 27, 1984.
He continuously asked for extension of leave till September 2, 1985.
Ultimately, when he reported for duty on September 3, 1985, he was informed that he cannot be permitted to join duty.
Aggrieved, he raised an industrial dispute.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court by the Central Government.
The Labour Court having rejected the petitioner's claim, he has filed the present writ petition.
2.
Mr. Arora, counsel for the petitioner has contended that overstayal of leave is a misconduct.
Since the petitioner was accused of having over- stayed the leave, his services could not have been terminated except after holding a regular enquiry.
Counsel has placed reliance on two Division Bench decisions of this Court in Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, 1995(1) Labour Industrial Cases 88 : 1994(4) SCT 444 and Sita Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, 1995(4) SCT 321 : 1995(5) SLR 564.
Consequently, it has been prayed that the award given by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
On the other hand, it has been pointed out by the counsel for the respondent that the petitioner had actually abandoned the job and, thus, the award deserves to be sustained.
3.
A perusal of the award shows that the Labour Court has come to a categorical finding that "the workman had deliberately been absenting himself from duty unlawfully and, thus, he had abandoned the job of his own by coming up with false plea on the pretext of illness of his mother".
The Labour Court has further found as a fact that a perusal of the letter dated December 26, 1986, which is on record as Ex. M10 shows that "the workman had travelled in the flight IA 430/18.10.84 vide ticket number 0734100851297.
This letter was issued by the Iraqi Airways to Shri Jagir Singh, Executive Engineer, BBMB in reply to his demi-official letter dated 23.12.86."
The Court has further found that vide letter Ex. M2, the workman was informed that "his requests for extension were rejected....
Thereafter, communication Ex. M4 was sent to workman whereby it was informed that the request for extension had been rejected and that he should resume his duties immediately.
Exhibits M6 to M8 are public notices as released in the Indian Express, Chardhi Kalan and Rozana Ranjeet (Punjabi papers) respectively".
The registered letters which were received back undelivered had been addressed to the workman at his permanent home address.
These are Exhibits M.11 to M.13.
It is evident from these envelopes that the workman was "not available at home despite visits by the postman."
Nothing has been either produced on record or pointed out to show that these findings recorded by the Labour Court are contrary to the evidence or are otherwise vitiated.
4.
The only plea taken by the workman was that he was absent on account of the illness of his mother.
For this purpose, he had produced a certificate dated December 20, 1985.
The Labour Court has considered this matter and found that no explanation had been given by the workman for not producing the private doctor who is alleged to have looked after his mother.
Still further, the petitioner's mother had remained "under treatment with the Nursing Home upto August 1985 and the certificate was managed on 201285 i.e. after a period of four months from the date of expiry of treatment of Smt. Sard Kaur."
In this view of the matter, even the defence raised by the workman has been rejected.
We find that the findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court are based on a correct appreciation of evidence and these call for no interference.
5.
It is true that overstayal of leave is a misconduct.
It is also true that whenever a workman is accused of a misconduct, a regular enquiry should be held.
However, no hard and fast rule can be laid down.
Each case has to be examined on its own facts.
In a case like the present one where the workman either goes abroad or makes himself scarce with the result that every communication sent by the management or notice published by it in the Press remains unacknowledged, it is not understood as to how the employer is expected to reach the employee.
The workman in the present case had not responded to the public notice published in the Press.
The registered letters sent to him at his permanent address were received back undelivered.
He had failed to report for duty.
In such a situation, the management was left totally helpless.
It had no alternative but to do what it was constrained to do.
6.
Mr. Arora has contended that a person who continuously asks for extension of leave cannot be accused of having abandoned the job.
7.
This plea in the circumstances of the present case cannot be accepted.
It has not been shown to us by producing either the copies of the applications or otherwise that the petitioner had actually a genuine cause for asking for leave.
It has also not been shown that he had disclosed his address during the period when he was away on leave.
It is clearly established on the file that the registered letters were sent to the petitioner but he was not available at the address which had been given by him to the management.
In this situation, the inference drawn by the Labour Court that he was in fact not available at the permanent address is well-founded.
8.
Mr. Arora has then pointed out that certain other persons who had gone abroad have been left off with the penalty of stoppage of two increments while the service of the petitioner have been terminated.
He concedes that even though those three workmen had initially denied having gone abroad, they had later on admitted the truth and were let off with minor penalty of a stoppage of increments.
He, however, submits that even they were liars and as such, the action of the management in terminating the services of the petitioner suffers from the vice of discrimination.
9.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
It is unfortunate that the counsel for the petitioner does not see any difference between a person who persists in telling a lie and another who has the courage to admit the truth.
10.
The decisions cited by the learned counsel are clearly distinguishable on facts and he cannot derive any advantage therefrom in the present case.
The findings recorded by the Labour Court call for no interference.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
It is a fit case for the award of costs.
In fact, the conduct of the petitioner leaves a lot to desire.
However, keeping in view the fact that he had failed before the Labour Court as well as this court, we pass no order as to costs.