DM Patnaik, J - The petitioner invokes extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of Indian to quash the departmental proceeding in Charge-sheet No. WSR-3226 dated 631983 and the punishment of dismissal as under Annexures 1, 4, 5, 6 and 8 as illegal and further to strike down Rule 9(viii) and (ix) of Reserve Bank of India Employees' Housing Building Loan Rules, 1960 (hereinafter called as ``Housing Loan Rules'') as irrational and arbitrary.
2.
The petitioner's case it that in the year 1987 while he was working as the Assistant Treasurer in the cash department under the opposite party No. 3, Branch Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Bhubaneswar he availed a house building loan of Rs. 1,25,000/- for construction of his house over plot No. 274 in his village Bhandagaon.
Though initially he had submitted plan for construction of house over plot No. 274, subsequently he changed his idea of having the construction on plot No. 742 since the latter one being situated by the side of the main road unlike the other one and was more advantageous.
It is his further case that the opposite parties without considering his small alternation of the site on which the petitioner wanted to have the construction, illegally initiated a departmental proceeding against him which ultimately ended in an order of dismissal.
This order of dismissal is challenged before this Court as arbitrary and excessive in comparison to the delinquency.
3.
The opposite parties-bank authorities filed a counter, wherein they asserted that all the allegations against the petitioner regarding procuring and presenting false certificates about the stage to stage progress of the construction and withdrawing the instalments of loan amount on the basis of such certificates and misutilising the said amount, having been adequately proved, the punishment of dismissal is unassailable.
It is further averred that the petitioner in fact admitted all the charges and, therefore, punishment imposed cannot be said to be excessive.
4.
Mr. SS Das, learned counsel for the petitioner, while advancing extensive argument, submitted that availing of house building loan under the House Loan Rules of the Bank being an optional one, violation of any terms and conditions of the said rules could not have been construed as violation of the service conditions applicable to an employee and therefore an extreme and harsh penalty of dismissal from service was unwarranted.
In this connection, it was further contended by Mr. Das that rule 9(viii) and (ix) of the Housing Loan Rules are illegal and irrational because of prescribing punishment of dismissal from service for violation of the terms and conditions thereof when there is no nexus between the service conditions of an employee attached to the post and his availing the loan facilities.
According to Mr. Das any breach of the conditions of the Housing Loan Rules, should not be construed as breach of the service conditions and staff regulation and therefore those Housing Loan Rules should be struck down being violative of the principles under Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was next contended that the petitioner should not have been dealt with so harshly merely because he changed his idea of having the construction over plot No. 742 instead of 274 and therefore the punishment imposed should be quashed.
To support his view Mr. Das has referred to paragraph 18 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, reported in AIR 1996 SC 484 : 1996 Lab IC 462 : 1996(1) SCT 617 (SC) and submitted that the power of this Court under writ jurisdiction is wide enough to set aside and/or mould the punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Authority if punishment so imposed shocks the judicial conscience of this Court.
5.
Mr. Gangadhar Rath, learned senior counsel for the opposite parties with reference to the Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Krishna Chandra Pillai v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1992 Orissa 261 : 1992 Lab IC 2033 : 1993(2) SCT 67 (Orissa), strenuously urged that once there has been a full-fledged enquiry resulting in proved delinquency, it would not be competent for this Court to interfere with the decision even if it is of the view that the punishment awarded is arbitrary or grossly excessive or out of proportion to the delinquency so proved.
The learned counsel further urged that since in the earlier O.J.C.
No. 24.88/91 disposed of on 17.11.93 filed by the petitioner, the matter of validity of a proceeding under the Reserve Bank of India (Staff) Regulations, 1948 and finding in regard to the petitioner's misconduct having stood concluded, the same cannot be raised again for the second time, being barred by the principles of res judicata .
The first point of Mr. Rath about the competency of this Court to modulate the punishment imposed and the submission of Mr. Das that, this Court could do the same being interlinked is discussed at the appropriate stage.
6.
So far as the second point of Mr. Rath with regard to the principles of res judicata is concerned, we do not feel it necessary to advert to that point since Mr. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner, had not challenged the validity of disciplinary proceeding under Rule 47 of the Staff Regulations.
Therefore, we accept the contention of Mr. Rath that the matter regarding validity of the disciplinary proceeding cannot be challenged in this writ petition.
But the case of the petitioner and the submission of Mr. Das that Rule 9(viii) and (ix) of the Housing Loan Rules should be struck down as being arbitrary and irrational needs to be disposed of since this point was not raised in the previous writ petition and of course his second point canvassed before this Court that whether punishment of dismissal in view of the delinquency charged should be quashed as shocking the judicial conscience.
7.
Mr. Das contended that the Rule 9(viii) and (ix) of the Housing Loan Rules are arbitrary and irrational and therefore should be struck down.
We are unable to accept this.
The Housing Loan Rules prescribe the authorities to follow certain procedures for disposal of the applications and disbursement of the loan amount.
Rule 9(viii) prescribes the employee's liability to be dismissed for furnishing wrong or false information or certificate, etc. besides other penalties that may be imposed for breach of dicipline and misconduct.
Rule 9(ix) prescribes any misuse of the facilities to be considered as breach of discipline.
The extreme penalty of dismissal from service for violation of the terms and conditions of the said Rules is found to be not in conflict with the prescription laid down under Rule 47 of the Staff Rules.
There is no doubt that submission of false certificates for the purpose of availing the loan and misutilisation of the loan advanced by the Bank would amount to misconduct and an employee is liable to be proceeded with in a disciplinary proceeding, even in absence of said Housing Loan Rules.
Therefore, the above two sub-Rules in question can be said to be a mere surplusage and therefore the question of striking them down does not arise.
8.
The other point of Mr. Das that the decision of dismissal from service shocks judicial conscience is also not acceptable to us.
The petitioner has not been charged merely for the misutilisation of the funds, but in addition he has also been charged of misconduct for having procured false certificates relating to the stage to stage progress of construction of the building and that too from a person not in existence.
We could have thought of accepting the contention of Mr. Das provided the petitioner could have shown to this Court that instead of constructing the house over plot No. 274 as per the original plan, he in fact constructed house in question or even part of it over altered plot No. 724.
At the initial stage of the argument of this case, we had given the petitioner an oppotunity to satisfy this Court on this point.
But no material has been placed before this Court that the petitioner in fact had his house constructed over the altered plot.
Had this been proved, then perhaps it would have been the case of a mere irregularity and then only the argument of the decision shocking the conscience of the Court could have been appreciated.
But the charge of procuring false certificates being a more graver one, we are unable to accept this.
This case of Mr. BC Chaturvedi (supra) cited by Mr. Das is of no assistance.
Therefore, it is apt to accept the contenton of Mr. Rath that in such matters the Court should interfere with the decision of the disciplinary authority as has been laid down by this Court in the case of Krushna Chandra Pillai (supra).
9.
The writ petition has no merit and the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.