THB Chalapathi, J - Challenging the award of the Labour Court, Ludhiana, dated April 16, 1981, whereby while ordering reinstatement of the petitioner, back wages were denied to him, the petitioner approached this Court by way of this writ petition.
2.
The petitioner was a Conductor with Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana.
His services were terminated on July 18, 1972.
Thereafter, he raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The management took the plea that the services of the petitioner were terminated after conducting an enquiry into the misconduct of the petitioner and, therefore, the order of termination is valid and proper and in accordance with law.
3.
On the basis of material placed before it, the Labour Court found that the enquiry was fair and proper and that the workman was guilty of misconduct but the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the penalty of removal from service is an extreme penalty in the circumstances of the case and the workman suffered financially for about nine years and agreeing with the contention of the representative of the workman, the Labour Court directed the reinstatement of the petitioner without continuity of service and without back wages and treating the reinstatement as a fresh appointment.
This part of the award is under challenge in this writ petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the evidence on record shows that there was no proper and fair enquiry and that the enquiry officer acted as a Presenting Officer or as a prosecuting officer and, therefore, the enquiry is vitiated and the Labour Court erred in coming to the conclusion that there was a proper and fair enquiry.
5.
The conclusion that the enquiry was fair and proper was arrived at by the Labour Court on an appraisal of the evidence on record.
The enquiry officer was examined as MW 2.
The petitioner examined himself as MW1.
Petitioner has not raised any objection to the enquiry being conducted by MW2.
He has signed the enquiry file and he also received the show cause notice.
It is not for this Court to reappreciate the evidence on record.
If the findings of the Labour Court are based on no evidence then only this court will interfere with the conclusions arrived at by the Labour Court.
But that is not the case here.
The findings are based on some evidence.
Sufficiency or insufficiency of the evidence is not a ground for exercising the discretionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
6.
Apart from what has been stated above, the representative of the workman himself conceded before the Labour Court that the punishment of withholding his back wages could be sufficient to meet the ends of justice and the order of dismissal be set aside by imposing a lesser punishment.
On a consideration of the totality of the circumstances, the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the termination of the services of the petitioner is an extreme penalty and the circumstances warrant a lesser punishment to be imposed.
Accordingly, while ordering the reinstatement of the petitioner, the Labour Court denied the back wages and benefit of continuity of service.
It is no doubt true that normal rule is to award back wages when reinstatement is ordered as held by the Supreme Court in Hindustan Times Works v. Its Employees, AIR 1979 SC 75.
But the denial of back wages and the benefit of continuity of service were imposed by the Labour Court as a lesser punishment instead of termination of service.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the Labour Court acted illegally.
On a consideration of the material on record, I do not find any illegality or infirmity with the order of the Labour Court.
7.
The Writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
8.
Writ petition is, therefore, dismissed but without costs.
Petition dismissed.