AM Mir, J - This writ petition calls in question Government order No. Rev.
(A) 195 of 1996 dated 29th of November 1996, issued by Commissioner Secretary to Government Revenue Department.
This is an order of transfer which besides 34 others, transfers the writ petitioner, who was working as Tehsildar Tral and has been transferred as Tehsildar.
AR Tengmarg.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he was posted as Tehsildar Tral only on 1771996 and this order transfers him prematurely.
Besides, this, according to the petitioner the impugned transfer has been made to accommodate respondent No. 5, who was previously working as Head Quarter Assistant to DC Rajouri.
According to the petitioner respondent No. 5 also was posted as Head Quarter Assistant to Deputy Commissioner Rajouri on 1771996.
Respondent No. 5 has worked at Tral previously also as Agrarian Reforms Tehsildar.
Therefore, the object of the transfer was just to accommodate respondent No. 5 for extraneous considerations.
Another ground taken for impugning the order was that the same has visited the petitioner with penal consequences.
The stand taken by the official respondents in their objections is that in fact no mala fides has been pleaded.
Therefore, that cannot be any ground for quashing the order impugned.
The Government instructions regarding fulfilment of two years tenure does not have a binding force and does not debar the Government from making transfer orders in the interest of administration prior to expiry of two years.
And that the order impugned does not violate any of the rights of the petitioner.
2.
I have heard L/c for the parties and gone through the file.
The persistent stand of the Supreme Court as also of this Court has been not to interfere in matters of transfer.
This general rule has two exceptions :-  (i) When the order of transfer is vitiated on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
(ii) When the order is passed on mala fides.
3.
Thus, I will have to confine myself within the compass of these two exceptions only.
Before doing so however, the position of law with regard to the Government circular in the form of instructions issued at different times is to be made clear.
Rule 27 of classification, control and appeal rules leaves all the powers of transfer of Government Servants with the Government itself.
It read as :-  "27.
Posting and transfers.
- (1) A member of a service or class of a service may be required to serve in any part of the Jammu and Kashmir State in any post borne on the cadre of such service or class.
(a) All transfers and postings shall be made by the authority prescribed by Government in this behalf."
On a Bird's eye view of this Rule, the power of transfer exercisable by the Government is absolute.
However, at different stages Government came out with circulars and notifications laying down the guidelines for regulating the exercise of this power of making transfers.
In this behalf Government order No. 912-GR of 1988 was passed on 1661988, whereunder transfers were required to be made after completion of two years tenure.
The petitioner claims that while passing the impugned order of transfer, this Government order and some other Government decision has been flouted.
4.
I have heard L/c for the parties at length.
As for the arguments of the order being violative of Government instructions is concerned, I find a number of decisions having been returned by this Court and the Apex Court.
In Mohamad Yaqub v. State reported in 1 984 SLJ 167, His Lordship Chief Justice V Khalid (as he then was) held that Government orders requiring an officer not to be transferred before completion of two years service are not rigid and inflexible.
On the other hand they can on any exigency of administration be relaxed by the Government.
Again in Syed Khurshid Ahmad v. State of J&K, reported in 1985 KLJ 47 His Lordship ML Bhat (J) returned a detailed finding.
In that case circular 36 of GD of 1983 dated 881983 was under question.
This circular also called upon the officers competent to make transfers to issue orders of transfer after completion of two years term.
It was held that the circular was just a guideline in the nature of advice to the heads of the department and not to the Government.
It contains only directions and therefore is not mandatory.
It is non-binding, even on heads of departments.
The circular was not justiciable and thus writ petition was not maintainable.
5.
The matter again came up before a Division Bench of this Court in Mohammad Sikander Bhat v. State reported in 1989 SLJ 141.
In this case a distinction was drawn between circulars, orders or instructions issued by the Government relating to the conditions of service and those issued in respect of transfers.
The cardinal principle of law was that the transfer is not a condition of service.
Therefore, such circulars, instructions or orders relating to transfers are not justiciable.
On the other hand, those issued in respect of conditions of service vest a right in the Government Servants, therefore, claims on basis of those circulars, orders or instructions can be maintained.
It was however categorically laid down that circulars, instructions or guidelines relating to transfers do not vest a right in the Government servants.
Therefore, do not have a binding force and are not justiciable.
6.
Taking into consideration the above prepositions of law laid down by their Lordships I fall in line with the view adopted and accordingly hold that circulars, instructions and orders issued by the Government from time to time in respect of transfer of Government employees do not have a binding force.
The order impugned cannot be challenged on the basis of violation of such instructions, orders or guidelines.
7.
On general principle, Supreme Court of India has more than often been stringent on matters of transfer.
In Bararow v. State of Karnataka the Supreme Court has held that transfers are incidents of service.
Once a person is appointed on a transferable post his transfer can be ordered from one place to another at any time.
No Government servant can ask for a particular posting.
8.
The same view was expressed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Central Gujarat Electricity Board v. Atma Ram Sangmal Pashani, reported in AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1433 : 1989 Lab JC 1374.
It was held that no Government employee has a legal right of posting at a particular place.
Transfer from one place to another is necessarily in public interest and accelerates efficiency in the public administration.
Whenever a public servant is transferred he must comply with the orders of transfer.
If he has any genuine difficulty it is open to make a representation before the competent authorities.
If he fails to proceed on transfer in compliance of the transfer order, he will expose himself to the disciplinary actions.
Again in State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh Datt reported in AIR 1993 SC 2486 : 1993 AIR SCW 3167 : 1995(4) SCT 225 (SC) Court has sounded a note of caution that transfers should not be ordinarily made the subject matter of judicial review.
Their Lordships held, that as under :-  "Court has time and again expressed its disapproval of the Courts below interfering with the orders of transfer of public servants from one place to another.
It is entirely for the employer to decide when, where and at what point of time a public servant is to be transferred from his place of posting."
9.
Thus in view of these authoritative pronouncements the Courts have ordinarily no jurisdiction to interfere with the orders of transfer.
10.
Mr. Qayoom has vehemently tried to argue that the very attempt of the respondent No. 1 to accommodate respondent No. 5, is sufficient to inspire confidence in the Court that the order is actuated by malice.
I am not inclined to agree to this proposition of fact.
The objections filed by the respondents have eloquently detailed out the reasons as to how was the petitioner required to be posted out.
Contemporaneous circumstances, projected, while filing the written statement do detail out the exigencies of administration which seem to have compelled the respondents/State to make the transfer.
I, therefore, do not find any malice to have seen at work.
11.
On the foregoing analogy, I do not find any substance in this case.
The same is dismissed and interim direction issued on 5.12.1996 is vacated.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.