Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition the petitioner who is working as Director, Water Resources and Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh has prayed for a direction to the respondents to consider his case for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer and further for the post of Chief Engineer with effect from the date on which his juniors were considered and promoted.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner who was working as Executive Engineer in P.W.D.
(Irrigation) Branch, Haryana, was placed under suspension on 11.4.1990.
Vide orders dated 1781990 (Annexure P.1) certain Executive Engineers, who according to the petitioner were junior to him were promoted to the rank of Superintending Engineer in the scale of Rs. 4100-5300 and the case of the petitioner was not considered on the ground that he had been suspended pending enquiry.
3.
The petitioner was served with the charge sheet on 13.9.1990.
The petitioner filed his reply to the charge sheet on 1231993, and thereafter he was reinstated on 2121993 vide order Annexure P-6.
It has been averred in the writ petition that the work of the petitioner from 1993 to 1996 has been appreciated by the authorities concerned.
4.
Vide order dated 26.10.1995 Sh. SK Khurana, the then Chief Engineer was appointed as Enquiry Officer to enquire into the charges levelled against the petitioner and certain other officers/officials of the same department.
From the documents produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General, we find that the said Enquiry Officer in his report submitted on 2981996 had stated as under :-  "The detail enquiry report in the case of Sh. Jagmohan Singh, SDO of Kaithal Division has been submitted separately which may kindly be perused.
While conducting individual enquiries it is seen that neither the original records were produced by the Presenting Officer nor the witnesses produced by him were/are willing to depose seriously and thereby delaying the proceedings on one pretext or the other at this belated stage.
Departmental and police proceedings are pending against them for the last about 7 years."
5.
During the course of arguments, it has been brought to our notice that FIR No. 19 dated 1981989 was registered against the petitioner and certain other officers/officials of the department for certain offences allegedly committed by them and some of these officers had filed revision petition in this Court under Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code for quashing proceedings and the said revision petition was disposed of as infructuous by learned Single Judge of this Court on 24.9.1996, in view of the statement given by the learned counsel of the State that the challan in the case was ready and was being filed shortly.
It may, however, be noted here that the challan has not been filed so far.
6.
It has also been brought to our notice that one of the officers namely Sh. OP Sindhwani had filed writ petition bearing No. 3702 of 1993 seeking the relief that the respondents be directed to release his retirement benefits.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this court vide order dated 24.11.1993 (Annexure P-23).
By this order the Division Bench directed the respondents to complete the enquiry within the period of one year on the ground that many persons were involved in the enquiry.
It is not disputed that in spite of the period of one year granted by this Court, the departmental enquiry against Mr. Sindhwani and others including the petitioner could not be completed within the period of one year.
7.
It may also be relevant to note here that another officer namely Sh. Bir Singh Chauhan also filed a writ petition in this Court for a direction to the respondents to consider his case for promotion under the Rules on the ground that the respondents had failed to complete the enquiry.
After the writ petition filed by Bir Singh Chauhan was dismissed by this Court, said Bir Singh Chauhan filed Special Leave Petition in the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court vide judgment dated 771997 Bir Singh Chauhan v. State of Haryana, and another reported in JT 1997(6) SC 409 allowed the appeal of the said officer and directed the respondents to consider his case for promotion on the basis of his service record after excluding the material relating to his inspection report which was the subject matter of the departmental enquiry.
8.
Since the departmental enquiry had not been completed against the petitioner and other officers and the petitioner was not being considered for promotion to the next higher post on the ground of pendency of the enquiry, the present writ petition was filed by the petitioner.
Notice of motion in this petition was issued to the respondents on 2031997 for 241997 and on the same day, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents accepted the notice.
Learned counsel for the State was also directed to seek instructions from the respondents as to what time they are likely to take in completing the enquiry.
On 241997 the case was adjourned to 951997 at the request of learned counsel of the respondents.
On 951997 at the request of learned counsel of the respondents, the respondents were given one more opportunity for filing the written statement and the case was adjourned to 3051997.
Thereafter the written statement on behalf of the respondents was filed and on 3051997 case was adjourned to 2471997 to enable the petitioner to file the replication.
On 2471997, the learned counsel of the respondents was directed to furnish the specific information as to whether any challan with regard to FIR No. 19 dated 9.8.1989 has been put in the trial Court and further what was the stage of the departmental enquiry, if any, pending against the petitioner and the case was adjourned to 481997.
On 481997, the learned counsel of the respondents orally stated that an Enquiry Officer had been appointed for holding the departmental enquiry against the petitioner and challan was likely to be put up in the Court shortly.
Accordingly, he was directed to file an additional affidavit and the case was adjourned to 1281997.
In the additional affidavit filed on 1281997 it has been stated that Shri Prem Prashad, IAS, Commissioner and Secretary to Government Technical Education Department has been appointed as Enquiry Officer and the said Enquiry Officer has been requested to finalise the enquiry proceedings within two months.
It has further been stated in this affidavit that the challan with regard to FIR No. 19 dated 481989 would be put in the court on priority basis within 15 days.
On 1281997 we directed the counsel of the respondents to produce the records of the case.
9.
From the records produced before us, we find that before Sh. SK Khurana, the earlier Enquiry Officer, neither the original records were produced by the Presenting Officer nor the witnesses produced by him were willing to depose seriously.
This is evident from the portion of the proceedings of the Enquiry Officer dated 2981996 which have been reproduced hereinabove.
As stated earlier, the respondents failed to complete the enquiry within one year as directed by the Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 24.11.1993 passed in CWP 3702 of 1993 (Annexure P-23).
Even in the case of Bir Singh Chauhan the respondents neither filed any counter affidavit nor produced the record before the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court was constrained to direct the respondents to consider the case of Bir Singh Chauhan for promotion on the basis of service record after excluding the material relating to the subject matter of the departmental enquiry.
10.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances mentioned hereinabove and without expressing any opinion on the enquiry proceedings and the records produced before us, we are of the opinion that it would be in the interest of justice that the case of the petitioner like the case of Bir Singh Chauhan is considered for promotion on the basis of his service record excluding the material relating to the departmental enquiry.
Accordingly, we direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the higher post/posts on the basis of his service record, after excluding the material relating to the departmental enquiry within two months.
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to complete the enquiry proceedings against the petitioner and other officers in accordance with Rules.
With this order the writ petition stands disposed of.