Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners have filed this writ petition with a prayer that an appropriate writ, order or direction be issued "quashing the impugned award more particularly to the extent of the findings recorded on Issues Nos. 1 and 3 as the reference itself has been held to be not maintainable under Section 2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act".
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Petitioner No. 1 had joined service as an Electrician-cum-Plumber with the Sewak Sabha Charitable Trust on December 1, 1982.
Petitioner No. 2 had similarly joined service as a Driver on April 1, 1985.
On December 29, 1990, the Respondent-Trust issued an order terminating the services of the petitioners.
Alongwith, the amount on account of retrenchment compensation etc. was offered to both the petitioners.
Petitioner No. 1 was offered a bank draft for an amount of Rs. 6,825/-.
A bank draft for an amount of Rs. 5,060/- was sought to be given to petitioner No. 2.
The petitioners did not accept the drafts.
3.
Some time later, the General Secretary, Sewak Sabha Trust Hospital Karamchari Association (Regd.
), Hissar raised an industrial dispute.
On August 20, 1991 the State Government referred the following dispute to the Labour Court :-  Whether termination of services of Mohan Lal and 17 others workers as detailed in the list is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief are they entitled to ?
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Court had framed the following three issues :-  1.
As per terms of reference.
2.
Whether the reference is not maintainable ?
3.
Relief.
4.
While dealing with Issue No. 1, the Court recorded a categorical finding that the management had offered retrenchment compensation etc. to both the petitioners with letters Exhibits MI and M3 respectively, along with bank drafts for Rs. 6,825/- and Rs. 5,060/-.
The plea taken by the workmen that the amount was not offered simultaneously was not accepted.
On this basis, it came to the conclusion that the provisions of Section 25-F had been duly complied with.
Even the other pleas raised on behalf of the workmen were rejected.
Regarding the second issue the Court recorded the following finding :-  "In my opinion, the objection of Shri SS Gupta AR of the management must prevail because in order to vest a dispute with the character of an industrial dispute, it has to be proved that substantial number of members participated in or acted together and arrived at an understanding either by a resolution or by other means and collectively supported the demand on the date of the reference.
The workman had not proved any copy of resolution passed by the Association immediately prior to the raising of the demand notice so as to show that this demand was supported by substantial number of workmen.
Admittedly, the 18 workmen entered in the list were discharged workmen on 911991, the date of demand notice and as such the Association was required to place some material evidence on the file to show that the Association had authority to represent the cause of these workmen.
In my opinion, it was the duty of the workmen to prove that the Association had authority on behalf of these 10 workmen to act on their behalf in espousing their cause and since this material evidence has been withheld by the workmen, it cannot be said that the dispute was properly espoused.
In the wake of this position, it has to be held that the reference was not maintainable in the present form.
This issue is, therefore, decided in favour of the management."
5.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Dinesh Kumar, counsel for the petitioners is that in view of the above finding, the Court should not have gone into the facts regarding Issue No. 1.
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that the award given by the Labour Court is vitiated.
We are unable to accept this contention.
It is the admitted position that three issues had been framed.
Evidence had been led by both parties.
This evidence had to be considered by the Court.
The issue regarding the validity of the reference was not a Prelimilary issue.
Once the evidence had been led, the court had rightly recorded findings on all the issues.
Still further, learned counsel has not been able to show that the findings recorded by the Labour Court on Issue No. 1 are in any way against the evidence or otherwise erroneous.
In fact, Mr. Dinesh Kumar states that he does not challenge those findings.
Furthermore, the learned counsel has also not been able to show that the finding on Issue No. 2 is in any way wrong.
That being so, no ground to interfere with the impugned award is at all made out.
The findings on the two issues having not been challenged, the claim of the petitioners that the Labour Court has erred in giving the award cannot be sustained.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.