THB Chalapathi, J - These two writ petitions - one by the Bhakra Beas Management Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) and other by the workmen of the Board - were filed to quash the order of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh dated 1991985.
2.
The workmen working in the Bhakra Beas Management Board filed application under Section 33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) seeking computation and recovery of the dues payable to them for the period from 561972 to 30.11.1983.
According to the petitioner, (sic) their pay was not fixed before the Labour Court.
Their pay was not fixed in accordance with the instructions and understanding between the Board, Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the Electricity Board) and the Government and at the time when their services were transferred to the Board, they were drawing pay of Rs. 131/- in the pay scale of Rs. 105-180.
But the Board reduced their pay and fixed their pay at Rs. 110/-.
Therefore, they claimed that the arrears of pay shall be computed and be paid to them.
3.
The Board in its written statement inter alia contended that the application filed under Section 33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act is not maintainable and it was further alleged that when the services of the petitioners were transferred to the Board, they were paid by the Electricity Board the monetary benefits of the past service as work-charged and accepted regular appointment on fresh scale of pay and, therefore, the employees who were taken into service, are not entitled to the protection of pay which they were getting from the Electricity Board prior to their appointment in the Board.
The application has been filed by 32 employees working in the Board.
On the basis of the material on record, the Labour Court found that 17 employees have received the monetary benefit of the past service as work- charged of the Electricity Board and accepted fresh appointment in the Board and, therefore, those 17 employees are not entitled to the protection of their pay on the basis of their past service.
In regard to other petitioners, the Labour Court found that they are entitled to re-fixation of their salary by protecting their pay which they have been drawing in the Electricity Board in the light of the Circular which has been marked as Exhibit W-12 and W-13.
Accordingly, the Labour Court passed its award on 1991985.
The Management of the Board filed an application to review order dated 1991985.
That application was dismissed by the Labour Court, Chandigarh by its order dated 3041987.
4.
In the writ petition No. 7121 of 1987, the Board is challenging the order passed by the Labour Court on 1991985 and also the order dated 3041987.
Whereas, the workmen who have been denied the fixation of their pay on the basis of their past service in the Electricity Board have filed CWP No. 3291 of 1988 against the orders of the Labour Court dated 1991985 whereby the Labour Court refused to get their pay fixed on the basis of their past service in the Electricity Board.
As both the writ petitions arise out of this same order of the Labour Court, both the writ petitions are heard and disposed together by the judgment.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.
Respondents 2 to 17 in CWP No. 7121 of 1987 and the writ petitioners in CWP No. 3291 of 1988 were employed in the Electricity Board on work- charged basis.
Due to the re-organisation of the Punjab State, the services of these 33 employees were transferred to the Board with effect from 161967.
According to the workmen, the Board used to follow and grant the same pay scales as were granted to the employees of the Electricity Board.
But, when their services were absorbed into the service of the Board, their initial pay was to be fixed at Rs. 110/- per month.
According to the workmen, they were getting basic pay of Rs. 131/- per month and the action of the Board in reducing the pay is arbitrary and patently erroneous and contrary to the instructions issued by the Punjab Government and the understanding between the Board and the Electricity Board.
Therefore, according to the workmen, their pay has to be fixed on the basis of the policy of the Electricity Board and they have to be paid the same salary as they were getting while serving the Electricity Board and same scale of pay has to be applied to them by the Board.
7.
It is clear from the record that 17 employees who were the petitioners in CWP No. 3291 of 1988 accepted the retrenchment compensation and other amounts payable to them on the basis that their services have been terminated in the Electricity Board.
They accepted fresh appointments in the Board on fresh conditions of service.
When once they ceased to be the members of the Electricity Board, they cannot be a matter of right claim that their past service in the Electricity Board has to be taken into account while fixing the salary.
They, having accepted regular appointment in the Board, cannot be permitted to have their pay fixed on the basis of their past service in the Electricity Board.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the Labour Court rightly held that the petitioners in CWP No. 3291/88 who have accepted regular appointments afresh in the Board, cannot claim to have their pay fixed on the basis of their past service rendered in the Electricity Board.
Therefore, the writ petition fixed by those 17 employees i.e., petitioners in CWP No. 3291 of 1988 is liable to be dismissed.
8.
The respondents 2 to 17 in Writ Petition No. 7121 of 1987 cannot be treated at par with the petitioners in CWP No. 3291 of 1988.
They did not receive the retrenchment compensation.
Their services have been transferred from Electricity Board to the Board.
Later on they were absorbed in the service of the Board.
They did not get any monetary benefit at the time when their services were transferred from Electricity Board to the Board.
Therefore, they are entitled to have their past service in the Electricity Board to be counted for the purpose of fixation of their pay in the Board.
9.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any illegality or infirmity with the order passed by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court has referred to the Circular Exhibit W-12 and W-13 on the basis of which it came to the conclusion that those employees whose services have not been terminated, but transferred to the Board are entitled to have their past service counted for the purpose of fixation of their pay.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that Writ Petition No. 3291 of 1988 is also liable to be dismissed.
In the result, both the writ petitions are dismissed, but, without costs.
Petitions dismissed.