THB Chalapathi, J - Challenging the award of the Labour Court, Ludhiana in Reference No. 38 of 1980 dated Ist October, 1981, whereby the Labour Court directed the period of absence from the date of termination till the date of reinstatement of the petitioner to be treated as leave of the kind due, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a Driver with respondent No. 3 and his services were terminated on 1771986.
Thereafter the petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Labour Court vide impugned award found that the order of termination is not valid and, therefore, directed the reinstatement of the petitioner with continuity of service, but the Labour Court directed the period of absence from the date of termination till reinstatement to be treated as the leave of the kind due and he be paid accordingly.
Thus, in fact, the Labour Court denied the back wages to the petitioner.
The petitioner, therefore, filed this writ petition claiming back wages for the period during which he was out of job i.e. from the date of termination of his services till reinstatment.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on a decision of the Full Bench of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 P.L.R.
720, wherein it has been held that ordinarily a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
4.
The Labour Court has not given any reason for denying the back wages to the petitioner and once it has been held that the order of termination of services of the workman is bad, he would be entitled to back wages for the period when he was out of job unless it was shown to the satisfaction of the Court that he was gainfully employed during that period or for any other valid reason.
In the case on hand, nothing has been brought on record that the petitioner was gainfully employed.
I, therefore, do not find any valid ground to deny the relief of back wages to the petitioner.
Leave has been earned by the petitioner when he was in service.
That cannot be adjusted towards the period of absence because of illegal termination of his services.
3.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed and respondent No. 3 is directed to pay back wages to the petitioner from the date of termination till the date of his reinstatement.
It is brought to my notice that the petitioner died during the pendency of the writ petition and his wife was impleaded as his Legal Representative.
Therefore, the legal representative of the petitioner, who has been impleaded as a party to the writ petition, is entitled to the said amount of the back wages.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to pay the said amount to the legal representative of the petitioner workman.