T H B Chalapathi, J - Respondent No. 4 was appointed as Manager by the Rohtak Central Co-operative Bank Limited, Rohtak, and was posted as Manager at Rewari Khera on March 6, 1978.
Thereafter, on the ground that respondent No. 4 tendered his resignation on June 6, 1978, the services of respondent No. 4 were terminated on July 17, 1978.
Respondent No. 4 raised an industrial dispute on the ground that his resignation was obtained under duress and, therefore, the termination of his services on the basis of his resignation were unlawful and accordingly sought reference of the dispute to the Labour Court for its adjudication.
In the reference, the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the resignation was not voluntary and, therefore, the acceptance of the same was bad under law and directed the petitioner-Bank to reinstate respondent No. 4 with continuity of service and full back wages.
The petitioner filed this writ petition challenging the award of the Labour Court dated July 22, 1982.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the finding of the Labour Court that resignation was not voluntary, was not supported by any evidence on record and that the fact that respondent No. 4 applied for a certificate of experience and also a certificate relieving him from the post so as to enable him to register himself with the Employment Exchange show that the resignation was voluntary and the finding of the Labour Court was, therefore, not correct.
3.
It is true that respondent No. 4 submitted the resignation letter but according to him it was obtained under duress but in this writ petition, I am of the opinion that it is not necessary to go into this question as it is evident from the record that respondent No. 4 withdrew the said letter of resignation on June 6, 1978, and that the withdrawal was communicated to the petitioner-Bank before June 20, 1978.
Therefore, the acceptance of so-called resignation either on July 11, 1978, or on July 17, 1978, cannot be said to be effective, as in the eye of law, there was no resignation as the same was withdrawn before its acceptance.
There cannot be any dispute on the question of law that when an employee submits his resignation, he can withdraw the same before its acceptance.
In this case, respondent No. 4 admittedly withdrew the letter of his resignation before it was accepted.
Therefore, there is no resignation surviving to be accepted by the petitioner-Bank.
When once it is held that there was no resignation letter to be considered by the Bank then the subsequent conduct of the petitioner in applying for experience certificate or for relieving certificate have no relevancy.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the acceptance of resignation by the Bank is liable to be set aside as the letter of resignation was withdrawn by the employee before its acceptance.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that under the terms of appointment Annexure P-1, the Bank has got a right to terminate the services of respondent No. 4 but the Bank has not terminated the services of respondent No. 4 in exercise of its powers under the letter of appointment Annexure P-1.
Therefore, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner does not hold water.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the appointment of the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court was set aside by this Court and, therefore, the award passed by the Labour Court is vitiated and is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
But this contention was negatived by a Full Bench of this Court in Tul Par Machine and Tool Co, Faridabad v. Joginder Pal, 1983(2) LIC 1615 relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in Gokaraju Bangaraj v. State of AP, A.I.R. 1981 SC 1473.
Therefore, simply because the appointment of the Presiding Officer was quashed, it cannot be held that the awards or orders passed by the said Officer are vitiated.
The Supreme Court in Gokaraju's case (supra) applied the de facto doctrine and held that the judgments or orders rendered by the person whose appointment was later set aside cannot be said to be vitiated.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I do not find any illegality or infirmity with the impugned award passed by the Labour Court.
6.
Writ petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.