RS Mongia, J - All the petitioners excepting petitioner No. 18 are working as Professors in the Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar (hereinafter referred to as `the University').
Petitioner No. 18 is working as an Associate Professor.
They have filed the present writ petition for directing the University to frame seniority list of Professors and Associate Professors in accordance with the law laid down by the Apex Court in case reported as Dr. Rashmi Srivastava v. Vikram University, Judgments Today 1995(4) Supreme Court 51 : 1995(3) SCT 362 (SC).
The petitioners are all directly recruited Professors/Associate Professors and they claim that they are entitled to be placed senior as such to those Professors/Associate Professors who might have got promotions to these ranks under the Merit Promotion Scheme.
2.
The posts of Professors are filled only by way of direct recruitment and not by way of promotion.
As per Clause 4(2) of Chapter IV of the University Statute whenever a vacancy or vacancies of the post(s) of Professor arise(s) or new post(s) is/are created, the Vice Chancellor advertises the vacancy.
Clause 4(2) of the Statute is in the following terms ;  "4(2) Professors and Principal, College of Agriculture, Kaul : The procedure of appointment of Professors and Principal, College of Agriculture, Kaul, when vacancies arise or when new posts are created, shall be as under :  (i) The Vice-Chancellor may have the post advertised with such qualifications as have been prescribed by the Academic Council and/or invite suggestions and recommendations from such persons, institutions, agencies as he deems proper.
(ii) After having advertised the post and received the applications and/or after having obtained the suggestions or recommendations from appropriate persons, institutions and agencies, the Vice Chancellor may either submit a single recommendation for the approval of the Board of Management to appoint a Selection Committee to make recommendations."
Keeping in view the stagnation in the Universities in the ranks of Reader, Associate Professors, Professors, the University Grants Commission recommended the introduction of a scheme known as Promotion Based on Merit (hereinafter referred to as `the Merit Promotion Scheme').
This was to provide opportunities for professional achievement of Teachers working in the Universities who had put in a particular number of years of service.
The University initially adopted the Scheme and later on by way of amendment made it a part of the Statute in 1982.
By this amendment, a new Chapter IV-A was added in the Statute.
Clause 3 of Chapter IV-A deals with the manner of promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme.
The same is as under :  "IV-A (3) Manner of Promotion : The promotion of Assistant Professor or equivalent as Associate Professor or equivalent and of Associate Professor or equivalent as Professor or equivalent will be made by the Vice Chancellor in the following manner :- (i) The promotion of a teacher to the next higher position will be made on his own post without addition to the number of faculty positions on the basis of an assessment of his performance through a prescribed procedure.
(ii) A teacher will be promoted to the next higher position only if he is found suitable by the Assessment Committee.
(iii) A teacher who has not been found suitable for promotion after assessment, shall be entitled to offer himself for reassessment after lapse of two years from the date of initial eligibility."
Clause 4 of Chapter IV-A deals with the conditions of promotion, which is in the following terms :  "4.
The promotion of Assistant Professor or equivalent or Associate Professor or equivalent to the next higher position will be governed by the following conditions :- (i) The qualifications and experience prescribed by the Vice Chancellor with the approval of the Academic Council for various posts will not be relaxed except as provided hereinafter in these Statutes.
(ii) The teacher shall continue to perform the same kind of work as a scientist after his promotion as before."
Clause 4 of Chapter 14-A provides as to what is to happen when the incumbent, who is promoted under the Merit Promotion Scheme leaves the University.
The same is in the following terms :  "5.
(i) When a senior promoted teacher leaves the University, the vacancy thus arising shall be filled at the original level position occupied by that teacher before promotion, in the manner prescribed in the Statutes regarding the Classification, the manner of Appointment and Powers and Duties of Teachers of the University."
Chapter IV-A further provides some other qualifications for promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme, one of them being that the person to be promoted to the higher post of Reader, Associate Professor and Professor should have eight years of service in the post from where he is to be promoted.
Initially, there was a ceiling of 33-1/3% of the cadre strength that could be considered for promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme.
However, later on this ceiling was removed and 100% incumbents of the lower posts can be promoted under the Merit Promotion Scheme to the next higher post.
Clause 8 of Chapter VI Part A deals with the determination of Seniority which is in the following terms :  "8.
The seniority inter se of the employee shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment to the posts;  Provided that in the case of the employees appointed directly the order of merit determined by the selecting authority shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection of the same post shall be senior to those appointed as a result of a subsequent selection;  Provided further that in the case of two or more employees appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :-  (a) an employee recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise; (b) an employee recruited by promotion shall be senior to a person recruited by transfer; (c) in the case of employees recruited by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such employees in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of employees recruited by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay; preference being given to a member who was drawing higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by their length of service in those appointments; and if the length of such service is the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member."
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that reading of clause 3 of Chapter IV-A and V(i) supra clearly indicates that the promotion of the incumbent is personal to him and by such promotion there is no addition to the cadre strength of the higher post.
In other words, the promotion is without addition to the number of faculty positions.
As and when the incumbent so promoted leaves the University or when he may be directly recruited to the higher post, the post that falls vacant is of the lower rank from which he was promoted under the Merit Promotion Scheme.
After the incumbent leaves the post on which he is promoted under the Merit Promotion Scheme the same is not filled by direct recruitment as there is no addition to the cadre.
According to the learned counsel, such a merit promoted Professor cannot be treated at par with the directly recruited professor and cannot be considered to be a member of the cadre of Professors or on the strength of that cadre when he is promoted as Professor under the Merit Promotion Scheme.
He brings his post of the lower rank with him without creating any vacancy in the cadre from which he is promoted and without any addition to the cadre to which he is promoted.
As observed earlier, on the incumbent leaving the post on which he is promoted under the Merit Promotion Scheme, the post in the lower rank falls vacant which can be filled in accordance with law.
Such promotees are not entitled to be included in the seniority list of directly recruited Professors.
In support of his submission learned counsel for the petitioner cited Dr. Rashmi Srivastava v. Vikram University, Judgments Today 1995(4) Supreme Court 51.
Learned counsel also relied on a judgment of a learned Single Judge in CWP No. 2991 of 1994 (Veer Singh v. Panjab University, 1996(3) SCT 588 (P&H).)
rendered on July 1, 1996, against which Letters Patent Appeal No. 673 of 1996 was dismissed.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the private respondents, who are promotees under the Merit Promotion Scheme argued that the promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme is a part of the Statutes and it is one of the modes of filling the posts of Professors.
Further the promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme is not automatic, rather it is based on competitive selection process in which merit is the sole criteria and in case the teacher is not found suitable for promotion after assessment, he cannot offer himself for reassessment for two years.
Once the promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme becomes part of statutes, such promotees are as much part of the cadre as are the direct recruits and their inter se seniority has to be determined on the basis of length of service under clause 8 of Part A of Chapter VI, which has already been reproduced above.
Learned counsel relied upon judgment of the Apex Court in Dr. Suman Agarwal v. The Vice Chancellor and others, Judgments Today 1995(9) Supreme Court 238 : 1996(2) SCT 530 (SC), to contend that the persons like the respondents who are promoted under the Statutes regarding the Merit Promotion Scheme are part and parcel of the cadre and when promoted, their posts are temporary additions to the cadre to which they are promoted and the seniority has to be determined between the direct recruits and the promotees under the Statutes.
If a promotee has longer length of service than a direct recruit, he would rank senior to the direct recruit under the Statutes.
Learned counsel emphasised that Dr. Rashmi Srivastava's case (supra) was also taken note of by the Judges deciding Dr. Kumari Suman Aggarwal's case (supra).
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Statute 3(i) of Chapter IV-A already reproduced above clearly goes to show that promotion of a Teacher to the next higher position would be made on his own post without addition to the number of faculty position.
(emphasis supplied).
In other words, the promotion is personal to the incumbent as he brings his own post along with him when he is promoted without addition to the cadre strength of the rank to which he is promoted and without decrease in the cadre strength of the lower post from which he is promoted.
Even the post in the lower rank does not become vacant on the incumbent's promotion to the higher rank under the Statute.
Such promotions were envisaged only to avoid stagnation and heart burning to the incumbents holding different posts as there were no avenues for promotion.
The very language of the Statute 3 of Chapter IV-A and 5(1) of Chapter IV-A, reproduced above, clearly suggests that the incumbent so promoted cannot be elevated to the cadre of the Professors.
They would remain ex-cadre employees and cannot claim inter se seniority with the direct recruits forming the concerned cadre.
The seniority inter se can only be determined of the persons belonging to the same cadre.
If on promotion the cadre strength of the promoted rank does not increase, surely the post held by such an incumbent is ex-cadre and personal to him and would cease as soon as the incumbent leaves the University or gets directly recruited.
Can it be said that when the incumbent is so promoted, the post held by him in the lower rank can be filled on regular basis ?
The answer is in the negative.
When such an incumbent is promoted, neither there is addition to the cadre in the promoted rank nor a vacancy occurs in the cadre from which he is promoted.
If the incumbent was to become a member of the cadre in the promoted rank, surely a vacancy should occur in the lower rank but it is not so.
This was precisely held in Dr. Rashmi Srivastava's case.
In Dr. Kumari Suman Aggarwal's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents, the Statute of the University clearly provided that "the post of Reader or Professor to which personal promotion is made shall be temporary addition to the cadre of Professor or Reader as the case may be and the post shall stand abolished on the incumbent ceasing to occupy it."
On these premises, the Apex Court held that when the incumbent was promoted under the Personal Promotion Scheme, the Statute provided that there will be temporary addition to the cadre and on the incumbent retiring etc., the increase in the cadre will come to an end.
Under these circumstances, it was held that such an incumbent would be a member of the cadre of Readers or Professors as the case may be.
Further, the Statute also provided for the determination of the seniority of the directly recruited professor and those appointed by personal promotion which was in the following terms :  "In the same cadre inter se seniority of Teachers appointed by personal promotion or by direct recruitment shall be determined according to length of continuous service in such cadre."
The Apex Court on the basis of the above particular Statutes came to the conclusion that the persons promoted on personal promotion had a right to get their seniority determined vis-a-vis direct recruits according to the length of continuous service.
This authority is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
There is no Statute envisaging temporary addition to the cadre.
Rather clause 3(i) of Chapter IV-A of the Statute envisages the other way round, i.e., there shall not be any addition to the number of faculty positions and the promotion will be made on his own post of the incumbent.
There is no statute dealing with the seniority of the direct recruits vis-a- vis those promoted under personal promotion scheme.
Personal promotion is totally different than the normal promotion understood in the service jurisprudence.
It does not make any difference that the person so promoted does not get automatic promotion but is based on merit.
The question is whether such a person is the member of the cadre to which he is promoted ?
Our answer is in the negative.
Learned Single Judge in Dr.
Veer Singh's case considered both the authorities of the Apex Court referred to above and also came to the conclusion that in Dr. Kumari Suman Aggarwal's case it was because of the special statutes to which reference has been made above that the incumbent was held to be a member of the cadre to which she was promoted as the Statutes envisaged temporary addition to the cadre and there was a specific statute dealing with the seniority of such incumbents vis-a-vis the direct recruits.
3.
Consequently, we hold that the promotees who are promoted under clause (3) of Chapter IV-A of the Statutes are not the members of the cadre to which they are promoted and cannot have any seniority vis-a-vis the direct recruits.
They may have inter se seniority between themselves but not inter se with the direct recruits.
4.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow that writ petition and direct the respondent-University to frame the seniority of the direct recruits, Readers, Associate Professors, Professors separately without inter-mingling the same with those promoted under clause 3 of Chapter IV-A of the Statutes and such incumbents be not considered as a member of the cadre for any inter se seniority with the direct recruits.
To make it further clear, it may be observed that an incumbent who is promoted under clause 3 of Chapter IV-A of the Statutes cannot claim seniority over a direct recruit though he may have a longer length of service.