SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against an order dated 13th December, 1983, passed by BC Basak, J as his Lordship then was in Civil Order No. 12354(W) of 1983, whereby and whereunder the writ-application of the appellant was dismissed in limine.
The facts of the matter are undisputed.
2.
The petitioner was Headmistress of Kanthapara Bhagini Nivedita Balika Vidyapith (hereinafter referred to as the `said School').
As the venue of the said School (sic) have filed a writ petition being Civil Rule No. 3147(W) of 1982.
A vakalatnama was sought to be obtained from the petitioner-appellant by Sri Ajit Kumar Bhattacharjee, who was the then Administrator of the said School.
The petitioner-appellant executed the said vakalatnama, but the petitioner-appellant later on having come to learn about the dispute, wanted to support the case of the writ-petitioners in CR 3147(W) of 1982.
The appellant has contended that on 3rd May 1982, the Administrator entered into the said School and forcibly took away keys of the almirah with the help of other two teachers, whereafter a general diary being GD 159 dated 351982 was lodged with Naihati Police Station.
The appellant apprehended that some action would be taken up by the said Administrator and the thereafter requested her lawyer to refer the matter before Justice BC Ray, as His Lordship then was.
Thereupon the following order was passed :-  "after hearing Mr. Banerjee and Mr. Basu there will be further interim order to the extent that the respondents are restrained from passing any order suspending the respondent No. 8 from service until further order of this Court."
The said order was communicated to the respondents.
The appellant, however, did not attend the school for some time and when she intended to resume her duties she was prevented from doing so, in respect whereof another general diary being GD Entry No. 854 dated 1551982 was lodged.
The appellant was allegedly put under suspension.
A charge-sheet was also issued against her.
In the meanwhile, for alleged violation of the aforementioned order, a contempt application was also filed.
The appellant questioned the said charge-sheet by filing a writ application which was marked as CO 12354(W) of 1983, wherein the following prayers were made :-  "(a) A writ of and/or a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to show cause why the order contained in Memo No. 47 dated 351982 (Annexure II to the petition) order and/or letter dated 11.3.1983 issued by the Secretary, Kanthalpara Bhagini Nivedita Balika Vidyapith i.e. respondent No. 8 (Annexure `J' to the petition) and also Memo No. 218/G dated 611983 issued by the Secretary, West Bengal Board of Secondary Education (referred in Annexure J to the petition) should not be quashed, set aside, and/or rescinded and also directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to resume her duties as Headmistress and to release her salary up to date; (b) A writ of and/or a writ in the nature of certiorari to produce entire records relating to the Memo No. 47 dated 351982 (Annexure H to the petition) issued by the then Administrator i.e. predecessor of the Managing Committee letter dated 11.3.1983 issued by the present Secretary i.e. respondent No. 8 (Annexure J to the petition) and also the Memo No. 218/G dated 611983 issued by the Secretary, West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and other records of the Board touching the affairs of the school before the Hon'ble Court and to certify them so that conscionable justice may be administered by quashing the same."
3.
The learned trial Judge dismissed the application on the ground that no case has been made out for issuing of any rule or any interim order and the petitioner-appellant's remedy, if any, lies in making an application for contempt which has been filed.
4.
Mr. Banjerjee, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submits that keeping in view the subsequent events the petitioner-appellant had filed the said writ application questioning the charge-sheet dated 11.3.1983 as contained in Annexure `J' to the writ application, inter alia, on the ground that the appellant was not given an adequate opportunity to file a show cause; but despite the same, the aforementioned notice was issued against her directing her to show cause as to why she should not be dismissed from service.
5.
Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submits that it would appear that the petitioner however filed a reply, whereupon, the Secretary of the said school issued a letter to the appellant on 13th April, 1983, in terms whereof the appellant was permitted to inspect the documents with her lawyer or with any other representative on 30th April, 1983 in between 200 pm and 400 pm at the school premises.
The learned Counsel, therefore, submits that the purported order dated 11th March, 1983 as contained in Annexure `J' to the writ application must be held to have been given a go-bye.
However, from another letter dated 28th April, 1983 issued by the appellant to the Secretary of the said school as contained in Annexure `M' to the writ application, it appears that despite the said letter, the appellant could not inspect the documents stating that :-  "So far as the custody of documents of the school and inspection thereof by me, I repeat that I apprehend threat of being manhandled if I am asked to go to the school premises, as in the past I was manhandled on several occasions by persons presumably set up by you or the other members of the purported Managing Committee and as such I believe that I may be manhandled and may not be given fair chances of inspection of all documents if I am required to go to the school premises for the same.
Besides the records of the school were kept with the erstwhile administrator in his residence in the past which goes to prove that the records of the school were not always kept in the school premises as alleged in your letter.
"In that view I would request you to allow me the inspection of documents in the chamber or in the residence of your learned advocate even on 30.4.1983.
If you have decided to allow me inspection of documents in the chamber or in residence of your learned advocate on 30.4.1983 I would request you to intimate me at least two days ahead thereof.
In the event some other date is fixed please intimate me a little ahead of the date fixed."
6.
Mr. Bhattacharya appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, has drawn our attention to a letter dated 26.3.1983, from a perusal whereof it appears that the appellant had submitted her explanation.
However, it appears that in the said letter, the appellant stated about threatening with dire consequences meted out to her and she prayed for inspection of the documents.
It further appears that the Secretary of the school in terms of a letter dated 1341983 which was received by the appellant on 2041983, asked her to take inspection of the documents in question on 30.4.1983 in between 200 pm and 400 pm at the school premises stating that as the said date is a Saturday, her counsel may also be present at the time of inspection.
The appellant again, in terms of her letter dated 2041983 expressed her inability to attend the school, inter alia, on the ground that the ground stated in the said letter that the documents are not allowed to go outside the premises of the school, is not correct.
It was stated :  "So far as the custody of the documents of the school and inspection thereof by me, I repeat that I apprehend threat and of being manhandled if I am asked to go to the school premises, as in the past I was manhandled on several occasions by persons presumably set up by you or the other members of the purported Managing Committee and as such I believe that I may be manhandled and may not be given fair chances of inspection of all documents if I am required to go to the school premises for the same.
Besides the records of the school were kept with the erstwhile administrator in his residence in the past which goes to prove that the records of the school were not always kept in the school premises as alleged in your letter.
In that view I would request you to allow me the inspection of documents in the chamber or in the residence of your learned advocate even on 30.4.1983.
If you have decided to allow me inspection of documents in the chamber or in residence of your learned advocate on 30.4.1983, I would request you to intimate me at least two days ahead thereof.
In the event some other date is fixed please intimate me a little ahead of the date fixed."
The said letter was not answered and, therefore, the writ application was filed.
7.
In view of the facts stated hereinbefore, it is evident that the learned trial Judge committed an error in refusing to issue a Rule Nisi or pass an interim order without taking into consideration the subsequent events particularly in view of the fact that on 3121983, the date was fixed for hearing of an application for addition of party.
The appellant in no uncertain terms contended that the notice asking her to show cause as to why she should not be dismissed from service is illegal because the same was passed in utter disregard of the orders passed by this Court and in violation of the mandatory provisions of Rule 28(8) of the Management Rules.
In this situation, in our opinion, the learned trial Judge ought to have disposed of the said writ petition on merit.
We may, however, point but that in a recent decision this Court in the case of Sujit Das v. The West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and others, 1996 Appeal No. 225 of 1990 arising out of Matter No. 612 of 1994 disposed of on 2641996, interpreted the provision of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules and held :  "A disciplinary proceedings as against a delinquent can be sub- divided into 3 parts in terms of Rule 28(8) of the said Rules.
The said Rule provides for drawing up of a formal proceeding and issuance of charge-sheet to the teacher and offering him reasonable facilities for defending himself.
The words `formal proceeding' evidently mean a proceeding initiated for the purpose of enquiring into the charges against the delinquent employee.
In the said proceeding, the delinquent must be offered reasonable facilities for defending himself which, without any shadow of doubt, means that the principles of natural justice have to be complied with.
The Rule of audi alteram partem roots in fairness.
It entitles the delinquent to have a fair hearing.
Charges when drawn up as against a delinquent are required to be proved in a proceeding after offering him reasonable facilities for defending himself.
The word `facilities' imports procedural fairness.
Unless the delinquent is provided with the facilities to have inspection and/or take copy of the documents which the Committee/Administrator relies upon, he cannot file a show cause nor can the same satisfy the requirements of giving all opportunities to the delinquent officer to defend himself.
Unless an effective show cause is filed, the question of consideration thereof by the disciplinary authority at the first instance and Section 24 Committee at the second instance for the purpose of grant of approval would not arise.
Moreover, the principles of natural justice in relation to a domestic enquiry must be held to comprise of two basic elements, i.e. the right to cross-examine the witnesses examined by the Managing Committee or the Administrator and right to examine witnesses in his own favour.
He at least is entitled to examine himself and make submissions as regards his defences.
Unless, in my considered opinion, the Committee takes recourse to the said formalities, it cannot be said to have offered reasonable facilities for defending to a delinquent.
The Managing Committee or the Administrator must also record reasons as to how it has come to the conclusion for taking disciplinary action against the delinquent.
Such reasons must be based on the materials on record.
Section 24 Committee can permit the Managing Committee/Administrator to issue formal notice calling upon the teacher or the employee concerned, to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed or removed from the service only when the Board considers the material on records and thus comes to a conclusion that there are sufficient grounds for taking disciplinary action.
Such a consideration must be based on the materials which have been collected in the formal proceedings drawn up as against the delinquent employee.
No document can be looked into which has been procured behind the back of the delinquent or which was not supplied to him or he was not allowed to take inspection thereof.
Upon receipt of the reply to the second show cause notice the Managing Committee/Administrator ex facie is required to take into consideration the same and only in the event if it satisfied that reply to the second show cause notice is unsatisfactory, it is to be sent again to the Board together with all relevant papers including the explanation submitted by the teacher or the employee concerned and the recommendations of the Committee for the action proposed to be taken.
Only when the power is exercised by the Committee to dismiss permanent or temporary teachers and other employees the question of grant of prior approval of the Board thereto arises."
8.
Keeping in view the fact that this appeal was filed in the year 1983, and further in view of the fact that the disputes between the parties are pending for a long time, we intended to dispose of the writ application itself, if it was so possible.
By an order dated 11.6.1996, after hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, we directed the respondents to let us know as to whether any further action had been taken or not, and if possible, to produce the entire records.
The matter was adjourned for 2 weeks, but when the matter was listed on 2761996, nobody appeared.
However, in order to give another opportunity to the respondents to produce records and to state before us as to what further action had been taken in the matter, we got the matter listed on 2861996, under the heading `To be Mentioned', but even on that date nobody had appeared on behalf of the respondents.
This case was fixed for delivery of judgment today.
Even today, nobody has appeared on behalf of the respondents, nor the records have been produced.
It is really a protracted litigation.
However, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, we set aside the impugned order dated 13121983 and remit the matter to the concerned Bench for hearing the matter on merits.
However, in absence of the records and in view of the order passed by a Division Bench of this Court, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the services of the appellant have not yet been terminated nor a final order has been passed.
Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that the appellant should not be kept under suspension for a long time.
We, therefore, quash the order of suspension, if any, and direct that she be allowed to resume her duties forthwith.
This order shall, however, be subject to the result of the writ petition as also any direction that may be given in CR No. 3174(W) of 1982, wherein an interim order was passed by BC Ray, J (as His Lordship then was) in favour of the appellant as noticed hereinbefore.
Moreover, having regard to the fact that the matter is pending for a long time, we would request the concerned Bench to hear the writ application as also the aforementioned CR No. 3174(W) of 1982 and CO No. 14839(W) of 1985 if the same are still pending, as early as possible, and preferably within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order.
Before parting with this case, we may note that pursuant to the interim order passed by this Court, the appellant has been paid subsistence allowance.
Any amount which may be directed to be paid in favour of the appellant, if any, by the learned trial Judge, the said fact may be brought to the Court's notice so that necessary order for adjustment may be passed.
Order accordingly.