NV Balasubramanian, J. - It is a petition to quash the order of the first respondent dated 2261991 and for a direction to fix the name of the petitioner above the third respondent in the posts of Assistant as well as Superintendent in the Office of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order of the first respondent rejecting the request of the petitioner for revision of seniority in the category of Assistant with effect from 1761972.
3.
The petitioner joined the service in the first respondent-Board as Junior Assistant in the year 1967 and completed probation successfully on 1241969.
The third respondent joined the service on 10.5.1967 and the third respondent is junior to the writ petitioner in the service in the Board.
4.
The next cadre of promotion for the post of Junior Assistant is that of Assistant.
The petitioner acquired the necessary qualification by passing Account Test in the examination held in May, 1972, and he was qualified from the month of June, 1972 when the result was declared.
The third respondent acquired the eligible qualification by appearing in the examination in the month of November, 1972 when he passed the account test.
However, the third respondent has passed the special test even before the petitioner acquired the eligible qualification.
In the month of May, 1972, an administrative necessity arose in the Office of the Board to fill up the posts of Assistants.
The Board to fill up the posts of Assistants scrutinised the names of the Junior Assistants who had essential qualifications for the promotion to the post of Assistant.
The Board found that the third respondent was qualified, but the petitioner was not qualified for the post of Assistant.
The third respondent was appointed as Assistant in the year 1972 and his rank in the order of seniority then was shown as No. 2.
The third respondent and others were temporarily and subsequently reverted for want of vacancies and were not re-promoted as Assistant till January, 1973.
When the vacancies arose in the month of January, 1973, a temporary panel was prepared for emergency appointment and 16 persons were selected for emergency promotion.
In the temporary panel prepared, the name of the petitioner was shown above the name of the third respondent.
The Accounts Subordinate Union made a representation to the Board to regularise the services of the persons who were promoted as Assistants albeit temporarily in the month of June, 1972.
The plea of Union was duly considered by the Board and it was decided that the services of those who would have got promotion had they been given regular appointment in the first instance itself should be regularised and in that view of the matter, a fresh seniority list was prepared and eight persons found in the temporary panel earlier prepared were considered and promoted as Assistants against the vacancies under the emergency provision of the rule.
The first six persons found in the temporary promotion in June, 1972 were found eligible to be regularised in the post of Assistant.
In this view of the matter, a fresh panel of promotion was prepared on 23.3.1973 and the rank of the third respondent was shown as No. 2 and the name of the petitioner was omitted in the fresh panel of promotion and the copy of the letter was forwarded to the General Secretary, Tamil Nadu Electricity Employees Union and the third respondent was also promoted on the basis of the seniority list prepared.
5.
The writ petitioner has made a representation in the year 1987 that his juniors were promoted as Assistants and his case was not considered for the temporary panel prepared and confirmed for the promotion from Junior Assistants to Assistants.
Hence, he has requested that he should be considered in the post of Assistant with effect from 1761972.
He made representations on 371987, 2131989 and 12.2.1990.
On 381990, the respondent rejected the request of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was not qualified for the post of Assistant at the time of preparation of panel in June, 1972.
The petitioner again made a representation on 15111990 and that was also rejected on 30.11.1990.
The petitioner made another representation to the Chairman on 3031991 and his request was rejected by an order dated 2261991.
The petitioner has challenged the order by filing this writ petition on 1931992.
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner reiterated the averments made in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition and submitted that once a panel was prepared and in the panel that was prepared, the name of the petitioner was shown above the third respondent, the name of the petitioner should have been preferred for promotion before considering the claims of the third respondent.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, even the regularisation made by the Board in the year 1973 would show that the third respondent would not have been appointed in the first instance itself because the petitioner was senior to the third respondent and the third respondent had no chance of being given a regular promotion or appointment in the first instance itself.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, that would apply only to the case if the person was found to be senior and it would not apply to the case of junior who acquired qualification earlier.
Therefore, it is submitted that the regularisation done by the Board of the third respondent as Assistant is against its own regulations and hence, the rank of the petitioner should be shown aabove the third respondent and the correct seniority of the petitioner should be refixed from the year 1973 onwards.
According to the second respondent, the panel was prepared on the basis of the seniority as well as qualification and after considering both the aspects, the petitioner's name was not shown in the panel prepared in the year 1973.
7.
No doubt, it is true, the claim of the petitioner seems to be justified.
The third respondent was only a junior and his promotion in the month of June, 1972 was only temporary.
At the time of preparation of the seniority list in the month of January, 1973, the petitioner had acquired necessary qualifications and his name was included in the temporary panel and his name was shown above the name of the third respondent.
Had the temporary panel continued, the petitioner would have obtained the promotion prior to the third respondent.
The Board considered the representation of the Union and felt that the regular appointment should be given to those persons, had they been given regular post in the first instance itself.
The third respondent on his own showing would not have obtained the regular appointment as Assistant since he was junior to the writ petitioner.
However, the third respondent continued to serve as Assistant from the year 1973.
It is stated that he was also promoted to the next higher post of Superintendent in the year 1990.
The petitioner has not chosen to challenge the seniority list for a sufficiently long period and under Regulation 97(d) of the Regulations applicable to the first respondent any relief of revision of seniority list, shall be made within a period of 3 years.
The petitioner has kept quiet for nearly 15 years even after the preparation of the panel of promotion in the year 1973.
His first representation against the panel on his own showing, was made in the year 1987, probably after the third respondent was promoted as Superintendent.
There were subsequent representations commenced from the year 1987 till the year 1991 and the Board was consistently rejecting his representations and the petitioner has chosen to approach this Court in the year 1992 seeking for the revision of the seniority prepared, implemented and acted upon in the year 1973.
Now, nearly more than two decades have passed from the days of preparation of the seniority list.
I have dealt with the question whether the writ petition can be entertained where there is a long delay in challenging the seniority list in an unreported decision in the case of MD Manickavelu v. Tamil Nadu Agro Industries Corporation Limited represented by its Managing Director, Madras and another, (Order in W.P. No. 2616 of 1986 dated 8111996) as under :-  ``The Supreme Court in a series of cases, particularly in Rabindra Nath Bose v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 470, NL Cecil D'Souza v Union of India, and others AIR 1975 SC 1269, State of Orissa v. Pyarimohan Samantaray, 1977(3) SLR 255 (SC), has taken a view that when there is no satisfactory explanation furnished by the petitioner for the inordinate delay in approaching the Court to challenge the seniority, the petition is liable to be rejected.
The reason for the rejection of the petition on the ground of inordinate delay is the fact that a number of appointments or promotions would have been made on the basis of the seniority list and there would have been a number of retirements also.
Hence, the Supreme Court in Pyarimohan Samantaray's case (cited supra) has held that, `those who continued to serve could justifiably think that as there was no challenge to their appointments within the period prescribed in the said suit, they could look forward to further promotion and higher terminal benefits on retirement'.
The Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Nandlal, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 251, has observed that when there is a considerable delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching the Court and in the intervening period, if third party's right intervenes, that would be a sufficient circumstance to disentitle the petitioner to claim the relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India''.
There is long delay in approaching this Court.
In other words, the petitioner has not approached this Court with promptitude which is expected of a reasonable person aggrieved by an order.
The long delay clearly shows slackness on the part of the petitioner.
I am, therefore, of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
Accordingly, I dismiss the writ petition, with reluctance, as there is something that can be said in favour of the writ petitioner on merits of the case.
Order accordingly.