RL Anand, J.- By this judgment I dispose of 11 writ petitions Nos. 2403 of 1987, 2632 of 1986, 4257 of 1986; 2402 of 1986; 4258 of 1986; 1899 of 1987; 2631 of 1986; 1901 of 1987; 4259 of 1986; 1900 of 1987 and 4756 of 1985; as in the opinion of this Court all the writ petitions contain common questions of law and fact.
Five writ petitions have been filed by the management against the award of the Labour Court and five writ petitions have been filed by the workmen against that very award, which has given rise to the filing of the writ petitions by the management.
Whereas the management has prayed in its writ petitions that the Labour Court committed an error in ordering reinstatement of the workmen once it has held that the inquiry against the workmen was fair and just by invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; the grouse of the workmen in their writ petitions is that while reinstating them into service, they would have been awarded backwages and the Labour Court committed an error in saying that in view of their conduct, they should be visited with the penalty with regard to the withholding of their backwages.
It may also be mentioned here that so far as CWP.
No. 4756 of 1985 is concerned, it has only been filed by Babu Khan, who has prayed for the award of the backwages.
There is no counter writ petition on behalf of the management against this employee/workman challenging the award of the Labour Court as to why it has invoked the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short `the Act').
2.
First of all I would like to refer to the pleadings of two writ petitions, i.e., CWP.
No. 2632 of 1986 filed by the management of M/s. Remington Rand of India Ltd against Virender Singh and CWP.
No. 2403 of 1987 filed by Virender Singh against the above management.
3.
M/s. Remington Rand of India Ltd (hereinafter called `the Company' in CWP.
No. 2632 of 1986 has stated that respondent No. 1 Virender Singh was working as a Mechanical Fitter with the petitioner Company.
He had been operating of Generator Set for the last about 1-1/2 years prior to the dismissal of his service on account of proved misconduct.
On 1911981 when respondent No. 1 Virender Singh was on duty, the Radiator of the Generator Set was damaged and water from it started leaking.
On preliminary inquiry it was found that 1-1/4" long metal piece foreign to the generator set was embedded in the radiator and it caused the leakage.
Virender Singh, respondent No. 1, was charge-sheeted for serious misconduct under the Certified Standing Orders.
The first charge-sheet was dated 821981 for sabotage or negligence causing damage to the generator set.
Respondent No. 1 also refused to operate the generator set on 10th, 11th and 15th February, 1981 and for this insubordination he was issued a second charge-sheet on 2721981.
No explanation was furnished to the charge-sheet dated 821981 and no proper and reasonable explanation was given to the second charge-sheet dated 2721981.
The petitioner-Company held a domestic inquiry and the Inquiry Officer found the misconduct having been proved.
Since the alleged misconduct against the workman was serious, the Company dismissed him from service on 2631982.
The domestic inquiry was conducted according to the principles of natural justice.
It started on 1141981.
Respondent No. 1 participated in the inquiry upto 27111981, but later on he did not participate.
It was a major misconduct on the part of respondent No. 1 Respondent No. 1 challenged his dismissal by raising an industrial dispute, which was referred to the Labour Court, who passed the award dated 2121982 and reinstated the workman into service, but without backwages.
Challenge has been given by the Company to the award on the ground that once it had held that the domestic inquiry conducted by the Company was fair and proper and that it was not the result of any mala fide victimisation or unfair labour practice, the Labour Court could not invoke the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act by calling upon the petitioner-Company to reinstate the workman into service.
The findings of the Labour Court have been attacked on the grounds that the conclusions drawn by the Labour Court are faulty.
The management has alleged that both the charge-sheets served upon this workman had been proved to the hilt.
Firstly, he tried to sabotage the working of the management by putting foreign metal in the radiator of the generator set, and secondly, he failed to discharge his duty.
The findings of the Labour Court are based on conjectures and surmises.
It is not proved on the record that somebody else other than respondent No. 1 could have also committed the mischief in causing damage to the generator set.
The Labour Court has not given any reason for interfering with the quantum of punishment.
It has not held that the punishment awarded by the management was harsh or oppressive or shockingly disproportionate to the misconduct committed.
The award suffers from error of law and jurisdiction and is perverse.
No cogent reasons have been given in interfering with the quantum of sentence.
4.
Virender Singh in his writ petition (CWP.
No. 2403 of 1987) has attacked the award of the Labour Court dated 2121985 passed by Shri RN Batra, Presiding Officer, on the ground that since the service conditions of the workmen employed at Faridabad are very poor in comparison to the workmen at Calcutta, the workmen of the Company formed a Trade Union known as Remington Rand Karamchari Union.
The Company and the Union entered into a settlement dated 2911979 under Section 12(3) of the Act.
The Company did not implement the clauses of the settlement and did not support the incentive scheme.
In view of this the General Secretary of the Union Shri Babu Khan complained to the Company on 24.8.1979 with copies thereof to the Labour Authorities, who assured him to prosecute the management and the Company.
When the workers of the Company failed to get justice, they resorted to a strike.
However they were assured for the implementation of the settlement.
A fresh charter of demands was also served upon the Company, vide which some financial gains were requested in order to bring the employees of Faridabad at par with the employees of the Company at Calcutta.
The Company did not negotiate with Union.
The Company did not agree to the demands of the Union; rather it made various deductions from the salaries of the workmen.
The Company entered into a settlement with a puppet Union which had no representative character.
The petitioner and his fellow workmen did not accept this settlement as they were not party to the conciliation proceedings.
The Company did not pay any wages to the workmen for the period of lock out.
Seeing all this, the Union submitted a letter dated 1781980 signed by about 200 workmen and complained that the Company was negotiating with another Union, which had no representative character.
Some litigation started.
The petitioner, who was an executive member of the Union, was actively participating in challenging the settlement dated 681980 arrived at between the Company and some unauthorised representatives of the already dissolved Union.
Due to the trade union activities of the petitioner, the respondent-Company served two false and fabricated charge-sheets dated 821981 and 2721981.
Those charge-sheets were duly replied to and in spite of that the management chose to institute a domestic inquiry and appointed Shri J.S.
Saroha as Enquiry Officer, in which the petitioner had no confidence as he was a man of the management.
The inquiry conducted by the Enquiry Officer was partial as he was violating the principles of natural justice.
The Enquiry Officer was not inclined to accommodate the petitioner by not getting the list of witnesses supplied.
The petitioner was not even permitted to represent himself through co-workers like Babu Khan, Sadakat Hussain or HR Dua; as a result of which the petitioner had to cross-examine the witnesses of the management himself without the assistance of his co-workers.
The petitioner had to withdraw from the inquiry seeing the conduct of the Enquiry Officer, who completed the inquiry at the back of the petitioner.
Finally the services of the petitioner were terminated in an illegal manner.
He raised an industrial issue and the Labour Court vide award dated 2121985 reinstated the petitioner.
The attack of the present petitioner is that the Labour Court held erroneously that the domestic inquiry was fair and proper.
Rather it was mala fide and conducted against the rules of natural justice as the petitioner was not supplied with the list of witnesses.
He was denied the opportunity of representing himself in a proper and effective manner.
He was not allowed to take the assistance of his co- workers for the purpose of cross-examining the witnesses of the management and the findings of the Labour Court that the domestic inquiry was fair and proper were erroneous.
5.
Udai Singh Rawat was also charge-sheeted on the allegations that on 2781980 he stopped his normal work, left his place of work without any permission and valid grounds and that he allegedly intimidated, coerced, manhandled, used abusive language, gave threats of violence, instigated the other workers, created ugly scenes inside and outside the administrative block and committed riotous and disorderly and unpleasant behaviour.
He was further charge-sheeted on the averments that on 391980 he along with others intimidated, used filthy abuses against co-workers and indulged in brick- batting from outside the factory.
He hurled uncalled for abuses.
After the domestic inquiry, his services were terminated, which became the subject- matter of industrial dispute and it ended with the award of the Labour Court given in Reference No. 120/1982 decided on 2121985, vide which it was held that the inquiry conducted against Udey Singh Rawat was fair and proper.
However, the Labour Court invoked the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act and set aside the order of dismissal and reinstated the workman into service to deprive him of the backwages for his proved acts of misconduct.
Thus the management has given the challenge to the award of the Labour Court by stating and adopting the same grounds as referred to above that the Labour Court was not justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act.
6.
On the contrary Udey Singh has given challenge to the award of the Labour Court in his writ petition (CWP.
No. 1900 of 1987) that the domestic inquiry was neither fair nor proper and the Labour Court was not justified in withholding the backwages on the plea of proved misconduct.
According to this workman, the domestic inquiry was mala fide and against the rules of natural justice.
The petitioner was not allowed to be represented by the Legal Secretary of the Union.
The inquiry was wrongly declared as ex parte as no notice was given to him regarding the resumed inquiry; that the Enquiry Officer failed to supply the list of witnesses to him.
7.
Sadakat Hussain workman was also charge-sheeted on the allegations that on 2781980 he stopped his normal work, left the place of work without any permission and valid grounds and he instigated his co-workers and created ugly scenes inside and outside the administrative block; spoiled the discipline and decorum of the establishment and committed riotous, disorderly and unpleasant behaviour; that he resorted to strike and also instigated other workmen to join in the strike.
Yet another charge-sheet was served upon him, which was to the effect that on 391980 he prevented the loyal workers from joining the duty by abusing them and thus committed act of gross indiscipline.
He was also dismissed from service vide letter dated 1561981 as a result of the domestic inquiry.
The dismissal of Sadakat Hussain also became the subject matter of the industrial dispute, which was disposed of by the Labour Court vide award dated 3121985 and the operative findings of the Labour Court are that the inquiry was just and fair but the punishment of dismissal was harsh and oppressive and accordingly it was set aside but the workman was deprived of his backwages for his acts of misconduct.
8.
Sadakat Hussain in his writ petition (CWP.
No. 2402 of 1986) has challenged the award on the main ground that the domestic inquiry was not fair and proper.
It was mala fide and against the rules of natural justice.
He was not allowed to be represented by the Legal Secretary of the Union.
He was pitted against a legally trained mind.
There was a denial of his reasonable requests which amounted to the infringement of the principles of natural justice.
The Inquiry Officer did not supply him the list of witnesses, the charges framed against him were concocted and there was no supporting evidence before the Inquiry Officer to substantiate the charge; that he was not given any notice of the resumed inquiry and, therefore, he is entitled to full backwages.
9.
The workman Kushal Nand Joshi was also charge-sheeted as charge-sheets (Annexures P1 and P2), dated 3081980 and 1591980 for insubordination, abetment, instigating co-workers not to resort to the work.
Against him domestic inquiry was conducted and vide letter dated 1761981 (Annexure P3) he was dismissed from service.
Industrial issue was raised by Mr. Joshi against his dismissal.
The appropriate Government referred the matter to the Labour Court for determination as to whether the dismissal of Mr. Joshi was valid and justified.
The reference ended with an award dated 2121985 vide which the inquiry was held to the justified.
However, the Labour Court by invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act reinstated the workman into service but without backwages.
The attack from both the sides to the award is on the same lines and footings as highlighted above.
10.
Jaswant Singh, workman of the Company, was charge-sheeted vide Annexure P1 of CWP.
No. 4258 of 1986 alleging against him that he was responsible for the breaking down of the electric motor and caused considerable damage to the Company and thus the damage has been caused due to his wilful negligence, carelessness and mishandling of the property of the Company and then he committed a major misconduct.
On the report of the Enquiry Officer, who conducted the domestic inquiry, Jaswant Singh was dismissed from service vide order dated 1131982 (Annexure P3).
This dismissal also became the subject-matter of the reference of the Labour Court, which passed the award dated 3121985 (Annexure P4) and held that the inquiry report dated 10121981 was justified; it was fair and proper but the punishment was excessive and oppressive.
The Labour Court invoked the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and converted the penalty of dismissal into reinstatement into service but without backwages.
The management is not satisfied with the award vis-a-vis the reinstatement and the workman is not satisfied with the findings of the award regarding his misconduct, which became the basis for the deprivation of the backwages to him.
The main grounds taken up by the rival parties in support of their cases are the same as referred to above and need not be repeated again.
11.
Babu Khan in his writ petition (CWP.
No. 4756 of 1985) has alleged that on account of his participation in the trade union activities; he being the General Secretary of the Union, was victimised and was falsely charge- sheeted on 1581980, alleging that he took up some disputes with a boy, who used to serve tea to the workmen.
It was also alleged that he coerced the workers to sign some papers relating to the trade union activities and instigated them to go slow in the discharge of their duties.
One more charge- sheet was served upon him alleging that he intimidated loyal workers and uttered filthy language to them.
He requested the management to supply to him the Hindi version of the charge-sheet, but his request was not accepted.
In the Enquiry Officer, who was appointed by the management, he had no faith as he was a man of the Management.
He requested the management to change the Enquiry Officer but his request was not accepted.
The Enquiry Officer violated the principles of natural justice by not allowing certain witnesses, who were recognised as Legal Secretaries of the Union, to represent him.
The inquiry was unfair and partial.
The workman was pitted against a legally trained man.
The witnesses were not examined by the Enquiry Officer in his presence; rather he recorded framed statements.
The petitioner protested against the conduct of the Enquiry Officer.
In short, the challenge has been given by Babu Khan to the report of the Enquiry Officer and to the award that the Presiding Officer held improperly that the inquiry was fair and proper.
This petitioner has prayed in his writ petition that he be awarded full backwages.
12.
There is no cross writ petition on behalf of the Company against Babu Khan petitioner.
In other words, the management in this writ petition (CWP.
No. 4756 of 1985) would try to justify the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the Labour Court with regard to the conducting of the domestic inquiry.
13.
First of all I would like to deal with the five writ petitions of the management, in which the challenge to the award is that the Labour Court was not justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act by simultaneously giving the findings that the inquiry was fair and just.
The counsel for the Management Mr. Sachin Mittal submitted that the workmen indulged in wanton acts of violence; they damaged the property of the management; they stopped the loyal workers from resorting to the work; they showed indiscipline, which act on the part of the workmen was an act of insubordination and in such circumstances the punishment of dismissal awarded by the management was justified and the Labour Court could not exercise its discretion under Section 11-A of the Act.
14.
Controverting the stand of the management and in support of the six writ petitions filed by the workmen, Smt. Abha Rathore, Advocate, submitted that the inquiry conducted by the Enquiry Officer stood vitiated when the management opted a Law Graduate as a prosecuting/Presenting Officer, who was pitted against the workers, who even were deprived of the legal assistance; so much so, the workmen were not supplied with the list of witnesses, the statements of witnesses, the Hindi version of the standing rules, copy of the preliminary reports, in spite of the fact that such vital documents were requisite.
In such circumstances the inquiry could not be held to be fair and justified and the findings of the Labour Court while depriving the backwages to the workmen on the ground that their conduct was such which did not justify the awarding of the backwages, should be set aside.
In this regard I will have to look to each award given by the Labour Court.
15.
With regard to the position of Virender Singh workman, the charges were that he damaged the radiator of the generator set and caused damage deliberately.
Also, it was the allegation against Virender Singh that he refused to operate the generator set.
The learned Labour Court framed additional issues as to whether the domestic inquiry conducted against Virender Singh was fair and proper and whether the termination of his services was justified or not.
After discussing the entire evidence produced before it and after hearing the submissions, the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the enquiry conducted against the workman was fair and proper regarding charges Nos. 1 and 2 only relating to charge-sheet (Exhibit M12) dated 2721981.
Charge-sheet dated 821981, which was with regard to the damage caused to the radiator, had not been proved.
Charge-sheet dated 2721981 was to the effect that the workman refused to operate the generator set on 1021981 in spite of the directions given to him by his Departmental Incharge Sh. IL Uppal.
Petitioner Virender Singh did not receive the warning letter dated 1221981 in which he was advised to operate the generator set.
This Court is not in a position to agree with the argument of Mrs. Abha Rathore that the inquiry conducted by the management stands vitiated for the reasons given by her because this Court is of the opinion that in a domestic inquiry the principles of natural justice are supposed to be met primarily and every omission on the part of the management may not be vital or fatal to the inquiry itself.
As the seriousness of the charge was not to the extent of justifying the dismissal of the workman, therefore, a lenient view was supposed to be taken by the Labour Court in view of the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act, which runs as follows :-  "11A.
Powers of Labour Court, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of discharge of dismissal of workmen.
Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case may require :  Provided that in any proceeding under this section the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evidence in relation to the matter."
The above provision would show that the Labour Court, if satisfied with the order of dismissal, was not justified, in the given circumstances, it could direct for the setting aside of the same and further directions could be given for the reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit or give such other relief to the workman, including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of the discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case may require.
In the case of Virender Singh, in the award dated 2121985 (Reference No. 403/1982) the learned Presiding officer came to the conclusion that a lenient view in the case of punishment was called for because the incident dated 821981 was lurking in the mind of the workman when he was charge-sheeted regarding the damage having been caused to the generator set and due to that incident he was feeling somewhat hesitant to operate the generator set.
As regards the charge relating to the incident dated 821981 it has not been proved, therefore, the impugned order of dismissal was liable to be set aside and the ends of justice would be met if the workman is reinstated but he should be deprived of his full backwages for the misconduct proved against him relating to the charges contained in charge-sheet (Ex.M12) dated 2721981.
This Court while agreeing that the Labour Court had the competency to invoke the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act, intends to disagree with the observations of the Labour Court when it had deprived Shri Virender Singh workman of his full backwages for the proved misconduct in relation to the incident dated 2721981.
I have already reproduced the material averments of the charge-sheet dated 2721981 and those averments/allegations do not warrant for depriving the workman of his full backwages.
Keeping in view the gravity of the allegations, a cut ought to have been applied, and by not doing so, a miscarriage of justice has been done, which should be remedied by this Court.
In the opinion of this Court, the workman Virender Singh ought to be awarded 40 per cent backwages from the date of the demand notice till the date he was taken into service in pursuance of the award dated 2121985 (Annexure P5 of CWP.
No. 2632 of 1986 filed by the management) given in Reference No. 43 of 1982.
This Court is not in agreement with the argument of Mr. Sachin Mittal, Advocate, that the Labour Court was not justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act or that the facts of this case did not warrant such interference.
While awarding the backwages to the extent of 40 per cent, this Court has derived support from M/s Kesoram Cotton Mills Ltd v. Gangadhar and others, AIR 1964 SC 708.
16.
Now I refer to the case of Jaswant Singh whose case has been defended by Smt. Abha Rathore, Advocate, who tried to convince this Court that the domestic inquiry conducted against this workman was liable to be struck down as he has been deprived of the legal assistance.
I am not in a position to agree with the submission of Smt. Abha Rathore as this Court is of the opinion that the principles of natural justice have been fully applied and no prejudice has been caused to Jaswant Singh workman.
However, on going through the charge against this workman, I have come to this conclusion that the Labour Court was justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act.
This employee also deserves backwages to the extent of 40 per cent from the date of the demand notice till he was reinstated into service, in view of the award dated 3121985 given in Reference No. 283 of 1982, wherein it has been observed by the Labour Court that the punishment awarded to the workman is disproportionate to the misconduct attributed to him as his helpers and supervisor went scot free and the entire blame is being laid on the shoulders of the workman (Jaswant Singh), who was taking active part in the trade union activities.
The award dated 3121985 of the Labour Court is hereby modified to this extent.
17.
The cases of KN Joshi Udey Singh Rawat, Sadakat Hussain and Babu Khan do not stand on different footing than that of Virender Singh and Jaswant Singh.
The Labour Court was not justified in depriving them full backwages, though it was justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court was not justified in holding that the enquiry against all the workmen was fair and just as in the opinion of this Court no prejudice has been caused to any of the workmen.
The award dated 2121985 passed in Reference No. 61 of 1982; the award dated 3121985 passed in Reference No. 40 of 1982; award dated 2121985 passed in Reference No. 120 of 1982; award dated 2811985 passed in Reference No. 371 of 1981 are hereby modified by holding that the management shall pay backwages to the extent of 40 per cent to each of these workmen from the date of the demand notice till the date of the reinstatement in pursuance of the awards, respectively.
18.
The net result of his decision is that five writ petitions filed by the management, i.e. CWP No. 2632 of 1986, CWP.
No. 4257 of 1986, CWP.
No. 4258 of 1986, CWP.
No. 2631 of 1986, and CWP.
No. 4259 of 1986 are hereby dismissed in toto.
Six writ petitions filed by the workmen Virender Singh, Sadakat Hussain, Jaswant Singh, KN Joshi, Udey Singh and Babu Khan, i.e. CWP.
No. 2403 of 1987, CWP.
No. 2402 of 1987, CWP.
No. 1899 of 1987, CWP.
No. 1901 of 1987, CWP.
No. 1900 of 1987 and CWP.
No. 4756 of 1985, are hereby allowed in part and these six persons are awarded 40 per cent back wages from the date of the demand notice till the reinstatement of each of them and to this extent the different awards given by the Labour Court in different references are hereby modified.
There shall be no order as to costs in all the 11 writ petitions.
Order accordingly.