GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner is entitled to the rounding off of the marks for the purpose of being treated as successful in the written test conducted by the Punjab State Electricity Board for recruitment of Assistant Engineer (Electrical Trainee) is the short question which requires adjudication in this petition.
2.
The petitioner applied for recruitment as Assistant Engineer (Electrical Trainee) in response to the advertisement issued by the Punjab State Electricity Board in February 1996.
A written test was conducted by the Board on 2991996.
Result of that test was announced by the Board on 3091996.
In all 58 candidates have been shown to have succeeded in the test.
Roll No. of the petitioner does not figure in the list of selected candidates because he has failed to secure 30% marks prescribed by the Board for the purpose of qualifying the written test.
The petitioner represented to the Board on 29111996 for rounding off his marks from 295% to 30% and to declare him pass in the written examination.
That request of the petitioner has not been accepted and this is the reason why he has moved this Court for directing the respondents to give him the benefit of 05% mark by applying the rule of rounding off.
In support of his assertion that the respondent-Board is duty bound to apply the rule of rounding off, the petitioner has relied on the orders passed in CWPNo.
83 of 1992, Asha Mehta v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(3) RSJ 1 : 1993(3) SCT 237 and C.W.P.
No. 5401 of 1995, Ms. Shivali Sahi v. Panjab University, decided on 2041995.
He has also relied on the fact that in the electricity bills issued by the Board to about 45 lac consumers fraction of 5 is rounded off to one.
According to the petitioner this practice also follows while paying salary to the employees and at the time of making purchases.
He has also invoked instructions issued by the Indian Standard Institute regarding rounding off the numerical values.
3.
Another grievance of the petitioner is that the Board has reduced qualifying marks for Scheduled Castes candidates but benefit even of fraction of marks has not been given to the general category candidate and in this manner the petitioner has been discriminated.
4.
After hearing Shri Gulshan Sharma at some length, we are convinced that no writ can be issued by the Court directing the respondents to apply the rule of rounding off.
The minimum eligibility criteria laid down by the Board for recruitment of Assistant Engineer (Electrical Trainee), which has been enumerated in the advertisement Annexure P-1, reads as under :-  "Minimum eligibility criteria :-  (i) Punjabi of Punjab Matric Standard (period for passing the exam., if already not cleared by the applicants), relaxable in case of November 1980 riots affected candidates to the extent of 2 years w.e.f.
date of joining this post.
(ii) The candidate has to qualify the written test or any other test/interview, if any, prescribed specifically, by securing minimum 30% marks.
xx xx xx xx xx xx"  A careful reading of the above extracted portion of the eligibility criteria shows that in order to qualify the written test a candidate must secure minimum 30% marks.
Thus securing of at least 30% marks is a condition precedent before a candidate can qualify in the written test.
In other words, the smallest possible percentage of marks or the least number of marks which a candidate must secure in order to become eligible is 30%.
As a logical corollary it can be said that the one who secures less than 30% marks is not qualified.
There is nothing in the advertisement or in the rules or regulations framed by the Board to show that a fraction of mark is to be rounded off to one if it is 05 or more and it is to be rounded off to zero in case it is less than 05.
In the absence of such a rule or a clause in the advertisement, it is not possible for the Court to rewrite the criteria laid down by the Board.
A mere possibility of some hardship in a case like the present one cannot justify the passing of an order so as to amend the criteria laid down by the Board.
Thus, we do not find any merit in the argument of Shri Gulshan Sharma that the Court should apply the rule of rounding off and declare the petitioner as pass in the written test conducted by the Board.
5.
We may now notice the decision of this Court on which reliance has been placed by Shri Sharma in Rakesh Kumar, Lecturer v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and others, 1989(2) RSJ 570, the Court was called upon to consider whether approval to the appointment of the petitioner on the post of Lecturer could be denied on the ground that after his appointment the Syndicate had revised the criteria for appointment of Lecturers in the affiliated colleges.
The petitioner Rakesh Kumar was appointed as Lecturer in English by Swami Swantantranand Memorial College, Dinanagar, Gurdaspur on 181988.
At that time the criteria was that a person should have secured 50% marks in his MA examination.
On March 23, 1989, the Syndicate resolved to raise the marks from 50% to 55%.
On the basis of revised criteria the University refused to approve the appointment of the petitioner.
This Court held that the amended criteria prescribed by the Syndicate dated 2331989 could not have been applied while granting approval in the case of the petitioner who was selected on the basis of the eligibility criteria applicable as on 181988.
After recording this conclusion, the Court further observed that the petitioner who had secured 546% marks in MA should have been given the benefit of the rule of rounding off.
In taking this view the Division Bench relied on the fact that in the past the University had been rounding off the percentage in the cases of similarly situated persons but after 2331989 it was decided not to apply the rule of rounding off.
The Court held that the decision of the University was arbitrary and unreasonable.
It is thus evident that the judgment in Rakesh Kumar's case (supra) primarily turned on the fact that the petitioner had been selected in accordance with the criteria applicable prior to 2331989 and the amended criteria could not be invoked for refusing approval to his appointment.
Hence, this decision has no bearing on the facts of this case.
6.
In Asha Mehta v. State of Punjab and another (supra), a learned single Judge considered the claim of the petitioner for rounding off the marks.
It appears from that judgment that the petitioner had applied for recruitment to Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
She secured 325% marks in the English paper.
She claimed that 05% marks should be rounded off so as to make the total marks as 33%.
The basis on which the petitioner made claim for rounding off the marks was that in other disciplines the Commission had applied the rule of rounding off.
The learned single Judge held that as a matter of right no one can ask for rounding off marks.
He, however, proceeded to hold that what the petitioner is claiming is that when the Commission has adopted the policy of rounding off marks while making selections and recruitments to various other posts, there was no justification for the Commission to adopt different yard sticks while making assessment of the candidates like the petitioner.
It is, therefore, clear that the learned Single Judge gave relief to the petitioner only on the ground of discriminatory practice adopted by the Commission.
7.
In C.W.P.
No. 5401 of 1995, this Court applied the rule of rounding off by making the following observations :-  "Taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances we find force in the petition particularly when the petitioner has secured 4475% marks and if the figure is rounded off, it cannot be said that the petitioner has secured less than 45% marks.
Even as per the rules of established practice for counting fractions, 5 or above has to be counted as 1.
Resultantly, the petitioner can be said to have secured 45% marks in the subject."
After having carefully read the judgment, we do not find any basis for the finding that there is rule of established practice of counting fractions.
8.
We may also notice four other decisions of this Court in which the claim of rounding off has been rejected.
In Nisha Kukreja and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(5) SLR 655, a Division Bench rejected the plea of the petitioner for rounding off the marks and to treat her eligible for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS Ayurveda courses and held that in the absence of any rule, the Court cannot apply the rule of rounding off.
9.
In Jasbir Kaur v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 1996(1) RSJ 261 : 1996(2) SCT 67 a division Bench of this court interpreted the provisions of the Punjabi University Calendar Volume-II and held that persons who secure 495% marks or below 50% marks in the written test could not be treated eligible for interview and if any such candidate is recommended by the selection committee then he has to be excluded.
10.
In C.W.P.
No. 821 of 1996 decided on 30th January, 1996, a Division Bench reviewed some of the earlier decisions and held :  "There is another aspect of the matter.
As already noticed, the rules prescribe three pre-conditions, viz.(i) 33% marks in the language paper; (ii) 45% marks in the aggregate of the written papers; and (iii) 55% marks in the aggregate of the written papers and viva voce test.
If the plea of the petitioners is accepted, a candidate who gets 325% marks in the language paper shall be entitled to the award of half a mark by the process of rounding off.
Similarly, when he gets 445% marks in the aggregate of the written papers which is 900 marks, he will be entitled to the award of 45 marks by way of rounding off.
Similarly, when he gets 545 marks, he would get 51 marks.
In other words, he would get 101 marks by way of rounding off.
A candidate from the general category is required to secure 561 marks out of 1020.
On acceptance of the plea of rounding off, he would become eligible by securing merely 5509 marks.
Not only this.
There can be a candidate who has actually secured 561 marks.
There is another who has in fact secured 5509 marks.
The latter shall be made equal to the former and thus, made eligible by rounding off.
This would make two `unequals' equal.
We are unable to persuade ourselves to uphold the contention which would lead to such an unfair result.
11.
In Sanjeev Kumar v. Panjab University and others, 1996(3) All Instant Judgements 156, another Division Bench examined the issue of rounding off for the purpose of admission to degree/diploma course in the Department of Computer Science, Panjab University.
By placing reliance on the judgment in Nisha Kukreja v. State of Punjab and others (supra) the Division Bench held as under :-  "Respectfully agreeing with the law laid down above, we find that there is no merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner and the petitioner cannot be given the benefit of rounding off."
In our opinion the principles laid down in Nisha Kukreja's case (supra), Jasbir Kaur's case (supra) and the later decisions represent the correct position of law and while expressing our respectful agreement with the four decisions, we hold that in the absence of any rule, provision in the statute or executive instructions regulating recruitment to the public services or the admissions to educational institutions, the court cannot direct any public authority to apply the rule of rounding off so as to give admission or appointment to a candidate who does not fulfil the criteria of eligibility.
12.
The petitioner's reliance on the practice adopted by the Board for preparing the bills or payment of salary and the instructions issued by the Indian Standard Institute is clearly misplaced and on the basis of such practice no relief can be given to the petitioner.
13.
Argument of Shri Sharma about discrimination has no substance whatsoever.
Merely because the Board has taken policy decision to reduce the percentage of marks in the cases of Scheduled Castes candidates it cannot be held that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the rule of rounding off.
The petitioner cannot claim any parity vis-a-vis the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, we do not find any basis to hold that the Board has acted arbitrarily by reducing the percentage of marks of Scheduled Castes candidates.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.