NC Khichi, J (Oral) - In this writ petition, award dated 3091981 (Annexure P.1) passed by Labour Court, Rohtak (Haryana) is subject matter of challenge.
2.
Respondent-workmen Nos. 2 to 4 raised industrial dispute and the State Government referred the same for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, under Section 10(i)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
All the three references Nos. 125, 142 and 144 of 1979 were consolidated by the Labour Court, vide order dated 12.8.1980.
The parties filed their respective pleadings which gave rise to the following issues :-  1.
Whether the dispute under adjudication is not an industrial dispute.
2.
Whether the termination of the workman is justified and in order ?
If so, to what relief he is entitled?
3.
On perusal of the entire evidence brought on the record, the Labour Court decided both the issues against the management-petitioner and found that respondent Nos. 2 and 4 had worked for about 6/7 years with the management and that the termination of their services was not in accordance with law because the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not complied with.
It was further found that the respondents after termination of their services, had been working with M/s Minakshi Ginning Factory, Fatehabad, as per their own admission.
Consequently, the workmen were ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service, but without back-wages.
Notices were issued to the respondents but in spite of service, none of them put in appearance as is evident from the order dated 361982.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner while assailing the award has submitted that the respondents were seasonal employees and they worked only for 151, 152 days, respectively during the period of 12 Calendar months preceding the date of closure of the season and their non-employment by the petitioner after the closure of the season did not amount to retrenchment.
This argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner carries weight.
The learned Labour Court itself returned a finding that the respondents were seasonal employees of the petitioner.
MW.1 stated that the season commences from the month of January and lasts upto the month of October every year.
In support of his contention the learned counsel has relied upon the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Morinda Co-op.
Sugar Mills Ltd v. Ram Kishan and others, 1995(5) Supreme Court Cases 653.
In this case, the workmen were engaged during crushing season only by the appellant.
It was held by the Apex Court that since the respondents were not working throughout the season and they worked during crushing season only, and therefore, they could not be said to have been retrenched, in view of what has been stated in clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
5.
In the case in hand it has been held by the Labour Court itself that the respondents were seasonal employees of the petitioner.
In this view of the matter and keeping in view the decision of the Apex Court rendered in Morinda Co-op.
Sugar Mills Ltd (supra), the workmen had to put off duty on the closure of the season and the view taken by the Labour Court that they were retrenched without complying with the provision of Section 25-F of the Act, is illegal.
6.
In view of what has been stated above, the writ petition succeeds and the impugned award dated 3091981 (Annexure P.1) is quashed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.