THB Chalapathi, J - Challenging the award of the Labour Court, Patiala, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Driver on probation.
During the period of probation, his services were terminated on May 11, 1976.
Thereafter, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication in the year 1979.
The Labour Court found that the order of termination of the services of the petitioner was not justified as there was non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) but the Labour Court held that the petitioner was entitled to retrenchment compensation to be computed under the provisions of the said section.
As the Labour Court did not order reinstatement of the petitioner with back wages, the petitioner approached this Court by way of this writ petition.
3.
There is no dispute of the fact that after termination of the services of the petitioner by respondent No. 1, the petitioner joined the services of Punjab Road Transport Corporation on May 10, 1977, and was working in the Corporation.
The Labour Court gave its award on December 4, 1980, on which date admittedly the petitioner was in the employment of Punjab Road Transport Corporation.
In view of the fact that the petitioner was gainfully employed elsewhere with a better salary, the Labour Court did not rightly order the reinstatement of the petitioner with back wages but awarded retrenchment compensation only under Section 25-F of the Act for not following the procedure under the said section.
The petitioner filed this writ petition on 9.9.1981 i.e. after more than nine months from the date of passing of the award by the Labour Court.
Subsequent to the passing of the award, the petitioner was suspended from service by the Punjab Road Transport Corporation in April 1981.
There is no dispute of this fact.
It is only after the petitioner was suspended for certain irregularities by the Punjab Road Transport Corporation, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
The delay of nine months in challenging the award in my view debars the petitioner from claiming any relief in this writ petition because the writ petition came to be filed only because of the intervening fact or that he had been suspended by the Punjab Road Transport Corporation in April, 1981.
On consideration of the facts and circumstances of this case, I am fully satisfied that the petitioner accepted the award dated December 4, 1980, as he was gainfully and profitably employed in Punjab Road Transport Corporation when the award was passed.
It is because of the subsequent event of being suspended from service while working in Punjab Road Transport Corporation for certain irregularities committed by him the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there are no bona fides in this writ petition.
The jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to issue a writ is discretionary.
It can be exercised only in favour of the persons who come to the Court with clean hands.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, I do not think that the petitioner deserves any relief from this Court in this writ petition.
Writ petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed.