Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was working as a Deputy Chief Accounts Officer in the Punjab State Electricity Board, has filed these four petitions to claim promotion to higher posts and to challenge the order dated January 21, 1994 by which the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was imposed on him.
Firstly, the sequence of events may be briefly noticed.
2.
On April 15, 1977, the petitioner joined service as an Accounts Officer.
He was sent on deputation to the Bhakra Beas Management Board.
In April 1984, Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma, a cashier embezzled an amount of Rs. 58,500/- by making fictitious entries in the cash book.
The petitioner, on noticing the error in accounts reported the matter to his superior officer vide letter dated June 1, 1984.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P.1 in CWP.
No. 9944 of 1995.
On instructions from Mr. PS Mangat, the Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, the petitioner reported the matter to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana vide his letter dated June 20, 1984.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P 2.
The Police registered a case against Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma on July 10, 1984.
After investigation, the police presented the case to the Court of Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana for prosecution of Kushal Dev Sharma on March 14, 1985.
While the case was pending in the Court, the petitioner was transferred from the post of Accounts Officer, Jamalpur to that of Accounts Officer, Sundernagar.
The petitioner alleges that after his transfer, the case was not properly pursued by his successor and ultimately vide order dated November 10, 1987, the Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana acquitted Mr. Sharma.
While doing so, the Court even made certain adverse comments regarding the petitioner.
It observed that it could not be believed that ``Shri Parbodh Sagar who was Drawing and Disbursing Officer and who used to check the cash book everyday and also used to sign the certificate at the end of the month could not detect the forged entry in the cash book....It is strange as to why he did not sign those entries and in case he was having any doubt with respect to the said entries why he did not take action at the earliest....The disbursing officer is required to check all the entries in his cash book as soon as possible after the date of their occurrence and to initial the book....''  3.
The financial rules as referred to above make it clear that the drawing and disbursing officer is fully responsible for all the entries made in the cash book for he signs the same at the end of the month having checked all the entries.''
The Court also observed that the prosecution had failed to examine Mr. PL Gulati and Mr. DR Saini, the persons to whom the money was alleged to have been given.
These witnesses could have explained the correct position and it could have been found out as to whether or not the accused had made fraudulent entries for issue of temporary advances.
The case had been registered against the accused on the allegation that he had made fictitious entries in the names of these two persons in the cash book.
These witnesses have not been examined and the record from the office of the SSE Sangrur and SSE, Jalandhar having not been produced, it could not be ascertained as to whether or not the entries were false.
The Court also observed that there was an inordinate delay of three months in the registration of the case.
The prosecution ``had thus failed to prove the guilt against the accused beyond any reasonable doubt.
The accused is therefore acquitted of the charge against him.....''  4.
A gradation list of the persons working in the cadre of Accounts Officers was issued on September 30, 1983.
A copy of the relevant extract from this gradation list is at Annexure P2 in CWP No. 3367 of 1989.
In this list, the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 18.
The names of S/Shri KS Bahri and Gajjinder Singh (Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 in CWP No. 3367 of 1989) appeared at Sr. Nos. 19 and 22.
Vide order dated December 27, 1988, both officers were promoted of officiate as Deputy Chief Accounts Officers.
It was also stipulated that ``the promotion of Shri KS Bhari has been made purely an ad hoc basis without prejudice to the pending disciplinary cases....'' A copy of this order is at Annexure P 6 with CWP No. 3367 of 1989.
Thereafter, vide order dated February 27, 1989, one Mr. KR Gupta, whose name appeared at Sr. No. 23 in the Gradation List, was promoted as Deputy Chief Accounts Officer.
On March 14, 1989, the petitioner filed CWP No. 3367 of 1989 praying inter alia that the order dated December 27, 1988 (Annexure P.6) whereby respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted be quashed and the respondents be directed to promote him.
The Motion Bench vide its order dated March 15, 1989 admitted the writ petition.
It further directed the respondents ``to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion against one of the posts of Additional Deputy Chief Accounts Officer going to be filled.''
When nothing was done for a considerable length of time, the petitioner served a notice for initiating contempt proceedings on July 11, 1989.
On September 15, 1989, the respondents issued a charge-sheet to the petitioner alleging that the petitioner had failed to follow the rules or instructions for the safe custody of the cash chest.
He had acted negligently.
He had failed in his duties in assisting the State Prosecution machinery properly.
He was responsible for the occurrence with respect to the embezzlement of Rs. 58,500/-.
5.
About two weeks later, on October 4, 1989, the petitioner was promoted as Deputy Chief Accounts Officer.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P.1 with CWP No. 528 of 1994.
On October 6, 1989, the petitioner filed CWP No. 12733 of 1989 challenging the charge-sheet dated September 15, 1989 issued to him.
Initially, further proceedings were ordered to be stayed.
Later on, the stay order was vacated.
After that, the petitioner filed a reply to the charge-sheet on January 30, 1990.
A copy of this reply is at Annexure P.8 with CWP No. 9944 of 1995.
After a lapse of about 11 months, the respondents appointed an Enquiry Officer.
On January 2, 1991, the petitioner was called upon to appear before the Enquiry Officer.
An employee who is a Law Graduate was appointed as the Presenting Officer.
The petitioner on coming to know of this, made a request for providing him the assistance of a legal practitioner.
The request was declined.
The enquiry proceedings were held.
The petitioner alleges that he was not given a due and reasonable opportunity.
Ultimately, on March 1, 1993, the Enquiry Officer submitted a report.
A copy of this report is at Annexure P13 with CWP No. 9944 of 1995.
A copy of this report was supplied to the petitioner but ``he was never asked to file any representation against the enquiry report at any stage.''
The petitioner had initially filed CM No. 7533 of 1993 in CWP No. 12733 of 1989 to amend the writ petition and to challenge the enquiry report.
While this application was pending, the Board issued an order dated January 21, 1994 whereby a penalty of stoppage of two annual increments with future effect was imposed on the petitioner.
In view of this position, the petitioner withdrew CWP No. 12733 of 1989 wherein he had challenged the charge-sheet, with liberty to file a fresh petition.
The petitioner has filed CWP No. 9944 of 1995 to challenge the enquiry proceedings which were initiated with charge-sheet dated September 15, 1989 and which had culminated in the order dated January 21, 1994.
6.
In the meantime, on August 3, 1993, the Board issued a circular to fill up the post of Financial Advisor.
The petitioner filed CWP No. 528 of 1994 claiming that he had a right to be considered for appointment to the post.
On April 3, 1994, the post was advertised.
On July 12, 1994, Mr. AK Aggarwal was appointed as the Financial Advisor.
The petitioner amended the writ petition and challenged the appointment of Mr. Aggarwal as Financial Advisor.
Reply to the amended petition was filed on behalf of the respondents.
7.
On May, 4, 1995, the Board promoted S/Shri KR Rabra and SC Seth to officiate against the post of Chief Accounts Officer.
The petitioner filed CWP No. 8638 of 1995 with a prayer that the order promoting the said respondents be quashed and a direction for consideration of his claim be issued.
In a nutshell, the petitioner has filed -  (i) Civil Writ Petition No. 3367 of 1989 to challenge the promotion of persons junior to him as Deputy Chief Accounts Officer vide order dated December 27, 1988.
(ii) Civil Writ Petition No. 528 of 1994 challenging the appointment of Mr. NK Aggarwal as Financial Advisor.
(iii) Civil Writ Petition No. 8638 of 1995 challenging the appointment of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 as Chief Accounts Officers.
(iv) Civil Writ Petition No. 9944 of 1995 to challenge the enquiry proceedings and the order dated January 21, 1994 by which the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was imposed on him.
8.
The petitioner prays that the impugned orders be quashed and that the respondents be directed to consider his claim for promotion with effect from the date the person junior to him were promoted.
He also prays for the grant of consequential benefits.
9.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
The pleadings in each of the cases may now be briefly noticed.
In CWP No. 3367 of 1989, the written statement alleged to have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 was not available on record.
Vide order dated August 21, 1996, a photo copy of the written statement was taken on record with the consent of the counsel for the parties.
In this written statement, the challenge to the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 has been controverted.
It has been averred that ``the competent authority did not find him fit for promotion and then considered and promoted respondent Nos 4 and 5 vide office order No....dated 27121988.''
It has been admitted that disciplinary proceedings are pending against respondent No. 4.
He was charge-sheeted on August 1, 1986 and on December 31, 1986.
The proceedings against him are mote than a year old.
Pending the proceedings, he was promoted on purely ad hoc basis.
The petitioner's case is different.
The disciplinary proceedings against him are ``yet to start on the basis of the preliminary investigation report bringing out actionable material against him....'' On these premises, the respondents maintain that the claim made by the petitioner is not tenable.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that no proceedings whatsoever had been initiated against the petitioner on December 27, 1988 or on February 27, 1989 when persons junior to him were promoted.
As against this, respondent No. 4 was promoted in spite of the fact that disciplinary proceedings were already going on against him.
Relying on the decision of their lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, AIR 1991 SC 2010 : 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC), learned counsel submits that the action of the Board in promoting respondent Nos. 4 and 5 cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mrs. Mohinder Gupta, who appeared for respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
No one appeared for respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
10.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Was the action of the Board in superseding the petitioner legal and valid ?
It is true that while deciding the case arising out of FIR dated July 10, 1984 (State v. KD Sharma), the Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana had made certain observations against the petitioner.
However, this decision had been rendered on November 10, 1987.
For more than a year, no action had been initiated against the petitioner.
On December 27, 1988, when the Board ordered the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 5, no proceedings had commenced against him.
Even a charge-sheet had not been issued.
Similar was the position on February 27, 1989.
Therefore, merely on the basis of remarks which had been admittedly made by the Court without affording any opportunity to the petitioner, he could not have been declared unsuitable for promotion.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner's record of service was bad.
It has not even been remotely suggested in the written statement that the record of service of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 was better than that of the petitioner.
In fact, no adverse comment regarding his record has been made in the written statement.
In this situation, it is reasonable to assume that the petitioner's record of service is satisfactory.
In spite of that, he was ignored for promotion.
Since no departmental proceedings had been initiated, the petitioner could not have been ignored for promotion only on the ground that his case for initiation of proceedings was yet under consideration.
Another fact which deserves mention here is that admittedly charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner on September 15, 1989.
Thereafter, the petitioner's claim was considered for promotion.
On October 4, 1989, he was ordered to be promoted.
If in spite of the issue of charge-sheet, the petitioner was considered suitable for promotion, it is not understood as to how he could be ignored in December 1988 or February 1989 when persons junior to him were promoted.
11.
It is true that the procedure of sealed cover as adopted by the Central Government and certain other departments is not in vogue in the Board.
However, the fact remains that even in a case where such a procedure is in vogue, it has been held that unless a charge-sheet has been issued, the procedure cannot be resorted to.
In other words, a person cannot be superseded merely because the department is considering the initiation of departmental proceedings.
Applying the principle as enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jankiraman's case (supra), it appears reasonable to hold that no departmental action having been initiated against the petitioner till September 15, 1989, the action of the Board in ignoring him for promotion in December 1988 and in February 1989 was not legal and valid.
Since respondent Nos. 4 and 5 as also Mr. KR Gupta were promoted almost eight years back, it would not be fair to revert them at this stage.
However, the petitioner has a `right' to be considered for promotion as Deputy Chief Accounts Officer with effect from the date the persons junior to him viz. respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted.
The respondents are, accordingly, directed to consider his claim within one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
CWP No. 3367 of 1989 is, accordingly, allowed to this extent.
CWP No. 528 of 1994  12.
In this writ petition, the petitioner's grievance is that he was arbitrarily ignored for promotion to the post of Financial Advisor.
According to the criterion laid down by the Board vide office order dated April 6, 1984, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P4 with the writ petition, the post of Financial Advisor could be filled up by direct recruitment, deputation or by promotion from amongst Deputy Chief Accounts Officers.
The petitioner alleges that the Board was biased against him on account of the fact that he had filed various petitions.
It, consequently, issued a circular dated August 3, 1993 (Annexure P.3 with the writ petition) inviting applications from its employees for appointment to the post of Financial Advisor.
The petitioner challenged this action on the ground that direct recruitment could not be confined to the employees of the Board.
Realising the mistake, the Board issued an advertisement dated March 4, 1994, a copy of which is at Annexure P.8 with the writ petition.
The pay scale of the post was not specified.
It was mentioned that the post carried all the perks and facilities available to a head of the department in the Board.
In pursuance of this advertisement, respondent No. 4 was selected and appointed vide order dated July 12, 1994.
He was already working in the pay scale of Rs. 5900-7100.
The pay scale of Financial Advisor is Rs. 4500-6300.
It was only to ignore the petitioner that respondent No. 4 was selected and appointed against this post.
The petitioner, consequently prays that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 be set aside and that the respondents be directed to make the appointment after considering his claim in accordance with the policy contained in the circular dated April 6, 1984.
13.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that after scrutinising the applications which had been initially received, it was considered desirable to enlarge the field of choice.
Consequently, an advertisement dated March 4, 1994 was issued.
The claims of the applicants were considered by the Selection Committee.
An expert member from the Punjabi University was also associated.
The petitioner's claim was duly considered.
Mr. Aggarwal was selected and appointed for a period of one year.
The selection is in accordance with law.
14.
Counsel for the parties were heard.
It is clear that even under the circular dated April 6, 1984, the post of Financial Advisor can be filled up by direct recruitment.
The action of the Board in deciding to fill up the post by direct recruitment was in conformity with the circular.
Still further, the post was duly advertised.
The claims of all the candidates including the petitioner were duly considered.
The candidate who was found to be the best by the Selection Committee was appointed.
The mere fact that respondent No. 4 was already working in a pay scale which was higher than that sanctioned for the post of Financial Advisor did not render him ineligible.
The petitioner's grievance that the advertisement was a device to ignore him is wholly fallacious and cannot be accepted.
Mr. Aggarwal was holding a post higher than that of the petitioner.
15.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, there appears to be no infirmity in the order of selection or appointment.
Consequently, no interference is called for.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
16.
CWP No. 8638 of 1995 relates to the appointment of Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 to the posts of Chief Accounts Officer and Chief Auditor respectively.
In sequence of time, it comes before CWP No. 9944 of 1995.
However, it appears appropriate to consider CWP No. 9944 of 1995 before proceeding to examine the petitioner's case in CWP No. 8638 of 1995.
CWP No. 9944 of 1995  17.
This petition raises a challenge to the proceedings initiated by the Board vide charge-sheet dated September 15, 1989.
The petitioner alleges that the Enquiry Officer had violated the principles of natural justice inasmuch as he had not given him adequate opportunity for defending himself.
The request for engaging a legal practitioner was arbitrarily declined in spite of the fact that the Presenting Officer was trained in law.
The documents asked for by the petitioner were not supplied.
The petitioner was not permitted to examine certain witnesses.
The Enquiry Officer was not working independently.
Still further, it is alleged that the order dated January 21, 1994 imposing the penalty of stoppage of two increments was violative of the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner also complains of discrimination on the ground that the person viz. Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma who had actually embezzled the money has not been awarded any penalty whatsoever.
However, he has been superseded and awarded a major penalty even though he had committed no wrong.
The petitioner, consequently, prays that the order dated January 21, 1994, the charge-sheet dated September 15, 1989 and the enquiry report dated March 1, 1993 be quashed.
A prayer for quashing the remarks recorded by the Magistrate has also been made.
However, no arguments in this behalf were addressed at the hearing of the case.
18.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim.
It is maintained that the petitioner had been given `` a fair and just opportunity to defend himself''.
He ``fully participated in the enquiry and cross-examined the witnesses at length.
It is only after knowing the result of the enquiry that the petitioner has made a grievance.....and has approached this Court after a lapse of two and a half years.''
19.
According to the respondents, a copy of the ``enquiry report was duly supplied to the petitioner by the Enquiry Officer.
But the petitioner, however, did not made any representation to the Board within a period of one month.
Under the circumstances, it is evident that he has nothing to say against the enquiry report.''
It is alleged that the report was furnished to him on March 4, 1993.
Thereafter, the matter was considered by the competent authority and the punishment was awarded to the petitioner vide office order dated January 21, 1984.
The order is in conformity with the provision of the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1971.
Since the petitioner has not filed any reply/objections to the enquiry report nor has he filed any appeal or revision against the impugned order, the writ petition is not competent.
As for the petitioner's allegation that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination on the ground that no action has been taken against the real culprit viz. Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma, it has been stated that the matter `` is separately under consideration of the concerned punishing authority.''
20.
Mr. Patwalia submitted that the Enquiry Officer did not afford a due and reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
He did not work according to his own independent judgment.
The petitioner was not allowed the assistance of a counsel and, therefore, the enquiry proceedings are vitiated.
He also submitted that the action of the respondents in punishing the petitioner suffered from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as no action had been taken against Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma who had really embezzled the money.
Counsel place reliance on the decision in Savinder Singh v. Director of State Transport,1988(7) SLR 112.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. AC Sharma, who appeared on behalf of the respondents.
It was contended that the enquiry proceedings had been held in strict conformity with the provisions of the rules.
21.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties and the documents produced by them shows that Mr. Vijay Gupta had been appointed as the Presenting Officer.
he was not a practising lawyer.
In view of the provisions of Regulation 8(8), an employee is not entitled to the assistance of a legal practitioner unless ``the Presenting Officer appointed by the punishing authority is a legal practitioner or the punishing authority having regard to the circumstances of the case so permits.''
In this case, it is the admitted position that the Presenting Officer was not a practising lawyer.
Even from the circumstances of the case, nothing has been pointed out to show that it was necessary for the petitioner to have the assistance of a legal practitioner.
The petitioner was permitted to utilise the services of a retired employee of the Board.
He was informed in this behalf vide letter dated March 20, 1991.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it cannot be said that there was denial of a reasonable opportunity merely because the petitioner was not permitted to engage a lawyer.
22.
It was also submitted that the witnesses of the petitioner were not examined during the enquiry proceedings.
In reply filed by the Enquiry Officer, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had submitted a list of 14 defence witnesses.
The Enquiry Officer had permitted nine of them to be examined.
Only 6 had actually appeared.
The remaining three were given up by the petitioner himself.
As for the five witnesses who were not summoned, the Enquiry Officer has pointed out that according to the petitioner, they had to be examined to prove the allegation of mala fides in regard to the issue of the charge-sheet.
The Enquiry Officer had taken the view that he has to find out the truth or falsehood of the charges actually levelled against him and the question of examining the mala fides regarding the issue of charge-sheet was not involved.
The reason given by the Enquiry Officer was not irrelevant.
23.
Mr. Patwalia also contended that there was denial of a reasonable opportunity inasmuch as the relevant record was not made available to the petitioner.
He referred to the application dated October 15, 1991 submitted by the petitioner to the Enquiry Officer.
A copy of this application is at Annexure P.11 with the writ petition.
One of the items mentioned in the list of records is - ``Copies of notings on the files by different employees/officers while preparing charge-sheet and issuing the same.''
Learned counsel submitted that copies of the noting sheets should have been supplied to the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer in his affidavit had admittedly declined the petitioner's request in this behalf.
Copies of the notes recorded on the files before the issues of charge-sheet have really no relevance with the proof of charges.
It cannot be said that the failure to supply these documents resulted in denial of reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
Accordingly, it cannot be said that there was denial of reasonable opportunity.
24.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination.
According to the petitioner, the money had been embezzled by Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma.
On this allegation, he was tried by the competent Court.
It was found that the charges were not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
The Court had also observed that the petitioner had not taken due care in the discharge of his functions.
Certain observations were made against him.
On a perusal of the judgment, a copy of which is at Annexure P4 with the writ petition, it is clear that the petitioner and Mr. Kushal Dev Sharma were not equally placed.
No strictures had been passed by any Court against the petitioner.
Therefore, the order of punishment passed against him cannot be said to be vitiated merely because no proceedings have been initiated or no order has been passed against Mr. Sharma.
It has been categorically averred in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that the competent authority is considering the matter.
It is hoped that the decision shall be taken without any avoidable loss of time and appropriate action shall be taken.
After all, a person who according to the respondents was merely negligent cannot be more guilty than a person who had actually embezzled the money.
Punishing the one who was negligent and not taking any action against the person who has actually embezzled the money may not be very fair.
In view of the above, the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner cannot be sustained.
CWP No. 8638 of 1995  24.
The petitioner complains that a post of Chief Accounts Officer (Revenue) and another of Financial Advisor-cum-Chief Accounts Officer had become available.
These had to be filled up from amongst the Deputy Chief Accounts Officers who had experience of five years.
In the seniority list, the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 2.
However, respondent Nos. 4 and 5 whose names appeared at Sr. Nos. 3 and 6 were promoted.
The petitioner's name was not considered.
Vide order dated May 4, 1995, respondent No. 4 was promoted as Chief Accounts Officer (Revenue) and respondent No. 5 was posted against the post of Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer, Thermal Plant, Ropar.
He challenges the order dated May 4, 1995 as being arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The petitioner alleges that he was ignored only on account of the fact that he had filed various writ petitions.
He is better qualified than the respondents.
The action in ignoring him is violative of Articles 14 and 16.
25.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been admitted that ``the petitioner is having higher qualification from respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
It is also admitted that the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 4 and 5 as Accounts Officer.
The seniority list of Deputy Chief Accounts Officers/Deputy Chief Auditors/Deputy Financial Advisor circulated by the Respondent Board vide its UO dated 431985 had already exhausted.
In the absence of seniority list of Deputy Chief Accounts Officers, selection/promotion case to the rank of Chief Accounts Officer/Chief Auditor has been considered by the Board on the basis of seniority position enjoyed by the senior-most officer in the lower rank of Accounts Officer...Actually it is quite evident from Memorandum dated 1041995 that the petitioner has been taken as senior-most officer and his case has been duly considered by the Respondent Board along with the case of respondent No.
4.''
It has been further pointed out that ``the annual confidential reports for the year 1994-95 of both the petitioner and respondent No. 4 were awaited at that time.''
With regard to the petitioner's allegation that persons like Mr. BK Verma to whom adverse remarks had been conveyed have been promoted, it has been pointed out that in the case of the petitioner, his annual increments had been stopped on conclusion of disciplinary case vide office order dated January 21, 1994.
With regard to respondent No. 5, it has been pointed out that he has actually not been promoted, and as such, the petitioner's rights have not been adversely affected.
26.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
Thereafter, a CM No. 15630 of 1995 was filed.
It was pointed out that during the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents have promoted Mr. BS Mathur, to the post of Chief Accounts Officer on September 29, 1995 in spite of the fact that he was not qualified for appointment.
It was further stated that the post of Chief Auditor was falling vacant on December 31, 1995 on account to the retirement of Mr. BK Verma.
It was prayed that the respondents be restrained from filling up the post.
In the reply filed in behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that the petitioner was not found fit for promotion.
Mr. Mathur who was posted against the post of Chief Accounts Officer is his own scale of pay.
It was also admitted that a post of Chief Auditor had fallen vacant.
However, it was pointed out that ``in the event of selection of a junior officer to the higher rank/selection post, he can be posted on the higher post in his own pay scale till he completes the minimum prescribed time gap.''
On theses premises, it was prayed that the misc. application be dismissed.
27.
Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner submitted that the action of the respondents in ignoring the petitioner for promotion on account of the order dated January 21, 1994 was illegal.
In any event, the alleged misconduct related to the year 1984.
It could not be referred to in the year 1995 for the purpose of declaring the petitioner unsuitable for appointment.
The action of the respondents was illegal and arbitrary and cannot as such be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. Sidhu who appeared for respondent Nos. 1 and 3.
28.
A perusal of the written statement shows that a memorandum dated April 10, 1995 regarding the filling up the post of Financial Advisor-cum- Chief Accounts Officer had been prepared and put up before the whole-time members.
Against the petitioner's name, it was mentioned that his two annual increments had been stopped vide order dated January 21, 1994 subject to the outcome of CWP No. 12733 of 1989.
No details regarding the confidential reports etc. were furnished.
It was also stipulated that the assessment chart shall be supplied by the Secret (Gaz.)
Cell.
Thereafter, according to the document at Annexure R. II, the whole-time members in their meeting held on April 18, 1995 decided as under :-  ``After considering the service record of the officers being considered for promotion, the whole-time members approved the name of Shri K.R.
Rabra for empanelment for filling up the post of Financial Advisor-cum- Chief Accounts Officer (O and M), RTP, Ropar.''
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has not been suggested that the petitioner's record of service is not good.
Therefore, the short question that arises for consideration is - Could the petitioner be ignored for promotion only on account of the order dated, January 21, 1994 ?
29.
Admittedly, the alleged misconduct had been committed by the petitioner in the year 1984.
The charge-sheet was issued to him after a lapse of more than five years in September 1989.
The enquiry proceedings were initiated in January 1991.
The enquiry report was received by the competent authority in March 1993.
Thereafter, the order was leisurely passed in January 1994.
Thus, the order had been passed more than nine years after the alleged misconduct had been committed.
A period of more than four years had been spent in deciding the matter.
It is further clear that the petitioner was initially ignored for promotion on account of the pendency of proceedings against him.
Thereafter, he was ignored on the ground that an order of stoppage of two increments with future effect had been passed.
How long would the ghost of 1984 incident continue to haunt the petitioner ?
It cannot be for ever.
30.
Mr. Patwalia referred to the observations of RS Mongia, J in Major Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) RSJ 236 : 1992(1) SCT 436 (P&H) to contend that the order of punishment passed in January 1994 should relate back to the period when the alleged misconduct had been committed.
In paragraph 8, it was observed that ``the punishment which was awarded would relate back to the period when the alleged offence/misconduct was committed or in any case when the same was detected.
Even if any punishment is awarded to the petitioner now that would relate back to the year 1973 when the alleged misconduct/irregularities took place or the year 1975 when the charge-sheet was served....'' This appears to be a fair rule.
That being so, the petitioner's claim should be considered in the same manner as that of the other persons.
The consideration of the record should be confined to the same number of years of has been seen in the case of respondent No. 4.
31.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
It is also not disputed that he is better qualified.
From the record, it is not even clear as to whether or not these factors were kept in view by the authority which considered the respective claims of the candidates for promotion.
In the circumstances of the case, the action of the respondents in ignoring the petitioner for promotion as Chief Accounts Officer does not appear to be fair.
In view of the above :  (1) CWP No. 3367 of 1989 is allowed as aforesaid and it is directed that the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Deputy Chief Accounts Officer shall be considered with effect from the date respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted viz. December 27, 1988.
In the event of the petitioner being found suitable for promotion, consequential reliefs shall follow.
(ii) CWP Nos. 528 of 1994 and 9944 of 1995 are dismissed.
(iii) CWP No. 8638 of 1995 is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the posts of Chief Accounts Officer (Revenue) and Financial Advisor-cum-Chief Accounts Officer with effect from the dates the persons junior to him were promoted.
Consequential reliefs shall follow.
In view of the partial success of both sides, the parties are left to bear their own costs.