PS Mishra, C.J.
- Appellant's application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction to the respondent for giving to him appointment as one of the land oustees has failed before the learned single Judge on the ground that in view of acquisition of the land, money compensation has been paid but in so far as the appointment is concerned there is no scheme framed.
2.
It is not in dispute that the appellant has a claim in the land which has been acquired for the purposes of the respondent, a public limited company and a State for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
In a proceeding for a similar claim by nine persons against one of the units of the respondent-company this Court had the occasion to consider whether such land oustees were entitled to any compassionate appointment.
The Court took notice of the fact that the management had prepared a provisional list of selected candidates on 31.12.1983 for appointment of unskilled workers and observed,  ``.....
The proceedings clearly indicate that the operation of the panel depends upon the requirements of the organisation and subject to the reservation made in favour of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
It has further mentioned therein that the panel will be valid for a period of one year only.
Admittedly the respondents herein who are the writ petitioners were not appointed during the period of one year the panel was in force.
For the first time they approached this Court in the year 1988 and filed WP No. 15707 of 1988 seeking a writ of mandamus to declare the action of the respondents in not appointing them on the basis of the panel as illegal and improper.
The learned single Judge gave a direction to the respondents by judgment dated 2821992, to appoint these respondents in the existing or future vacancies on NMR basis.
Aggrieved by that order the present writ appeal is filed.''
3.
After taking notice of the contentions of the parties the Court disposed of the appeal (WA No. 415/92) with the observations as follows :  ``If the Management of Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited is following the policy of giving preference to the land oustees in the matter of appointment they may consider the case of the respondent if there are any existing vacancies for which they are eligible to be considered and if they are found to be the land ousteees....'' 4.
In the case of the appellant, however, the stand taken by the respondent is rather different from the stand in the previous proceeding.
It is stated on their behalf, after quoting Rule 7(2) of the Recruitment Rules, as follows :  ``...that there is no Order/Scheme framed by the Government of India or the BHEL, whereunder appointment is to be given to persons like the petitioner without reference to the availability of the vacancies and job specifications.
The petitioner will have to apply against advertisement, if any, or has to be sponsored by the Employment Exchange, as and when vacancies are notified by the Company.''
5.
It is indeed surprising how the General Manager of one of the units of the same respondent-company has spoken something different from what the management represented by the appellants in WA No. 415/92 (the earlier appeal in which the above order has been passed) has spoken about the preference to the land oustees in the matter of appointment.
We are, however, not inclined to give any indulgence to the appellant for the simple reason that he was not eligible for any appointment at the time of the acquisition of the land or at the time of the award.
At the relevant time he was a minor and not eligible for any appointment.
Later, almost after one and half decade, he has chosen to seek enforcement of the alleged scheme for preference to the land oustees.
At the same time, however, we have good reasons to think that respondent herein has chosen to mislead the Court by a statement that there is no order or scheme whereunder appointment can be given to the petitioner without reference to the availability of the vacancies and job specifications.
While it may be correct to say that no person can be asked to give appointment to another merely because there is some scheme framed in this behalf unless there are vacancies and jobs are specified, any attempt to suggest that there is no preference for the land oustees and thus there is no scheme to accommodate them is incorrect.
No person, much less a Government undertaking is expected to take a stand before the Court which conflicts with its earlier stand.
Merely because this time the respondent is represented by another person, it cannot come forward to say that it is not bound by the statement previously made on its behalf.
The impugned order has the effect of stating that the respondent has no obligation to give any preferential appointment to the land oustees.
This the learned single Judge has stated mainly because the respondent has chosen to give such a picture in the counter-affidavit.
This, as we have already noticed, is contrary to the previous stand of the respondent.
The respondent, for the said reason, can be held to be liable for misleading the Court and perjury.
We are not ordering for any action for the above attempt of the respondent to mislead the Court in the hope that in future he shall be careful and come out with truth and nothing else but truth in his affidavits and statements before the Court.
To tell, however, that the Court will not countenance such stands taken by any party before it, the Court is of the opinion that exemplary cost be awarded and accordingly order that the respondent shall pay cost of Rs. 5,000/- within one month from today in this Court which money on deposit shall be transferred to the benefit of the Legal Aid Fund of the State.
6.
With the direction as above, the appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above and the writ petition is dismissed.
Reg.
WAM.P.
No. 2532/96, 151196.
Heard.
7.
There appears to be same misapprehension about the directions by us and it seems there are some misgivings as if the Court, while passing the Judgment in appeal i.e., Writ Appeal No. 167 of 1996, has in any manner modified the directions in Writ Appeal No. 415 of 1992, which are not only affirmed but are reiterated in the order in appeal i.e., Writ Appeal No. 167 of 1996, the effect of which, in our view, is that in the case of any existing vacancy if the appellant-petitioner is a land oustee, preference has to be given to him in the matter of appointment and his case has to be considered in the light of the directions in Writ Appeal No. 415/1992.
8.
With the clarification as above, the instant petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.