THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - Challenging the award passed by the Labour Court, Patiala, dated 2091982 refusing to grant any relief to the petitioner, he filed this writ petition to quash the same by issuing a writ of certiorari.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a Legal Assistant and has put in service of 3 years 9 months and his services were terminated without any notice, charge- sheet or enquiry on 3.4.1980.
Thereafter the petitioner raised an industrial dispute.
The Management namely the Punjab Roadways contended that the petitioner was not a workman as defined under Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief under the provisions of the said Act.
This contention of the Management was found favour with the Labour Court.
Accordingly, the Labour Court declined to grant any relief to the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner is not a workman.
The Labour Court did not decide the matter on merits as it held that the petitioner is not a workman.
3.
The only question that arises for consideration in this writ petition is whether the petitioner, who was employed as a Legal Assistant in Punjab Roadways, is a workman.
This question has already been settled by this Court in Rajesh Garg v. The Management of the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation Ltd. and another, 1985(1) PLR 153.
In that case also, the petitioner was employed as a Legal Assistant by the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation.
Dealing with the question that the Legal Assistant employed by the Corporation is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, this Court held as follows :  "The petitioner's duty at best was that of a skilled clerk having in his clerical duties to put up notes and seek instructions.
Besides that as urged he had to tender legal advise when asked by the Corporation and draft and approve documents as asked by the Corporation from the legal point of view.
The duties of the petitioner have even been termed by the learned counsel to be "techno-clerical" with the aid of legal knowledge which the petitioner possessed.
And on these grounds, it is "contended that these duties could by no stretch of imagination be regarded as administrative or managerial especially when the petitioner had no administrative control over anybody and was rightly designated to assist the Corporation in matters asked by it.
Once it is held that the petitioner was not working in the Corporation in any administrative or managerial capacity, he has conversely to be held a `workman' within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act."
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the petitioner is drawing a sum of Rs. 1,150/- at the time of termination of his services.
Therefore, according to him clause (iv) of Section 2(s) the petitioner cannot be termed as a workman under the definition.
Clause IV of Section 2(s) reads as follows :-  "who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceedings 500/- per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly on a managerial nature."
In view of the judgment referred to above, the petitioner cannot be said to the discharging any functions of managerial nature.
It cannot also be said that the petitioner has been employed in supervisory capacity.
He is not supervising the work of any other person.
The petitioner had been only tendering the legal advice to the Punjab Roadways as and when called upon by the Management.
Therefore, the employment of the petitioner cannot be termed as in a supervisory capacity.
Therefore, Clause-IV of Section 2(s) has no application to the facts of this case.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion, that the award of the Labour Court is liable to be set aside.
As the matter has not been decided by the Labour Court on merit, the matter has to be remitted back to the Labour Court to determine as to whether the termination of the services of the petitioner was contrary to law and invalid and whether he is entitled to any relief.
5.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the award of the Labour Court, Patiala, dated 2091982 (vide Annexure P-5) is hereby set aside and the matter is remitted back to the Labour Court, Patiala to proceed further in accordance with law.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
The parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court, Patiala, on 7.4.1997.