GC Garg, J - The challenge in this writ petition at the behest of the State of Punjab is to the Award of the Labour Court, Patiala dated April 24, 1985.
2.
Respondent Om Parkash was appointed as Beldar in Anandpur Sahib Hydel Project on 19101981 on monthly wages as a work-charged employee and was promoted as Work-Munshi on 111982.
He was reverted to his original post on 6.8.1982 and thereafter he did not report for duty.
3.
The workman raised an industrial dispute alleging that his services had been illegally terminated and the Labour Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh referred the following dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court, Patiala under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 :  "Whether termination of services of Sh. Om Parkash, workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
Before the Labour Court the case of the workman was that he had put in more than 240 days and his services were terminated without any enquiry and payment of retrenchment compensation as contemplated under the Provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The stand taken by the writ petitioner before the Labour Court was that the Irrigation Department of the Govt. of Punjab did not fall within the purview of the definition of industry as defined in Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
However, the State of Punjab did not dispute the fact before the Labour Court that the workman had worked for more than 240 days.
4.
The Labour Court on a consideration of the matter over ruled the objection and concluded that the Irrigation Department falls within the ambit of industry as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act.
It in other words concluded that the Irrigation Department of the State of Punjab is an industry and therefore governed by the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act.
In the result the Labour Court vide Award dated April 24, 1985 ordered reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service.
The workman was also held entitled to full back wages as the State Govt. failed to lead evidence before the Labour Court that the workman was gainfully employed during the period of forced idleness.
It is this Award of the Labour Court, which is under challenge in this writ petition.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 it is averred that the workman had put in more 240 days and the termination of services was without payment of retrenchment compensation and that the Labour Court rightly held that the workman is entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages, and it was also correctly held that the Irrigation Department falls within the ambit of industry as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act.
6.
Writ petition was admitted to regular hearing and since then respondent-workman is getting wages in terms of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act in view of the interim order passed by this Court.
7.
As already noticed the sole dispute in this writ petition is as to whether Irrigation Department of State of Punjab is covered by the definition of 'industry' as defined in Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The question raised in this writ is no longer res-integra and is concluded against the petitioner by the judgment of the Apex Court in Des Raj v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1988 SC 1182, wherein it was held that the Irrigation Department clearly comes within the ambit of Industry as defined in Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In this view of the matter nothing survives in this petition.
8.
Mr. Mann, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, however, submitted that the workman did not report for duty and therefore is not entitled to reinstatement and back wages.
This contention of the learned State Counsel cannot be accepted that the respondent-workman did not report for duty as he is getting wages in terms of Section 17-B of the Act under the directions of this court.
It was open to the petitioner to ask the respondent- workman to join his duty in terms of the Award, in case it so desired as no stay had been granted by this court while admitting the writ petition or at a subsequent stage.
9.
Mr. Mann still raised another contention that the Award does not clarify as to on which post, respondent-workman is to be taken back in service.
This is indeed so.
The workman was initially appointed as a Beldar with effect from 19101981 as he worked as such till 31.12.1981, when he was promoted to the post of Work-Munshi, and he continued to work as Work-Munshi till he was reverted to his original post by order dated July 26, 1982.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondent-workman refused to work as Beldar after his reversion.
However, the case of the respondent-workman is that his services were terminated in the absence of an enquiry and without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On a consideration of the matter I find that the order of reversion is not in dispute in this case and thus the workman would be entitled to reinstatement as Belder and not as Work-Munshi.
10.
The respondent-workman is directed to report for duty within one month from today.
In case he fails to report for duty within one month from today, he shall not be entitled to wages thereafter and it will be taken that he has abandoned the job of his own.
If the respondent-workman reports for duty, he shall be immediately taken back in service in terms of the Award of the Labour Court and the directions as contained above.
11.
With the above clarification this writ petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.