GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves adjudication of the claim made by the petitioner that his total service be counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority and for grant of other service benefits.
2.
For deciding whether the petitioner's claim is tenable or not, it is necessary to give a brief reference to the facts.
Petitioner was appointed as Lineman in the services of the respondent-Board with effect from 11.10.1976.
He has described this appointment to be a regular appointment on the ground that his candidature was sponsored by the employment exchange and he was appointed after selection.
However, this statement has been contested by the respondent Nos.
I to 3, who have asserted that the petitioner was not appointed on the basis of selection made after advertising the posts or after being sponsored by the employment exchange.
These respondents have pleaded that the petitioner had applied for regular appointment as Lineman in response to the advertisement issued in the year 1978 and after interview by the Services Selection Committee constituted by the respondent-Board, he was appointed as Lineman with effect from 13101978.
3.
Contention of the petitioner is that his total service commencing from 11.10.1976 should be counted for the purpose of seniority, experience, pay fixation etc. and the respondent Nos.
I to 3 have acted illegally and arbitrarily in denying him the benefit of service rendered between 11.10.1976 and 12.10.1978 for the aforementioned purposes.
He has placed reliance on the decree passed by the Sub Judge, Ist Class, Ludhiana on 27.8.1990 in favour of respondent No. 4, Sukhdev Singh, who was appointed as Lineman on ad hoc basis on 30th August, 1976.
He has also relied upon circular No. 36 of 1987 (Annexure-P4) issued by the Board for counting of ad hoc/temporary service for the purpose of counting of experience for promotion and direct recruitment.
Respondent Nos.
I, 2 and 3 have, on the other hand, contended that on the basis of purely ad hoc appointment, which was not preceded by any selection, the petitioner cannot get the benefit of seniority and that he has been correctly assigned the seniority on the basis of length of service counted from 13101978.
Case of respondent No. 4 has been distinguished on the ground that his service was terminated on 16.2.1981 but he had to be reinstated in view of the award passed by the Labour Court on 861983 and, thereafter, suit filed by him was decreed and the Board had no option but to implement the decree passed by the learned Sub Judge.
Respondent No. 4 has also contested the claim of the petitioner on similar grounds.
4.
The controversy as to whether ad hoc service can be counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority and for grant of other service benefits has consumed substantial time of the Courts.
The maze of decisions rendered by the Courts may apparently suggest that conflicting opinions have been expressed by the Courts and a cursory reading of some of the judgments does suggest that claim of ad hoc appointees to be assigned seniority on the basis of total length of service has been upheld but a careful reading of the judgment of the Apex Court and particularly those rendered in recent past and a correct understanding of the principles of law make it clear that service rendered on the basis of an appointment made otherwise than in accordance with the rules regulating the recruitment and the doctrine of equality enshrined in the Constitution cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority.
Thus an ad hoc appointment which is made without any selection cannot enure to the benefit of the employee for the purpose of seniority.
The reason underlying this principle is that ad hoc appointee is not a member of service and till an employee acquires the status of member of service he is not entitled to have his service counted for the purpose of seniority.
In such a case seniority can be assigned only from the date of regularisation or regular appointment.
The only exception to this rule is where a person is appointed after regular recruitment but the employer uses the phrase `ad hoc' to describe the appointment till the completion of some formality.
Service rendered on the basis of such appointment can be counted for the purpose of fixation of seniority.
The Courts have unequivocally held that giving benefit of total length of service to an ad hoc appointee so as to place him above a regularly selected person would result in direct infraction of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra others, (1990) 2 SCC 715, which much stress was laid by the learned counsel for the petitioner was a case decided by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court.
After making reference to various other decisions of the same Court, the Constitution Bench summed up the principles for determination of seniority.
These principles are:-  "(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted.
(C) When appointments are made from more than one source, it is permissible to fix the ratio for recruitment from the different sources, and if rules are framed in this regard, they must ordinarily be followed strictly.
(D) If it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota rules, it should be substituted by an appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
In case, however, the quota rule is not followed continuously for a number of years because it was impossible to do so the inference is irresistible that the quota rule had broken down.
(E) Where the quota rule has broken down and the appointments are made from one source in excess of the quota, but are made after following the procedure prescribed by the rules for the appointment, the appointees should not be pushed down below the appointees from the other source inducted in the service at a later date.
(F) Where the rules permit the authorities to relax the provisions relating to the quota, ordinarily a presumption should be raised that there was such relaxation when there is a deviation from the quota rule.
(G) The quota for recruitment from the different sources may be prescribed by executive instructions, if the rules are silent on the subject.
(H) If the quota rule is prescribed by an executive instruction, and is not followed continuously for a number of years, the inference is that the executive instruction has ceased to remain operative."
Principle (B) if read in isolation may suggest that even where an appointment has been made without following the procedure prescribed in the rules but the appointee is regularised in service in accordance with the rules and his service is continuous, his period of officiating service will count towards seniority.
However, if the judgment of the Constitution Bench is read as a whole it becomes clear that the Constitution Bench did not accept the claim of seniority of a person who got entry into service without any sort of selection and who was subsequently regularised in pursuance of policy decision of the Government.
In fact a perusal of para 13 of the judgment of the Supreme Court clearly shows that the Supreme Court has reiterated the well established principle of determination of seniority based on length of service where appointment was made in accordance with rules.
The Constitution Bench observed:  "We, therefore, confirm the principle of counting towards seniority the period of continuous officiation following an appointment made in accordance with the rules prescribed for regular substantive appointments in the service."
In Masood Akhtar Khan and others v. State of Madya Pradesh and others 1990(4) SCC 24, claim of petitioners to be assigned seniority from the date of initial appointment was negatived by the Supreme Court.
In that case the petitioners had been given appointment for fixed term of six months with a condition that their service will stand automatically terminated.
Subsequently the petitioners were selected by the Public Service Commission.
Then they were given regular appointments.
Petitioners relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association's case (supra) and some other judgments in support of their claim that they should be assigned seniority on the basis of total length of service.
While rejecting the writ petition, the Supreme Court observed:  "If the initial appointment is not made according to the rules, subsequent regularisation of service of an employee does not entitle him to the benefit of intervening service for seniority."
In Keshav Chandra Joshi and others v. Union of India and others, 1990 Lab.
lC 216, while reiterating the principles that ad hoc service cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority, the Supreme Court observed:  "Ad hoc or fortuitous appointment on temporary or stop-gap basis cannot be taken into account for the purpose of seniority even if the appointee was subsequently qualified to hold the post on regular basis.
To give benefit of such service would be contrary to equality enshrined in Article 14 read with Article 16(1) of the Constitution as unequals would be treated as equals."
While commenting on the apparent anomaly in principles (A) and (B) laid down in the case of Direct Recruit Class 11 Engineering Officers' Association's case (supra).
The Supreme Court observed:  ''As stated, the counsel for the promotees placed strong reliance on proposition (B) while the counsel for the Direct Recruits relied on proposition (A).
The controversy is as to which of the propositions would apply to the facts of this case.
The proposition (A) lays down that once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rules, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The latter part thereof amplifies postulating that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and is made as a stop-gap arrangement, the period of officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for reckoning seniority.
The quintessence of the proposition is that the appointment to a post must be according to rules and not by way of ad hoc or stop-gap arrangement made due to administrative exigencies.
If the initial appointment thus made was de hors the rules, the entire length of such service cannot be counted for seniority.
In other words the appointee would become a member of the service in the substantive capacity from the date of his appointment only if the appointment was made according to rules and seniority would be counted only from that date.
Propositions (A) and (B) covers different aspects of one situation.
One must discern the difference critically.
Proposition (B) must, therefore, be read along with para 13 of the judgment wherein the ratio decidendi of Narendra Chadha was held to have considerable force."
In The Excise Commissioner, Karnataka and another v. V Sreekanta, JT 1993 (2) SC 384 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
185, the apex Court once again held that an ad hoc appointee who is subsequently regularised in service can claim benefit of seniority only from the date of regularisation and not from an earlier date.
In State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, JT 1993 (2) SC 598 : 1993(2) SCT 734 SC), the principles (A) and (B) in Direct Recruit Class 11 Engineering Officers' Association's case (supra) once again came up for examination before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court clarified that where a case is covered by principle (A), principle (B) cannot be applied for giving benefit of seniority.
While doing so, the Supreme Court observed:  "We shall now deal with conclusions (A) and (B) of the Constitution Bench in the Maharashtra Engineers' case, quoted above.
There can be no doubt that these two conclusions have to be read harmoniously and conclusion (B) cannot cover cases which are expressly excluded by conclusion.
(A).
We may, therefore, first refer to conclusion (A).
It is clear from conclusion.
(A) that to enable seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post has to be initially appointed 'according to rules'.
The corollary set out in conclusion (A) then is, that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
Thus, the corollary in conclusion (A) expressly excludes the category of cases where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules, being made only as a stop-gap arrangement.
The case of the writ petitioners squarely falls within this corollary in conclusion (A), which says that the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for counting the seniority.''
In Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana and another, 1992(4) S.L.R.
701 : 1995(4) SCT 830 : 1992(3) SCT 378 : 1992(3) SCT 424, seniority based on the total length of service counted from the date of ad hoc appointment has been negatived by a Division Bench.
After making a reference to the service rules, including rule 11 of the Haryana Food and Supplies Department Sub-Officer (Group C) Service Rules, 1982, which is in pari materia with Rule 10 of 1967 Rules and the various decisions of the Supreme Court and of this Court, the Division Bench held:  "As can be seen from the above, the Supreme Court has clearly laid down that the service rendered on ad hoc basis shall not be counted for seniority.
Similar view expressed earlier in Masood Akhtar Khan's case (supra) has been reiterated in paragraph 6.
This being the latest judgment of the Supreme Court declaring the law on the point has to be followed by us.
The ratio clearly applies to the interpretation of rule 11 of the Rules."
In Civil Writ Petition No. 9200 of 1993, Gurmail Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) SCT 739 : 1992(3) SCT 335 (P&H) : 1991(3) SCT 608 decided on July 21, 1994, a Division Bench referred to the various decisions and held:  "On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that a person appointed on ad hoc basis or a person appointed without following the procedure prescribed in the Rules is not entitled to the benefit of total length of service for the purpose of seniority even though he is subsequently regularised in service on the basis of a policy decision taken by the Government or on the basis of the amendment made in the rules.
We further hold that even where an appointment on ad hoc basis is made after calling names from the employment exchange, such ad hoc appointee will not be entitled to seniority over an employee recruited in accordance with the rules even if service of ad hoc appointee is subsequently regularised."
In Chambel Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SLR 1 : 1994(4) SCT 800 (P&H) (FB).
a Full Bench of this Court held that services rendered on the basis of ad hoc appointment cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of the incumbent, except when such appointment is made as per rules and not by way of stop-gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with.
The Full Bench also held that mere longer stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of the employer will not clothe any appointee to claim seniority on the basis of such service.
Similar views have been expressed by the apex Court in State of Gujarat v. CG Raiyani, 1995(1) SLR 353 : 1995(2) SCT 541 (SC) and Food Corporation of India v. Thaneshwar Kalita and others, 1995 (2) SLR 425 : 1995(3) SCT 319 (SC).
In view of the principles laid down by the apex Court and this Court, we hold that the service rendered by the petitioner from 11.10.1976 consequent upon ad hoc appointment on the post of Lineman cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority and the Board has not acted illegally in fixing his seniority on the basis of length of service with effect from 13101978.
Claim of the petitioner to be regularised in service with effect from 11.10.1976 also deserves to be rejected on the short ground that the initial appointment of the petitioner was not on the basis of selection made by the Services Staff Selection Committee of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
Petitioner's case for regular appointment was considered on the basis of application filed by him in the year 1978.
If the petitioner had thought that his initial appointment was a regular appointment, he would not have applied for regular appointment in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the competent authority nor he would have faced the interview conducted by the Services Staff Selection Committee.
Therefore, there is no basis for directing regularisation of the services of the petitioner with effect from 11.10.1976.
Moreover, this claim of the petitioner is highly belated.
He has instituted this writ petition in the year 1996 ie after 20 years of his ad hoc appointment and we do not find any reason to ignore this long delay and direct the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to regularise the service of the petitioner with effect from 11.10.1976.
Issue of such direction will have adverse effect on the seniority of persons, who may have been appointed on regular basis between 11.10.1976 and 12.10.1978.
Even those who were selected along with the petitioner in the year 1978 will be prejudicially affected.
We cannot, therefore, unsettle the settled rights of a large number of employees by issuing a direction after 20 years.
6.
However, rejection of the claim of the petitioner for seniority does not automatically result in denial of other service benefits to the petitioner on the basis of total service rendered by him.
In our opinion, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the principles laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in Rakesh Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana, 1995(5) SLR 315 : 1995(4) SCT 285 (P&H).
7.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed in so far as petitioner claim for regularisation of service with effect from 11.10.1976 and for fixation of seniority on the basis of total length of service is concerned.
It is allowed in regard to his claim for other service benefits and we direct the respondent No.
I to 3 to give the benefit of ad hoc service to the petitioner on the basis of the decision of the Full Bench in Rakesh Kumar Singla's case (supra).
Costs made easy.
Order accordingly.