ML Singhal, J - On an industrial dispute having been raised by the respondent-workman (Vijay Kumar Sharma) the Punjab Government referred the following industrial dispute to the Labour Court, Amritsar for adjudication between the respondent-workman and the petitioner-management vide endorsement No. ID/4/230-A-85/17434-38 dated 5th March, 1985.
``Whether termination of the services of Shri Vijay Kumar Sharma, workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?''
Vide award dated 23.8.1983 (Annexure P-18), the Labour Court, Amritsar found that the workman was entitled to reinstatement with continuity in service and full back wages as the termination of his services was not in order and unjustified as prior to the termination of this services no notice/charge-sheet and compensation was given to him.
It was found that his employment had not come to an end and that it was unfair labour practice on the part of the petitioner-management to get rid of him under the garb that his was temporary employment liable to come to and end automatically with the efflux of time.
2.
Through this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India filed by the petitioner-management, challenge is directed to the award (Annexure P18) dated 2381993 delivered by the Labour Court, Amritsar in favour of the respondent-workman.
It is averred that the workman was governed by the terms of employment laid down in the certified standing orders applicable to the factory of the petitioner management.
Clause 4(f) inter alia provides as under :  ``Temporary employees - A temporary employee must complete two years satisfactory continuous service before he may apply for upgrading to permanent employee.''
Vijay Kumar Sharma in pursuance of statutory terms of employment executed a temporary appointment agreement for two years with effect from 111983 to 31121984 on or about 111983 thereby agreeing to work at the rate of Rs. 16/- per day.
Annexure P-1 is the temporary employment agreement executed by the workman in favour of the management.
He was engaged in the manufacture of textile goods and the job of fitter for installation of machinery etc. arises for a particular period.
He was a fitter in Mech/Shop.
After 31121984 the job of the fitter did not exist as per MW.2 Inderjit Sharma who appeared before the Labour Court.
Although the period of his employment was specified as up to 31121984 in the temporary employment agreement and also in view of the temporary nature of the job, yet in order to avoid hardship to the workman and as a measure of caution one month pay was remitted to him through bank draft alongwith other service benefits having accrued to him with letter dated 28121984 (Annexure P-2).
The respondent-workman wrote a letter dated 111985 to the management making grievance of the termination of his services with effect from 31121984.
In response to that letter the management wrote to him a letter dated 5.1.1985 explaining that there was no termination of services involved and in fact his services came to an end automatically due to efflux of time.
It was told that he could not invoke the provisions of Section 2(A) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Earlier to that he had been given probational appointment up to 3091982 through appointment letter Annexure P-6.
In nutshell, the only ground of challenge to the award Annexure P-18 delivered by the Labour Court in favour of workman is that the workman was not entitled to any protection as envisaged by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as his employment came to an end automatically by efflux of time and that termination of his services was not ``retrenchment'' within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
3.
The respondent-workman opposed this writ petition urging that no temporary employment agreement was executed by him.
It was denied that he admitted the execution of any temporary employment agreement between him and the management during the course of proceedings before the Labour Court.
He was engaged in the manufacture of textile goods.
It was denied that job of fitter arises for a particular period only; rather the post of fitter is a regular job.
The fitter is required to repair machines from time to time.
No such plea was raised before the Labour Court that the job was for a particular period.
No such plea can be allowed to be raised for the first time in the writ jurisdiction.
It was denied that the job of the fitter became non-existent after 31121984.
The termination of his services under the garb that his was a temporary employment is unfair labour practice brought into play by the management due to his Trade Union activities, which was a measure of punishment.
Prior to 31121984 letter dated 7121984 was written to him that he had been instigating his co-workers.
He gave reply dated 8121984.
The petitioner-management wrote letter dated 14121984 that strict action would be taken against him.
He gave reply dated 21.12.1984 that he was not being permitted to joint duties.
Termination of his services was thus retrenchment brought about mala fide because of his trade union activities.
It was denied that he was given probational appointment upto 3091982.
Appointment letter (Annexure P-6) is forged and fabricated.
During the evidence before the Labour Court, the alleged temporary employment agreement was never put to him.
After 31121984 the job of the fitter was very much in existence.
New persons were employed after the termination of the services of the respondent-workman.
There is regular machine shop in the petitioner-Mills in which job of fitter is in existence.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner-management, learned counsel for the respondent-workman and have gone through the record.
5.
In this petition, the question that falls for determination is, ``whether respondent-workman was in temporary employment which came to an end on 31121984 due to efflux of time or it was unfair labour practice on the part of the management to put an end to his employment under the garb that his was temporary employment, though the job of the fitter which he was holding was a permanent job and that under-lying cause for the termination of his services was his trade union activities ?''
6.
It was submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner-management that the termination of the services of the workman cannot be said to be retrenchment as defined in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act as his services came to an end automatically on 31121984 and after 31121984 the contract of employment was not renewed.
It was submitted that Annexure P.1 shows that his was a temporary employment given to him for a period of two years ending on 31121984.
In order Annexure P-1 it was stipulated that during or at the expiry of this period if his work and conduct was not found satisfactory or if his services were no longer required by the company, these would be terminated as per clause No. 8 of appointment order Annexure P-1.
It was submitted that he accepted the employment on terms and conditions incorporated therein and in the Certified Standing Orders of the OCM (India) Private Limited, Amritsar.
Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 defines ``retrenchment'' as follows :  ``Retrenchment'' means the termination by the employer of the service of workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or (bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health.''
7.
It was contended that the employment of respondent-workman came to an end automatically as a result of non-renewal of the contract of employment.
Earlier to the appointment of the workman with effect from 111983, he was on probational appointment upto 3091982 from 1641982.
In probational appointment order Annexure P-6 it was stipulated that this is purely a probational appointment upto 3091982.
During or at the expiry of this period the Company can terminate his employment without assigning any reason whatsoever, at its will and discretion.
It was further stipulated in probational appointment order Annexure P.6 that this employment was accepted by the workman on terms and conditions prescribed herein and in the Certified Standing Orders of the OCM (India) Ltd., Amritsar.
It was further stipulated in this order that if and when he was made permanent he would return his temporary appointment letter to be exchanged by a permanent appointment letter.
It was contended that the workman accepted the terms and conditions of his employment which was a temporary employment with eyes open and therefore, he could not claim that non-renewal of contract of employment was retrenchment.
8.
Suffice it to say against the might of the employer, the employee stands nowhere so far as the bargaining power is concerned.
Respondent-workman was in need of employment and, therefore, he agreed to accept employment on whatever terms he was given employment.
9.
In State of Rajasthan v. Rameshwar Lal Gahlot, 1996 LAB I.C.
1914 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
600 it was held that where an appointment is for fixed period, it is covered by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Termination would not amount to retrenchment unless it is shown that power under clause (bb) of Section 2(oo) was misused or vitiated by its mala fide exercise.
In this case, the power to terminate was misused by the management and the appointment for a fixed period was a colourable exercise of power.
10.
In M. Venugopal v. LIC of India, 1994-I LLN 545 it was held that where a Development Officer in the LIC of India was on probation and the confirmation depended inter alia on his satisfactory completion of probation and fulfilment of a minimum business, the termination of his service during the period of probation on account of his unsatisfactory performance, would not amount to retrenchment.
Non-compliance with Section 25-F shall not vitiate the order of termination of service.
Termination of the services was covered by exception (bb) to Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
11.
In Director, Institute of Management Development, UP v. Smt. Pushpa Srivastava, 1992-II LLN 863 it was held by their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that where the appointment is contractual and by efflux of time the appointment comes to an end, the respondent can have no right to continue in the post.
Once this conclusion is arrived at, what requires to be examined is in view of the service of the respondent being continued from time to time on ad hoc basis for more than a year, whether she is entitled to regularisation ?
The answer should be in the negative.
However, it was observed that it will be open to the appellant Institute to consider regularisation of her services if it is so desired and that this judgment would not stand in the way of such regularisation.
12.
Whole stress of the learned counsel for the petitioner-management was that where the services of a workman are terminated as a result of non-renewal of the contract of employment on the expiry of the contract period, such termination is not retrenchment.
There can be no dispute so far as this proposition of law is concerned.
In this case it is true that there was a condition in the letter of appointment Annexure P1 that the respondent-workman was appointed on 111983 and his was a temporary appointment to enure for a period of 2 years i.e. upto 31121984.
It was also stipulated in the letter of appointment that if his work or conduct was not found satisfactory during or at the expiry of this period or his services were not required by the management, the same would be terminated as per clause 8 of the letter of appointment.
There is nothing wrong and is rather permitted by Section (bb) of the Act to specify the duration of appointment of a workman.
In this case, however, the termination of the services of workman was not a termination simpliciter in terms of his appointment but was retrenchment brought about as a punishment inflicted without any enquiry into the alleged misconduct that he had been assembling the workers and addressing them inside the factory premises on the subject which had direct interference with the normal working of the factory and he had no right under any law for canvassing for political as well as trade union purposes inside the factory premises and such activities on his part amounted to interference with the normal working of the factory which is a serious misconduct.
His services could be terminated after enquiry into the alleged misconduct having been imputed to him.
In our opinion, the Labour Court justifiably held that the termination of the service of the workman was retrenchment which was not in order and he was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
In consequence, this petition fails and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.