THB Chalapathi, J - In this petition, the challenge was made to the award passed by Labour Court, Jalandhar in Reference No. 341 of 1992 on April 12, 1994.
2.
The first respondent was employed as a Sweeper in Punjab Roadways on 21st March, 1986.
His services were terminated on 30th October, 1986.
After the lapse of six years from the date of his termination, the 1st respondent raised an industrial dispute on the ground that his services were terminated wrongfully without following the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act and also by adopting unfair labour practices.
The said dispute was referred to the Labour Court by the Government for its adjudication vide order dated 27th August, 1992.
3.
The Labour Court on a consideration of the material placed before it, came to the conclusion that the services of the 1st respondent were terminated prior to the completion of 240 days with a malafide intention so as to deprive him of the benefits of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
The Labour Court further held that there was a violation of provisions of 25-F of the Act.
In this view of the matter, the Labour Court directed the reinstatement of the 1st respondent with continuity of service and with full back wages from the date of the Demand Notice i.e. 30th January, 1992.
4.
Aggrieved by the said award of the Labour Court, the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar and the Director, State Transport, Punjab, filed the writ petition.
5.
Admittedly, the 1st respondent has not completed 240 days of service.
Therefore, the 1st respondent is not entitled to the benefits of provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
Another ground, which weighed with the Labour Court is that the employer adopted unfair labour practice in terminating the services of the 1st respondent only a few days prior to completion of 240 days of service with a mala fide intention.
On a perusal of the record, I do not find any mala fide on the part of the employer.
Simply because the services were terminated a few days prior to his completion of 240 days, it cannot be said that there is a mala fide intention on the part of the employer.
No specific averments were made in regard to mala fide intention on the part of the employer.
The mere vague allegation that the order of termination was passed with a mala fide intention is not sufficient.
Some material facts are necessary to be given to show that the employer acted mala fidely.
However, the act of termination prior to the completion of 240 days does not amount to mala fide intention.
I am, therefore, not able to agree with the finding of the Labour Court that the order of termination was a mala fide one.
The services of the 1st respondent were terminated on 30th October, 1986.
The 1st respondent kept quiet till 30th January, 1992 ie for more than five years.
No explanation was given by him for the delay in raising the industrial dispute.
The delay in raising the industrial dispute tantamounts to abandonment of the claim on the part of the employer.
The employer is not expected to keep the post vacant for all times to come.
It is obligatory on the part of the employee to raise an industrial dispute within reasonable time after termination of his services.
6.
In the instant case, the 1st respondent kept quiet for a long period of more than five years.
From this inaction on the part of the employee, it can safely be inferred that he abandoned his claim though no particular time limit was prescribed for raising the industrial dispute.
This view finds support from the decision of this Court in Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Society Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1991(2) SLR 487 : 1991(1) SCT 311(P&H), wherein it was held as follows :-  ``If the workman had felt that the order of termination of his services was illegal, as no procedure at all was followed, he could have come up with a demand notice within some reasonable time.
It is true that there is no limitation prescribed for raising dispute to Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court, but it would be only then reasonable that the dispute should be referred as soon as possible and after conciliation proceedings have failed.
To reopen the matter after such a long time and that too without giving any explanation of delay would be too inequitus and had a great disadvantage of the management.''
7.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I am of the opinion that the award of the Labour Court is liable to be set aside.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed and the award of the Labour Court is set aside.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.