Dr. (Mrs.) Sarojnei Saksena, J - This is father's appeal against the impugned order whereby his petition filed under section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (in short, the Act) was declined.
2.
Adumbrated facts of the case are that the petitioner-appellant Paramjit Singh was married to respondent-Manjit Kaur on April 15, 1984.
In this wedlock she gave birth to Amanpreet Kaur on November 4, 1985.
Petitioner- appellant and respondent-Manjit Kaur could not live in harmony under the matrimonial roof.
Hence they separated on July 10, 1986.
Since that date Amanpreet Kaur is in the custody of respondent-Manjit Kaur.
3.
Petitioner-appellant filed an application under section 25 of the Act claiming the custody of his daughter.
He alleged that at the time of marriage Manjit Kaur was not in service.
He got her employed in Vijaya Bank at New Delhi.
At that time he was also a bank employee at Delhi.
Manjit Kaur got herself transferred to Patiala and started residing with her parents.
He made several attempts to bring her back to the matrimonial fold but she and her brothers declined.
He also averred that respondent No. 2 Manjit Kaur is not keeping the minor child in her own custody.
She has left the child in the custody of her brother Harpreet Singh respondent No. 1.
Hence Manjit Kaur respondent No. 2 is not entitled to the custody of the minor child.
Respondent No. 1 is not a natural guardian of the minor.
Respondent No. 2 has no means to bring up the child properly.
Petitioner-appellant is a bank officer and is financially well off to give proper education and upbringing to the child.
Respondent No. 1 filed an application under section 125 Cr.PC on behalf of the minor child, which shows that respondent No. 2 Manjit Kaur has left the child in the custody of respondent No. 1.
Hence he prayed that custody of his minor daughter be given to him.
4.
The respondents being noticed filed their separate written replies.
They denied that respondent No. 2 left the matrimonial home without any reasonable cause.
She pleaded that she was beaten by the petitioner-appellant and his mother on the ground that she had not brought sufficient dowry as per their expectations.
She was also tortured by them by keeping her lock in a room, without providing her meals.
Finally in 1986 she was turned out of the matrimonial home.
FIR was lodged about this incident.
Since then she is residing in her parental home.
She also denied that the appellant got her employed in the bank.
It is also denied that she has left the care and custody of the minor with respondent No. 1 and she is not in her custody now.
She also emphatically denied that she is not in a position to bring up the child properly or to give her best possible education.
5.
On these pleadings, issues were framed.
Parties adduced their evidence.
The trial Court also ascertained the wishes of the minor on September 13, 1995.
Considering her preference to reside with the mother and scanning parties' evidence on record, the trial Court held that the petitioner- appellant has failed to prove that he is entitled to the custody of the child.
Hence the petition was dismissed.
6.
The petitioner-appellant's learned counsel contended that the appellant is an officer in the bank, while respondent No. 2 Manjit Kaur is only an employee of the bank.
She goes to the bank at about 9/9.15 A.M. and comes back at about 530 PM while the minor child comes back from the school at about 230 PM After that there is no body to look after the child.
Respondent No. 2 is living with her brother respondent No. 1, who has three children.
When once petitioner-appellant's brother-in-law visited the respondent's house, wife of respondent No. 1 complained that she is unable to look after the minor child of the petitioner-appellant as she has her own children.
She expressed her unwillingness and displeasure as respondent No. 2 and her daughter are living with her.
Thus, the learned counsel argued that financially petitioner-appellant is well off, he is better placed in society, his parents are residing with him, he can look after the minor child, give her best possible education and during his absence his mother can look after the child.
Thus, according to him, he being father has a preferential right to the custody of the minor daughter.
7.
Respondent's learned counsel submitted that respondent No. 2 Manjit Kaur is an employee of the bank.
She goes to the bank at about 945 A.M. and comes back at about 515 P.M. No doubt, minor child comes back from the school at about 230 PM but as her mother is residing with her, during her absence her mother is looking after the minor child.
He pointed out that respondent No. 2 is equally financially well off.
He clarified that petition under section 125 Cr.PC was filed by respondent No. 1 claiming maintenance for the minor daughter because respondent No. 2 was not able to attend the Court hearings, as she being a bank employee could not get leave on each date of hearing.
He submitted that because of the filing of the petition, it cannot be said that respondent No. 2 has handed over the custody of the minor child to respondent No. 1.
He also vehemently argued that parties are living separately since July 10, 1986.
Till the Magistrate ordered the petitioner- appellant to pay maintenance at the rate of Rs. 350/- per month, the petitioner-appellant never cared to send any amount for the upbringing of this minor.
He never sent any gifts to his minor daughter.
He also pointed out that even when the Court enquired about the wishes of the minor, she declined to reside with the father.
She is happily residing with her mother.
Hence, according to him, the lower Court has rightly dismissed the petitioner-appellant's petition.
In support of his contention, he has relied on Smt. Pinki v. Abhey Singh and another, 1996(1) PLR 739.
8.
The main consideration is the welfare of the child.
Minors represent a class of person, who, by their age, are regarded as having immature intellects and imperfect discretion.
On account of their tender age, immature intellects and imperfect discretion they are unable to take care of themselves.
Guardianship is a sacred trust.
Father, being the natural guardian, is under an obligation to maintain his minor child during minority provided he has not made himself unfit to be the guardian.
While deciding such a petition the first and paramount consideration is the welfare of the minor and all other considerations are subsidiary and subordinate and should have importance proportionate to their bearings on the welfare of the minor.
9.
The controlling consideration for governing the custody of the child is the welfare of the child and not the rights or sentiments of the parties.
In deciding such a question the Court must regard the minor's welfare as the first and paramount consideration and must not take into consideration whether from any other point of view the father's claim in respect of such custody, upbringing, administration or application is superior to that of the mother or the mother's claim is superior to that of the father.
In case of a dispute between the mother and the father for the custody of the child, it is not necessary to strike out a balance between the requirements of the welfare of the minor child and the rights of the respective parents over the child.
10.
The material considerations should be: (i) with whom the child will be happy; (ii) who will look after and contribute to the well being, health and comforts of the child; (iii) who will give best possible education to the child; (iv) in whose company the child will grow up in normal balanced manner to be useful member of the society; and (v) the age and the sex of the child and (vi) the character and capacity of the father or the mother.
11.
Section 17 of the Act provides which matters are required to be considered by the Court in appointing or declaring a guardian.
It lays down:-  (1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be guided by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be for the welfare of the minor.
(2) In considering what will be the welfare of the minor, the Court shall have regard to the age, sex and religion of the minor, the character and capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of kin to the minor, the wishes, if any, of the deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations of the proposed guardian with the minor or his property.
(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the Court may consider that preference.
12.
The discretion vested in the Court is as is the case with all judicial discretions to be exercised judicially in the background of all the relevant facts and circumstances.
Each case has to be decided on its own facts and other cases can hardly serve as binding precedents.
13.
In Rosy Jacob v A Chakramukki, AIR 1973 SC 2090, the Apex Court has observed:  ``..... No doubt, the father has been presumed by the statute generally to be better fitted to look after the children being normally the earning member and head of the family - but the Court has, in each case, to see primarily to the welfare of the children in determining the question of their custody, in the background of all the relevant facts having a bearing on their health, maintenance and education.
The family is normally the heart of our society and for a balanced and healthy growth of children it is highly desirable that they get their due share of affection and care from both the parents in their normal parental home.
Where, however, family dissolution due to some unavoidable circumstances becomes necessary the Court has to come to a judicial decision on the question of the welfare of the children on a full consideration of all the relevant circumstances.
Merely because the father loves his children and is not shown to be otherwise undesirable cannot necessarily lead to the conclusion that the welfare of the children would be better promoted by granting their custody to him as against the wife who may also be equally affectionate towards her children and otherwise equally free from blemish, and, who, in addition, because of her professional and financial resources, may be in a position to guarantee better health, education and maintenance for them.
Children are not mere chattels: nor are they mere play-things for their parents.
Absolute right of parents over the destinies and the lives of their children has, in the modern changed social conditions, yielded to the considerations of their welfare as human beings so that they may grow up in a normal balanced manner to be useful members of the society and the guardian court in case of a dispute between the mother and the father, is expected to strike a just and proper balance between the requirements of welfare of the minor children and the rights of their respective parents over them.''
14.
In Smt. Pinki's case (supra) dispute was with regard to the custody of a minor girl aged 10 years.
The child had no complaints against her mother and her foster father.
She was being looked after well by them.
No doubt, the mother had remarried, but the child was still in the custody of the mother with her second husband.
The father of the minor child filed an application for the custody of the child.
The Court held that the child being of tender age required not only love and care but also constant vigil which can only be given by the mother alone.
The Court also considered this fact that father was residing alone and goes out for work and there will be none to look after the child throughout the day in his absence.
Hence father's petition seeking guardianship of the minor was accordingly dismissed.
15.
So far as the facts of this case are concerned, the petitioner-appellant has stated on oath that his monthly salary is Rs. 6, 000/-.
Respondent No. 2 - mother has also testified on oath that she is drawing Rs. 4, 000/- as her salary.
Both of them are living separately since July 10, 1986.
Both of them were residing in Delhi before July 10, 1986, also.
After separation they resided separately in Delhi itself till July 1989.
There is no evidence on record that during this period (from July 10, 1986, to July 1989) petitioner-appellant ever made any attempt to meet the child to give any presents or any chocolate, biscuits etc. or even clothes to the minor child.
He never made any attempt on his own to pay any amount for the maintenance of the child.
Respondent No. 1 filed a petition under section 125 Cr.PC claiming maintenance for minor daughter on May 16, 1991.
This petition was allowed and in pursuance of that order the petitioner-appellant is paying Rs. 350/- per month for the maintenance of the minor daughter.
16.
Father is an officer in the bank.
Mother is also an employee in another bank.
Father's duty hours are 945 A.M. to 515 PM Mother's duty hours are also the same.
Father is living with his parents.
His father is aged about 70 years and is a heart patient.
His mother is aged about 65 years.
Manjit Kaur is also living with her own mother, who is aged about 65 years.
Petitioner-appellant's learned counsel submitted that during petitioner's absence the minor child will be looked after by his mother.
He examined his mother as AW-2.
In her cross-examination Manmohan Kaur AW-2 has admitted that when they were residing at Delhi Manjit Kaur used to go to Gurgaon from Delhi.
Even when she was living with the petitioner-appellant and Manjit Kaur this minor child was sometimes kept in creche and sometimes at home.
If the grandmother had any love, affection or concern for the minor child, there was hardly any occasion to leave this minor child in creche.
This circumstance indicates that the grandmother is not interested in looking after the minor child.
But there is nothing on record to show that the mother of Manjit Kaur is not capable or is not interested in looking after the minor.
17.
Amanpreet Kaur is now aged about 10 years.
The age of this minor daughter at present is such that she must need the constant company of a grown-up female in the house genuinely interested in her welfare.
In the circumstances her mother is the best company for her.
The daughter would need her mother's advice and guidance on several matters of importance.
It is an admitted fact that no grown-up woman closely related to the child would be available in the petitioner-appellant's house for such material advice and guidance.
Even from the point of view of her education, her custody with the mother would be far more beneficial than her custody with the father.
In this growing age, she will be needing her mother's constant care and advice.
Her mother is equally financially well off.
After coming back from the bank she is at home and can look after the welfare of the child in a more devoted and committed manner than the father.
In a year or two the child may be facing some physiological changes, which may result is psychological disturbances also.
At that time also mother's fondling protection, caring hand and fruitful advice would be more helpful and beneficial for the upbringing of this minor daughter.
It is also a fact that when the lower Court tried to find out her preference, she refused to see her father.
This fact cannot be lost sight of that since her birth Amanpreet Kaur is living in the custody of her mother.
Father never cared to develop any emotional rapport with the child.
All of a sudden this child at this critical tender age cannot be uprooted from mother's custody to the father's custody.
Thus, in my considered view, considering all the facts and circumstances of the case the trial Court has not fallen into any error in rejecting the petitioner-appellant's petition filed under section 25 of the Act.
18.
The petitioner-appellant's learned counsel made a last submission that visitation rights be granted to the father, so that he may develop some emotional relationship with the child.
The father is living in Ludhiana.
The mother is residing with the child at Patiala.
These visitation rights cannot be denied to the father because children require parents love and affection.
As Amanpreet Kaur is minor, she cannot be sent all alone by respondent No. 2 to the petitioner-appellant's house at Ludhiana even on week ends.
Therefore, the petitioner-appellant is hereby allowed to go to the house of respondent No. 2 on second and fourth Sundays of every month and be in the company of minor Amanpreet Kaur from 9 AM to 5 P.M.
This arrangement shall continue as long as the minor desires.
During summer vacation also, initially for 10 days the petitioner-appellant father will be at liberty to bring Amanpreet Kaur to his residence and to return her back after 10 days.
This right can be exercised by him only in the first part of the summer vacation.
19.
With the above observations, the appeal, being meritless is hereby dismissed, with costs, which are quantified at Rs. 2, 000/-.
Appeal dismissed.