RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of two Writ Petitions No. 3972 of 1980 titled `State of Punjab v. Kalga Singh and others' and another bearing No. 844 of 1981 titled `Kalga Singh v. State of Punjab and others' as in the opinion of this Court both the writ petitions can be disposed of by one judgment as common question of law and facts has arisen in these writ petitions.
Moreover, these two writ petitions have arisen from one award passed by the Labour Court dated 331980 vide which it was held that workman Kalga Singh was entitled to reinstatement into service with the benefit of continuity of service but without back wages.
2.
In writ petition filed by the State a prayer has been made for setting aside the award in toto while in the writ petition of Kalga Singh, it has been prayed that the Labour Court fell in error when it did not award back wages to him.
3.
It has been alleged by the State in the writ petition that the Labour Court was not justified in holding that the enquiry initiated against the workman was liable to be set aside when it has been allegedly conducted in a fair manner, and that the Punishing Authority had taken into consideration all the relevant facts before terminating the services of Kalga Singh.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court was wrong in holding that there was no Presenting Officer before the Enquiry Officer and that the Enquiry Officer himself has acted as prosecutor causing a prejudice to the workman.
These averments of the State have been denied by Kalga Singh who had tried to justify the award on this aspect but has attacked it on a separate ground in his own writ petition No. 844 of 1981 by alleging that once his written statement was allowed by the Labour Court it could not deprive him of the back wages.
4.
I need not to incorporate the pleadings of the writ petition of Kalga Singh in this judgment as the averments are incorporated in the written statement filed in civil writ petition No. 3972 of 1980.
5.
Both the writ petitions are being disposed of with the assistance rendered by Shri PS Chhina, Senior DAG (P), who appeared on behalf of the State of Punjab and Sh. Manjeet Singh, Advocate, for the respondents  6.
First of all, I would like to dispose of writ petition No. 3972 of 1980.
The attack of the State is that enquiry has been conducted in a fair manner and it is proved in the domestic enquiry that Kalga Singh had committed embezzlement of Rs. 575 when he allegedly received bus fare from five passengers and did not issue the tickets to them.
The submission of Mr. PS Chhina, DAG (P), cannot be accepted in support of the writ petition of the State Because the enquiry proceedings were examined by the Labour Court which revealed that there was no representing Officer before the enquiry officer and that the enquiry officer himself discharged the duties of the prosecutor and in this manner the fair Principles of natural justice had been violated by the management.
It will be useful for me in this regard to incorporate the findings of the Labour Court in order to repel the contention of the Deputy Advocate General:-  ``The enquiry proceedings further reveal the fact that there was no Presenting Officer before the enquiry officer.
It thus stands to reason that the Enquiry Officer was himself the prosecutor and on the said score the enquiry cannot be considered to be fair and proper.
The order of termination of services of the workman is obviously based on the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and is not sustainable.
Accordingly, I hold that the order of termination of services of the workman is not justified and is not in order.
The issue is decided in favour of the workman and against the respondent.''
7.
In the light of the above, the Labour Court was justified in setting aside the domestic enquiry.
Even otherwise, the order of termination on the part of the management was harsh in view of the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and the Labour Court was within its rights to order for the reinstatement with benefit of continuity of service as the charge against the workman was that he allegedly embezzled a small and petty amount of Rs. 575 only.
The allegations were not so severe so as to warrant the dismissal of the workman on those allegations.
8.
Resultantly, this Court is of the opinion that there is no error of jurisdiction in the award dated 331980 whereby the Labour Court had ordered for the reinstatement of the workman with the benefit of continuity of service.
9.
To meet the writ petition No. 844 of 1981 the contention of the workman in his writ petition is that once his termination has been set aside, the Labour Court was duty bound to award him back wages.
Of course, the general law of the land is that with the reinstatement of workman he is entitled to back wages, but in the present case the departmental enquiry had been vitiated by the Labour Court on technical grounds.
So far as the merits are concerned, the workman made an admission before the Labour Court that he admitted his guilt at the instance of the authorities.
This late explanation furnished by the workman before the Labour Court was too feeble to be accepted.
As I stated above, domestic enquiry had been set aside on technical grounds.
Therefore, the general principle of awarding back wages would not be attracted in this case.
Thus I do not find any infirmity of law when the workman had been deprived of the back wages in the impugned award dated 331980.
10.
Consequently, both the writ petitions are hereby dismissed being devoid of any merit.
No order as to costs in any of the two writ petitions.
Petition dismissed.