Dalveer Bhandari, J (Oral) - In these writ petitions, the Union of India has challenged the orders passed by the Presiding Officers, Labour Courts awarding the workmen the difference of pay w.e.f.
date they acquired temporary status till they were paid regular pay scale.
2.
The workmen in these writ petitions had filed applications under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act before the Labour Courts claiming difference of wages from the date they acquired temporary status till they were appointed on regular pay scale.
3.
The petitioners herein contested the claims of the workmen and filed written statements against the claims of the workmen contending that the workmen were ``not entitled to the wages of regular pay scale.''
According to the petitioners the workmen herein were casually employed and were only entitled to statutory daily wages.
4.
After hearing all the parties, in these cases, the Presiding Officers of the Labour Court granted the claims of the workmen.
Aggrieved by these orders the Union of India have preferred these petitions.
5.
It is alleged in these petitions that the Presiding Officers have very limited jurisdiction under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Presiding Officers could not have arrogated to themselves the functions of the Industrial Tribunal in a reference under Section 10 by proceeding to determine the workmen's right instead to computing the claims under the valid order of the competent authority.
It was further argued that there has been no adjudication or recognition of the claims of the workmen, therefore, the Labour Court in these proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act could not have decreed their claims.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and examined relevant provisions of the Act and decided cases.
The respondent workmen did not appear despite service.
7.
In Central Bank of India Ltd v. PS Rajagopalan, AIR 1964 SC 743 the Constitution bench of the Supreme Court clearly pointed out that the sole purpose of Section 33-C(2) is the implementation or execution of the award and that the power of the Labour Court in a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) being akin to that the Executing Court, the Labour Court would be within its rights to interpret the Award or settlement on which a workmen bases his claim under Section 33-C(2) like the power of the Executing Court to interpret the decree for the purpose of execution.
To the same effect is the judgment of the Supreme Court in Bombay Gas Co Limited v. Gopal Bhiva, AIR 1964 SC 752.
That the right to the benefit which is sought to be computed under Section 33-C(2) must be one already adjudicated upon or provided for and that, while acting under that provisions, that Labour Court cannot arrogate itself the functions of adjudication of the dispute relating to the claim, was made further clear by the Apex Court in Chief Mining Engineer, East India Coal Co Limited v. Rameshwar, AIR 1968 SC 218 and Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited v. Workmen, 1974(4) SCC 696.
8.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court had occasion to examine the same issue in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ganesh Razak and another, 1995(1) SCT 408 (SC) : 1995(1) SCC 235.
Their Lordships held that:  ``Where the very basis of the claim or the entitlement of the workmen to a certain benefit is disputed, there being no earlier adjudication or recognition thereof by the employer, the dispute relating to entitlement is not incidental to the benefit claimed and is, therefore, clearly outside the scope of a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The Labour Court has no jurisdiction to first decide the workmen's entitlement and then proceed to compute the benefit so adjudicated on that basis in exercise of its power under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
It is only when the entitlement has been earlier adjudicated or recognised by the employer and thereafter for the purpose of implementation or enforcement thereof some ambiguity requires interpretation that the interpretation is treated as incidental to the Labour Court's power under Section 33-C(2) like that of the Execution Court's power to interpret the decree for the purpose of its execution.
The power of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) extends to interpretation of the award or settlement on which the workmen's right rests.''
9.
On the basis of aforesaid judgments, a large number of petitions were disposed of by this Court.
10.
Admittedly, in these petitions the claims of the workmen, who were daily rated/casual workers, to be paid wages at the same rate as the regular workers, had not been earlier settled by adjudication or recognised by the employers and the claims were disputed.
Since the claims in these petitions were disputed, therefore, there could be no occasion for computation of the benefit under Section 33-C(2) and consequently the applications preferred by the workmen under Section 33-C(2) of the Act were not maintainable.
11.
It is submitted by learned counsel for the parties that decretal amount have already been paid to the workmen several years ago.
12.
Looking to the facts and circumstances of these cases where the amount involved in individual cases is very meagre, substantial amount is likely to be spent in the whole process of recovering those small amounts and even then there is hardly any possibility of the recovery.
Therefore, taking the pragmatic approach in consideration, I direct that the amount shall not be recovered from the workmen in these cases.
13.
Consequently, the writ petitions preferred by the Union of India are allowed and the awards made by the Central Government Labour Courts in favour of the respondent workmen are set aside.
In the facts and circumstances of these petitions, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.