GS Singhvi, J - The facts of this case disclose twin tragedies - one suffered by the petitioner and the other by the public and as will be seen hereafter, completely lope-sided, causal and perfunctory approach adopted by the departmental authorities has caused immense loss to the public exchequer.
The petitioner who was serving as a Steno-typist in Public Works Department (Building and Roads Branch), Punjab and was posted at Amritsar, was placed under suspension on September 20, 1982 in contemplation of a departmental enquiry.
An FIR was also registered against him under Sections 409, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code on 2141984.
The investigation of the criminal case took almost two years and it took another eight years for the prosecution to tender evidence half-heartedly.
Consequently, the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Amritsar acquitted the petitioner on 1921994 by giving him benefit of doubt.
In the meantime, a charge sheet was issued to the petitioner on 1711983 to which he submitted a reply dated 1631983.
Enquiry Officer was appointed on 20.4.1983 and he submitted report some time in the year 1984.
Show cause notice dated 381984 was issued to the petitioner and he was served with a copy of the enquiry report which contained a finding that charges levelled against him stand proved.
After receipt of the show cause notice, the petitioner made some applications for being permitted to inspect the record and it appears that the Executive Engineer and the Superintending Engineer concerned accepted his request with a direction that he should submit his reply to the show cause notice within stipulated period.
After 1986, there was a silence on both the fronts.
The petitioner did not bother to file reply and the department did not bother to take further action.
The matter remained pending till the acquittal of the petitioner by the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Amritsar.
Immediately after acquittal the petitioner started his efforts for reinstatement by making representations to the Superintending Engineer followed by a detailed representation to the Secretary, PWD (B&R Branch), Punjab, Chandigarh and when nothing tangible happened, he moved this Court on 13.3.1996 and prayed that a writ of certiorari be issued to quash order of suspension as well as the charge sheet dated 1711983 and also that the respondent-department be directed to reinstate him in service forthwith with all consequential monetary benefits.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that prolonged suspension of the petitioner for over 13 years has virtually ruined the life of the petitioner and keeping in view the agony suffered by him by being subjected to prosecution and the departmental enquiry for such a long time, the proceedings of the enquiry should be quashed and a direction be issued to the respondents to reinstate him in service.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on the other hand, submitted that in the enquiry proceedings held against him the petitioner has virtually admitted various allegations levelled against him and there is no explanation available with the departmental authorities for not taking action against the petitioner after the year 1986 and in any case, after his acquittal by the competent Court.
She further submitted that the delay after 1994 can be explained because the departmental authorities had taken a decision to challenge the judgment of the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Amritsar, by way of appeal.
3.
The right of the employer to suspend his employee is inherent in his right to make appointment.
In what circumstances an employee can be placed under suspension primarily lies in the domain of the employer.
It is always open to the employer to consider prima facie the allegations levelled against the employee and pass an order so as to prevent him from physically discharging the duties of a particular post.
In a given case, the employer may exercise his power to supend the employee even before initiation of the departmental enquiry.
Suspension in contemplation of the departmental enquiry is also a well recognised legal concept.
In fact, most of the disciplinary appeal rules authorise the competent authorities to suspend an employee during the pendency or in contemplation of the departmental enquiry.
Court's interference in such matters is warranted only when it is established that the order of suspension has been passed in violation of the provisions of law or there is patent arbitrariness in the action taken by the employer.
4.
Irrespective of the above exposition of law, we find little justification for continued suspension of an employee for a period of more than 13 years.
Ordinarily the total span of service of a civil servant is 33 to 36 years and keeping a man under suspension for a period of 13 years would mean that more than 1/3rd of his service has been spent under suspension.
It can only be a matter of imagination as to which sufferance the petitioner may have been subjected to due to long suspension.
There may have been some element of justification in suspending the petitioner in the year 1982 and even to continue him under suspension during the pendency of the criminal case because the allegations levelled against him related to misappropriation of public funds, breach of trust and forgery.
The departmental authorities may have been justified in thinking that an employee like the petitioner who was charged with such serious allegations should not be allowed to hold the post.
However, after his acquittal by the competent Court, though by giving him benefit of doubt, there remained no justification to continue the suspension of the petitioner.
For a period of more than 2 years after his acquittal the petitioner has remained under suspension without any rhyme or reason.
We, therefore, do not find any justification to allow the respondent to continue the petitioner under suspension even now.
5.
It has to be remembered that while an employee who is placed under suspension suffers on account of non-payment of full salary and allowances.
Not only he but his entire family suffers.
Education of the children and their upkeep is also adversely affected.
In some cases, continued suspension of an employee causes irreparable damage to the career of his children.
The employee is also looked upon with contempt in the society and it is, therefore, always imperative to carefully examine the facts of a given case before power of suspension is exercised.
At the same time, it has to be remembered that employee who is placed under suspension is paid subsistence allowance without discharging duties.
Rules provide for payment of subsistence allowance at the rate of 50 per cent for first six months and at the rate of 75 per cent for the remaining period of suspension.
Payment of subsistence allowance without requiring an employee to discharge his duties of the post necessarily places burden on the public exchequer without any advantage to the public.
Therefore, continued suspension of an employee for number of years not only causes injury to the employee concerned but also to the public interest.
This is another reason why the continued suspension of the petitioner deserves to be decided by this Court.
6.
Coming to the claim of the petitioner for quashing of the charge sheet, we would like to observe that the allegations levelled against the petitioner are extremely serious.
He has been charged with the allegations of comitting violation of the trust which the employer has reposed in him as a public servant.
It is often said that every public servant holds a post as a trustee of the public faith and confidence and one who commits breach of this trust loses his right to continue in service.
The very fact that the petitioner has been charged with serious allegations should be sufficient to repel any argument that the proceedings of the enquiry should be quashed.
Being third organ of the State, as contemplated by our constitutional scheme, it is as much the duty of the Court, as of the Legislature and also of the Executive to see that the public property is protected and it will mean that an employee who is guilty of misappropriation, cheating or forgery is not allowed to go scot-free by quashing of the departmental enquiry merely because there is a delay in the issue of charge sheet or in the holding of the enquiry.
It would be a clear disservice to the public interest if on the specious plea of mere delay in the conclusion of the enquiry the Court quashes the proceedings without there being any proof of serious prejudice having been suffered by the employee.
Only in rarest of the rare cases the Court should exercise its jurisdiction to quash the enquiry proceedings and in our considered opinion, the present one cannot be considered a case of that nature.
In fact, failure of the departmental authorities to take appropriate action against the petitioner after receipt of the enquiry report has resulted in a situation where the petitioner has got 75 per cent of his salary by way of subsistence allowance while at the same time he has not discharged duty even for a day.
Therefore, it is not a fit case for exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the proceedings initiated on 1711983 particularly when enquiry report had been received by the competent authority as early as in the year 1984 and even a show cause notice had been served upon the petitioner on 381984.
7.
Before concluding, we cannot refrain from taking cognizance of the unexplained delay on the part of the departmental authorities to finalise the departmental proceedings.
At the cost of repetition, we would like to observe that show cause notice was sent to the petitioner on 381984.
He did submit applications for inspection of the record some of which were accepted.
All that happened upto 1986.
Between 1986 and 1996 no step was taken by the respondents to pass a final order.
Even after the decision of the criminal case, the departmental authorities kept silence.
This obviously resulted in a situation where the petitioner has got subsistence allowance at the rate of 75% of his salary for more than two years after passing of the judgment by the competent Court.
In our opinion, it is a clear case in which the officials concerned have gravely derelicted in the discharge of their duties and in order to see that such delinquency is not repeated in future, the departmental authorities should issue necessary directions.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition in part and quash order of suspension dated 2091982 with effect from today.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service forthwith.
It shall, however, be open to the respondents not to assign him any duty or to take such work from him which may not adversely affect the pending enquiry.
The prayer of the petitioner to quash charge sheet dated 1711983 is rejected.
The competent authority is directed to give an opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner and decide the pending enquiry as early as possible, but, in any case within a period of two months of receipt of copy of this order.
The question of payment of pay and allowances other than the subsistence allowance already received by the petitioner and other monetary benefits shall depend on the final result of the enquiry proceedings.
We also direct the Secretary, Government of Punjab, PWD, B&R, Chandigarh to issue direction for future guidance in such (cases) (sic.)
Petition allowed.