BA Khan, J - Petitioner is a retired KAS officer and is before the Court since 1984 agitating his grievance for promotion to the KAS Super-time scale of Rs. 2600-3100 (unrevised).
This is the third round of litigation launched by him in a relentless battle only to vindicate his claim which may only lead to an increase of a few hundred of rupees in his pensionary benefits.
2.
It transpires that the State-respondent passed Government Order No. 2059-GD of 1983 dated 19121983 promoting some Officers belonging to KAS to its super-time scale.
Of these, 5 officers junior to petitioner were also promoted by this order.
He felt aggrieved and filed writ petition before this court which along with a batch of petitions (leading petition being Writ Petition No. 384/84) was disposed of by judgment dated 18.78.1986 wherein after noticing that he was unjustifiably superseded, it was directed as under:  ``For the aforesaid reasons, the abovesaid petitions of the petitioners are allowed.
There is every justification to quash Government Order No. 2059-GD of 1983 dated 19121983 selecting ten persons in super- time scale to the KAS cadre but considering the administrative difficulties to be faced by the State-respondent especially when the order was passed more than 2 years ago, I refrain from making such an order.
The petitioners have certainly a better merit and they are required to be adjusted to the KAS super-time scale whenever vacancies arise.
A direction is accordingly made to this effect.
There shall be no order as to costs.''
Petitioner feeling dissatisfied by the direction contained in the judgment filed LPA (SW) No. 43 of 1989 on the plea that once his writ petition was allowed by the writ court, it should have quashed the impugned promotion of his junior contenders and directed his promotion retrospectively from 19121983 when the impugned order of promotion was passed.
This appeal was disposed of vide judgment dated 2741995, as under:  ``In the present case, the writ-court has allowed the appellant's writ petition without quashing the order impugned though it has directed his consideration for grant of the scale.
As such we refrain from saying anything on the validity of the direction passed.
It seems that this direction could not be implemented as the appellant had retired from the service meanwhile.
That being so, it is to be seen whether he can be given the benefit of super-time scale now.
His counsel, Mr. Gupta has placed some documents before us to show that this scale was granted even to the retired officers pursuant to court judgment.
There is no reason to disbelieve these documents or to doubt his statement in this regard.
Therefore, on the analogy and considering all aspects of the matter we dispose of this appeal by providing that the respondent-State shall consider grant of KAS super- time scale to appellant on a representation to be made by him w.e.
from 19121983 in accordance with the rules and give him the benefit accruing therefrom and add the same to his pensionary benefits.
His representation shall be disposed of within two months from the date of its receipt.
This shall, however, not entitle him to any arrears of salary.''
A perusal of the aforesaid order passed by the Division Bench shows that the State-respondent had taken the plea that the petitioner could not be given the benefit of super-time scale as he had retired from service meanwhile and noticing his counsel's submission that even retired officers were granted this grade later, it was deemed appropriate to provide the State-respondent once again a chance of mending its fences and redress the petitioner's grievance.
But, on the contrary, it passed Government Order No. 90-GAD of 1996 dated 2511996 strangely by one of its officers whose promotion was found unjustified by the writ court on the petitioner's writ petition, rejecting his representation this time on the specious plea that he could not be promoted as no vacancy existed in 1984.
3.
Petitioner's case in the present writ petition is that this Court had not directed his consideration against the vacancy which had become available in 1984 but, on the contrary, taking cognizance of the fact that the State- respondent had granted such promotion even to the retired officers, had directed the State-respondent to consider him for this promotion with effect from 19121993.
Therefore, it is projected that there was no question of rejecting his claim for promotion for non-availablity of a vacancy in 1984.
Moreover, it is also argued that the order emanated from extraneous considerations as it was passed by one of the opponents of the petitioner whose promotion to the super-time scale of KAS was admittedly found illegal by this court though it was not quashed for administrative exigency.
4.
Respondents have filed objections reiterating the stand spelt out in the impugned Government Order dated 23.1.1996 and all that remains to be seen is: whether petitioner's representation claiming promotion to the KAS super-time scale from 19121983 could have been rejected in the facts and circumstances of the case ?
5.
It is a matter of record that the writ court had allowed the petitioner's writ petition as far back as on 1871986, but, had stopped short of quashing the promotions impugned made by Government Order No. 2059-GD of 1983 dated 19121983 and instead had directed his consideration.
No appeal was taken by the State-respondent against this judgment of the writ court which, if implemented in ordinary course, should have settled the controversy way back in July, 1986.
It was the petitioner who had taken the appeal against this judgment on the plea that once his writ petition was allowed, he was entitled to the relief consequentially.
But, his appeal was also disposed of on noticing the stand taken by the State-respondent that he could not be given the benefit as he had retired from service meanwhile.
6.
The direction contained in the Division Bench judgment dated 2741994, again, if appreciated in right spirit and perspective, should have resulted in the consideration going in favour of the petitioner.
But, the State- respondent in disregard to all norms of elementary justice allowed one of his opponents to consider his matter and reject it.
It is repugnant even to common conscience that the petitioner's opponent should have been entrusted the implementation of the court judgment passed in favour of the petitioner and to act both as a judge and the prosecutor at the same time.
The mala fides of the action are, therefore, writ large on the order impugned which cannot sustain otherwise also for lacking any basis.
7.
Petitioner's claim for promotion after fighting for it for over 12 years stands rejected now on the ground of non-availability of vacancy in 1984.
It is not understandable how the issue of availability of vacancy in 1984 crept up to deny him the benefit when this Court had specifically directed the State-respondent to consider his case for promotion to the super-time scale from 19121983 after finding his supersession unjustified and the promotions of his juniors liable to be quashed.
The matter could have been set at rest with little administrative common sense.
After all it was a matter of giving him the benefit of promotion on paper which would have enhanced his pension by a few hundreds of rupees and not providing him any specific post of which non-availability could be pleaded.
8.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner was wronged through and through.
Firstly, he was superseded which was found unjustified by the writ court along with the promotion of his junior officers including the one who had passed the impugned order now against him.
He was then put off on the plea that he had retired from service and was not entitled to be promoted and now a new issue of non-availability of the post related to 1984 is raised to deny him his due for which he has been before this court for all these years.
9.
It is sad that the petitioner should have been forced to fight every inch for his otherwise justified claim and that it should have taken the State- respondent more than a decade to treat this as a genuine grievance, more so, after retirement when granting him promotion on paper would only have resulted in enhancement of his pension by few hundred rupees.
It is also in bad taste that the functionaries of the State, who were none other than the opponents of his claim, should have been allowed to deal with his case and put off his claim on one untenable reason or the other.
It seems to be a case of traversty of justice and it is in these circumstances that the present writ petition is disposed of with a clear cut and categorical command to the State-respondent to promote the petitioner to the KAS super-time scale retrospectively from 19121983 and to work out the monetary benefits accruing thereby excluding the arrears of salary and to add to his pensionary benefits.
It is further provided that the petitioner's case shall be dealt with in light of the judgments passed by this Court since 1986 by the Chief Secretary of the Government and by no other officer who was a party to the litigation.
This whole exercise shall be completed within two months from the date of receipt of this order.