Harphul Singh Brar, J - In this Revision Petition order Dated 641994 of the Executing Court i.e. Senior Sub Judge, Patiala has been challenged.
The operative part of the order of the learned Senior Sub Judge, Patiala reads as under :-  ``In view of my above discussion, the objectors-judgment debtors are directed to implement the judgment and decree.
However, the decree holder is directed to refund the benefit which he received under the Employees Provident Fund Scheme regarding work-charged service rendered by him.
With these findings the objection petition fails and is dismissed accordingly.''
2.
The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners among others is that the impugned order of the learned Executing Court is cryptic and it does not disclose as to in what manner and to what extent the decree is to be executed.
It does not speak or deal with specifically qua the objections raised by the petitioners qua seniority, pay and allowances, interest @ 18% per annum etc.  3.
I find sufficient force in this contention of the learned councel.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not rebut the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
4.
I have minutely gone through the order of the learned Executing Court.
Learned Executing Court has not dealt with the objections raised by the petitioners and has not given any decision on those objections much less the framing of issues on the basis of the objections raised and then giving its decision its decision thereon.
5.
After perusing the case of both the parties, the Executing Court has simply ordered as stated above i.e. objectors-judgment debtors are directed to implement the judgment and decree.
In my considered view, the order of the learned Executive Court is cryptic and does not deal with the objection raised by the petitioners before it.
The Court has not given any guideline or direction as to in what manner and to what extent the decree in question remains unexecuted.
6.
In this situation, without going into the factual position further, I hold the order of the learned Executing Court as non-speaking and cryptic.
I hereby set aside the order dated 641994 of the learned Executing Court and remand the case back for fresh decision in accordance with law.
I direct the Executing Court to pass a speaking and well reasoned order after dealing with the objections raised before it.
7.
I further direct the Executing Court that it shall decide the objections and the execution application after hearing the concerned parties within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
Resultantly, this Revision Petition is allowed and the order dated 641994 of the learned Executing Court is quashed.
Petition allowed.