NK Kapoor, J - This Judgment shall dispose of regular Second Appeal Nos. 2229 and 2230 of 1990 as both these appeals arise out of the common judgment and decree dated 7.6.1990 passed by the District Judge, Gurdaspur.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2891995 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Batala, removing him service as Conductor as well as forfeiting his balance pay is illegal, null and void, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice and service rules.
Similarly, the order of the appellate authority dated 2621986 as well as the second appellate authority Director Transport, Chandigarh, dated 441986 too suffers from the same infirmity and thus liable to be quashed on identical ground.
3.
As per case of the defendants, the plaintiff who is a conductor in the Punjab Roadways was found to have not issued tickets to three passengers who were travelling from Gurdaspur to Magar Mudian but had received 50 paise each from them.
Similarly, plaintiff is alleged to have not issued tickets to 8 passenger who were travelling from Gurdaspur to Dorangla.
In respect of the aforesaid charges, an inquiry was initiated ultimately leading to the passing of the order of dismissal from service and forfeiture of his balance pay which the plaintiff challenged before the Civil Court.
4.
The suit of the plaintiff was resisted by the defendants on merit of the pleadings as well as maintainability of the suit before the Civil Court.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed:-  (1) Whether the impugned order dated 26.2.86 passed by the Divisional Manager and the impugned order dated 441986 passed by the Director are illegal, null and void and not binding on the plaintiff as alleged ?
OPP (2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction as prayed for ?
OPP.
(3) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD.
(4) Relief.
6.
The trial court took up issues No. 1 and 2 together.
The trial Court whereas agreed with the conclusion arrived at by the Enquiry Officer, yet found the punishment imposed to be very harsh and so chose to modify the same from dismissal of service to stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
Issue No. 3 was not pressed by the defendants and so was decided against them.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed to the extent as noticed above.
7.
Feeling dissatisfied with the judgment and decree of the trial Court, plaintiff as well as defendants filed separate appeals before the District Judge.
Before the lower appellate Court, both the counsel in all fairness conceded that the lower Court was not competent to convert the punishment i.e. order of removal from service to one for reinstatement and awarding punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
The District Judge too agreed with the views expressed by the respective counsel representing the parties.
The counsel, however, differ as to whether the case be remitted to the trial Court for fresh adjudication or the same may be decided as no evidence, in fact, was to be adduced by either of the parties.
Thus, keeping in view the peculiar facts of the case, the District Judge thought it appropriate to hear the counsel and decide the matter.
8.
Counsel for the plaintiff urged that a bare perusal of the departmental enquiry file reveals that the plaintiff had summoned three witnesses in defence whereas only one has been examined.
Enquiry Officer despite plaintiff's protest chose to close the defence evidence which has adversely prejudiced the case of the plaintiff.
Thus, on this ground alone, the order of dismissal from service and its affirmation before the appellate authority and second appellate authority is illegal and unsustainable on this ground alone.
Elaborating, the counsel argued that a delinquent person is entitled to a fair opportunity to present his case.
Denial of such an opportunity vitiates the trial and so the same deserves to be quashed.
Support was sought from Rule 8(17), Part IV of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short `Punishment and Appeal Rules').
9.
Counsel for the defendants, however, argued that since no precise purpose was given for summoning these witnesses, the Enquiry Officer was well within his right to shut the unnecessary evidence.
On considering the relevant circumstances and relying upon the aforesaid Punishment and Appeal Rules, the lower appellate Court found the impugned order unsustainable in law.
Resultantly, the appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted, thus decreeing the suit of the plaintiff; whereas the appeal filed by the defendant was ordered to be dismissed.
10.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant, non-examination of the two witnesses has in no manner prejudiced the case of the plaintiff.
Since no precise purpose was mentioned while seeking examination of the two persons, the Enquiry Officer in the facts and circumstances of the present case rightly found the prayer made by the plaintiff to be devoid of any substance and so ordered for closure of his evidence.
In any case, as per facts of the case, plaintiff was found by the checking staff to have not issued three tickets to one set of passenger and another eight tickets to the other set of passengers thereby causing wrongful loss to the Punjab Roadways and, of course, pocketed the amount himself.
No worthwhile explanation has been given by the plaintiff before the Enquiry Officer in this regard.
Thus, there is no infirmity in the proceedings conducted by the Enquiry Officer calling for any interference by a Civil Court.
Even if it be taken that there has been slight infringement of procedural law, the same does not vitiate the proceedings as, in fact no prejudice has been caused to the plaintiff.
11.
Admittedly, plaintiff sought examination of three witnesses in defence in the departmental enquiry.
One witness was produced by him on 181984 and was examined.
Evidence of the remaining two witnesses was struck off as they did not come present.
There is no indication in any zimni order passed by the Enquiry Officer that these witnesses were to be brought by the plaintiff on his own.
Even at the time of summoning these witnesses, no objection was raised as to their examination or purpose for which they were being produced.
Rule 8(17) of Punishment and Appeal rules reads as under:-  ``The evidence on behalf of the government employee shall then be produced.
The government employee may examine himself on his own behalf, if he so prefers either at the outset or after the conclusion of examination of the witnesses produced by him.
The witnesses produced by the government employee shall then be examined and shall be liable to cross-examination, re- examination and examination by the inquiring authority according to the provision applicable to the witness for the punishing authority.''
As per aforesaid Rule, a government employee can appear as his own witness at the outset or after the conclusion of examination of witnesses to be produced by him.
Thus, this provision envisages production of evidence in support of the plea raised by the government employee as well as his own examination.
This being so, there is no escape from the conclusion that the plaintiff has been deprived of his right to examine the witnesses in support of his case.
Such being the position, prejudice to the case set up by the plaintiff can even be inferred.
Depriving a person of his right to examine witnesses of his choice cannot be termed to be a case of some procedural lapse on the part of the Enquiry Officer.
Rather, such an omission goes to the root of the case and, in fact, is fatal to the enquiry.
Thus, I find no merit in the plea advanced by the counsel for the appellant.
12.
The decision in case reported as State Bank of Patiala and others v. SK Sharma, JT 1996(3) SC 722 : 1996(2) SCT 568(SC)., also does not help the case of the appellant in any manner.
While dealing with the cases of violation of procedural provision, the Court held that procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent officer/employee.
Violation of any and every procedural provision cannot be said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held or order passed except in cases falling under `no notice', `no opportunity' and `no hearing' categories.
Thus, the complaint of violation of procedural provision is to be examined from the point of view of prejudice, viz, whether such violation has prejudiced the delinquent officer/employee in defending himself properly and effectively.
If it is found that he has been so prejudiced, appropriate orders have to be made to repair and remedy the prejudice including setting aside the enquiry and/or the order of punishment.
As per facts of the present case, the plaintiff has been deprived of his right to place his view point.
Such a denial per se vitiate the enquiry and so the conclusion arrived at by the lower appellate Court is, indeed, appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the case.
13.
No other point has been urged or claimed.
14.
Resultantly, I find no merit in the appeals and dismiss the same.
No order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.