RL Anand, J - Shri Tailak Raj, the petitioner, has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents including respondent Nos. 3 and 4 i.e. Management of Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Limited (hereinafter called `the Corporation') praying for the issuance of writ of certiorari, Mandamus and for the quashment of the impugned award (Annexure P.9) passed by Labour Court and it has been pleaded by the petitioner that he was appointed as workman (Dairy Extension Worker) by the Managing Director of the Corporation with effect from 111967 and the term of his appointment was extended up to 3131971 by the Corporation.
Due to hard and efficient work he completed his probationary period to the entire satisfaction of the management.
He was made regular vide letter dated 1521972.
Although his appointing authority was the Managing Director, the General Manager of the Branch at Ludhiana of the Corporation started disciplinary proceedings against him and issued a charge-sheet dated 4111974.
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge-sheet.
The allegations contained in the charge-sheet were absolutely false and frivolous.
A domestic inquiry against the petitioner was ordered and finally the petitioner was dismissed from service on 28.5.1976.
He challenged the order of dismissal in the Labour Court, which passed the award (Annexure P.9) holding that the penalty of dismissal was not justified on the part of the management.
A lenient view was taken by the Labour Court and a lesser punishment was awarded to the petitioner in the ends of justice and it was ordered that he would be reinstated into service with the benefit of continuity of service and by way of punishment the Labour Court awarded stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect and it was further declared by the Labour Court that petitioner would not be entitled to back wages and the period of his absence from duty shall be treated as leave of the kind due.
The present petitioner Shri Tilak Raj has given the challenge to the award in the present writ petition on the grounds that illegal, invalid and void award has been passed.
The petitioner was entitled to be reinstated into service with benefit of full back wages.
As the charges against the petitioner were not established beyond doubt, it has also been pleaded by the petitioner that the award to the Labour Court is passed on non-proper appreciation of evidence.
The Labour Court itself has come to the conclusion that the termination of the petitioner's service was illegal.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
At one point of time, Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 gave the appearance but after the stage of admission of the main writ petition, no return has been filed by these respondent.
I have heard Shri BN Sehgal, counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, with whose assistance I have been able to go through the record of this case.
3.
The impugned order (Annexure P.9) shows that petitioner, Shri Tilak Raj was charge-sheeted by the Department on three counts:-  (1) That he had been dispatching more milk than what had been receiving from the milk assembling centres.
(2) He had destroyed various records such as Form No. PD-1, which were supposed to be kept for at least one year.
(3) He did not check form No. PD-1 or its details to ensure the quality of milk received from the collection centres.
In the domestic inquiry all the three charges were proved against petitioner but the Labour Court had exonerated the petitioner from the first two charges but held under charge No. 3 that there was dereliction of duty on the part of the petitioner.
In this regard it will be useful for me to refer to the observations as contained in para 11 of the impugned award.
It is reproduced as follows:-  Shri BN Sehgal further stressed that there is reliance by the Inquiry Officer on the statement of Amrit Singh, workman during inquiry proceedings, who stated that Tilak Raj used to add 20 Kg.
of water in milk.
The amount of excess bill used to be received by Tilak Raj.
Shri Amrit K Singh does not remember since how long this was being continued and he states that the was sure that this was common practice in their department.
He was put a question whether that acceptance of bribe in is an offence.
Shri Avtar Singh replied that he does not think it to be a bribe.
In fact, he is a witness to be claimed to be a party to this design and he is being relied upon by the Inquiry Officer.
Shri SK Arora was examined during inquiry proceedings.
He stated that Shri Amrik Singh ``Incharge V.I.C., Raikot, reported in the presence of the General Manager that Tilak Raj was increasing 20 kgs.
of water to the milk every day and had been collecting the payment from Avtar Singh on every day.
Shri Avtar Singh had stated that he used to adjust milk in different vans.
Actually, he is an implicit witness and reliance cannot be placed on the testimony of this witness because a person who had been a party to such an act, would try to save his own skin.
Even the Inquiry Officer's report reveals at Page 2.
"I am not convinced that there is serious doubt in the whole of the affairs and mal-practices had been carried out by one way or the other and Shri Tilak Raj could not controvert the position regarding the bogus entry made by Tilak Raj as explined by Shri SK Arora, on the basis of records produced by him.''
It would mean that the Inquiry Officer had certain doubts about the integrity of the workman which means that there was no clear proof that he had committed any mal-practice or as to what extent he was responsible for exaggerating the quality of milk received.
Charge No. 2 does not stand proved and regarding charge No. 3, there is only dereliction of duty.''
After considering the report to the Inquiry Officer and the witnesses produced by the management before the Inquiry Officer, the Labour Court came to the conclusion that petitioner did not perform his duties efficiently and his integrity was doubtful.
After considering all the pros and cons of the case, the Labour Court invoked the provisions of section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act and lesser punishment in the ends of justice was awarded.
4.
The learned counsel, Shri Sehgal submitted that at the first instance the Labour Court itself came to the conclusion that there was no proper basis before the Inquiry Officer to come to the conclusion in order to held that the petitioner was guilty of charge Nos. 1 and 2, and in these circumstances it was not proper on the part of the Labour Court to say that there was dereliction of duty on the part of petitioner under charge No. 3 as the report of the Inquiry Officer has not been believed by the Labour Court, therefore, while invoking the provisions of section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act, the learned Labour Court ought to have awarded the back wages while reinstating the petitioner into services.
The argument of Mr. Sehgal is not acceptable to this Court.
This Court is not to sit as a Court of Appeal over the judgment of the Labour Court which had apprised rightly the record to the domestic inquiry.
I have to see whether there is any error of jurisdiction or patent error in the award so as to interfere with it under Article 226 of the Constitution.
If the petitioner had directly entered into an act of embezzlement or tampering with the record as alleged by the management, yet he could be held guilty of dereliction of his duties when he did not take proper care in order to ensure the quality of milk received from the collection centres.
The Labour Court rightly came to the conclusion that the impugned allegations proved against the petitioner did not justify a case of extreme penalty and rightly invoked the provisions of section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act which authorises a Labour Court, in given circumstances and after taking into consideration the attending circumstances, to set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct the reinstatment of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit or as the circumstances of the case may requires.
5.
Shri Sehgal submits that the Labour Court could not award two punishments at the same time while invoking powers under section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
His client has been awarded the penalty of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect and also the back wages have been deprived to him and the period of his absence from duty was ordered to be treated as leave of the kind due.
This argument of Mr. Sehgal is correct as the punishments awarded by the Labour Court would be attracted by the principles of double jeopardy.
Since the award in the present case has been passed in the year 1980, it may not be proper for this Court to remit the award to the Labour Court to against pass appropriate order.
This Court would like to exercise the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution and order that management would not deprive the workman of the increment with cumulative effect as ordered by the Labour Court.
Now, the workman would be entitled to the reinstatement to his services with benefit of continuity of service.
However, he would not be entitled to any back wages and his period of absence from duty would, of course, be treated as leave of the kind due.
Resultantly the present writ petition is partly allowed.
The award (Annexure P.9) is partly set aside and is hereby modified as indicated above.
In all other respects the same is hereby confirmed.
With above directions and observations the present writ petition stands disposed of with no orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.