RL Anand, J - The State of the Punjab has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 16101995 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Patiala who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 2091994 passed by the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Patiala and both the Courts below decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondents Piara Lal Constable for declaration as prayed for.
2.
Piara Lal plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration against the State of Punjab and Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala to the effect that his retirement age was 60 years and orders dated 29111988 by which he was retired at the age of 58 years was illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void, against principles of natural justice and against the service rules and regulations.
His main case was that he joined the services in the erstwhile Pepsu State on 2272006 BK (4111949) and his date of birth is 1121930.
He was retired by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala vide office order dated 29111988 which order is illegal.
He ought to have been retired at the age of 60 years.
3.
The suit was contested by the State which has just tried to justify the order by stating that at the time of the passing of the order, the plaintiff was Class III employee being a constable.
After the merger of Pepsu with the State of Punjab, the plaintiff's services are to be governed by the Punjab Police Rules and as such the impugned order dated 29111988 is legal.
The State also took the other legal pleas.
4.
On the above controversy raised by the parties the learned Court of Senior Sub Judge, Patiala decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent and granted a declaration by holding the impugned orders dated 29111988 as illegal and gave a declaration to the effect that the plaintiff is entitled to continue up to the age of 60 years with all rights and benefits and previlages.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment of learned trial Court, the State filed an appeal which was also dismissed by the impugned judgment and decree dated 16101995.
The learned Appellate Court placed reliance on several authorities while dismissing the appeal reported as Niranjan Singh v. The Secretary to Govt. Punjab, 1990(1) SLR 794; Gulzara Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1983(1) All India Services Law Journal 690; Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab through the Secretary to Govt. Irrigation Department, Chandigarh, 1994(2) RSJ 140 : 1994(2) SCT 413(P&H).
Aggrieved by the judgments and decrees of the Courts below, the present appeal, which is being disposed of with the assistance of Sr. Deputy Advocate General, who appeared on behalf of the appellants and Shri SK Sharma, Advocate, who gave appearance on behalf of the respondents.
6.
The only point for determination is whether the plaintiff-respondent Piara Lal was entitled to retire at the age 60 years as held by the Courts below or at the age of 58 years as contended by the learned Sr. Deputy Advocate General who relied upon a Division Bench authority of this Court passed in C.W.P.
No. 8186 of 1994, Tripat Singh v. State of Punjab etc., decided on 891994 and the ratio of this judgment is "accordingly, we hold that the claim of the petitioners in all these writ petitions that they should be treated as members of Class IV service or that they have a right to continue till the age of 60 years cannot be sustained.
It is the post held by them at the time of retirement which is relevant for determining the age of superannuation.
Since, one of the petitioners is holding a Class IV post and all of them are in fact members of Class III Services, they have no right to continue till the age of 60 years."
It was further held as follows:- `` The action of the respondents in retiring the petitioners who are admittedly members of the Class II Services, at the age of 58 years is, thus, in strict conformity with the provision of the Pepsu Service Regulations."
7.
Further, the Division Bench of this Court held that "As already observed, it is the post held by the petitioner at the time of his retirement that determines the age of superannuation."
8.
Lastly it was observed "after a consideration of the matter, we are of the considered view that even if an employee initially joins a post in a Class IV Service, he cannot continue till the age of 60 years if at the time of retirement, he is holding a Class III post for which the age of retirement is admittedly 58 years."
9.
Adverting to the facts in hand Piara Lal Constable plaintiff-respondent was Class III employee at the time of the passing of the impugned order and in view of the Division Bench pronouncement it can be safely held that both the Courts below fell in error and did not interpret legal provisions of law while giving a declaration in favour of the plaintiff.
Both the impugned judgments and decrees cannot sustain in the eyes of law in view of Division Bench pronouncement of this Court.
10.
Faced with this situation Shri SK Sharma, Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent submitted that as per the Pepsu Services Regulations Volume I issued by the Finance Department and vide Appendix No. 1, a police constable was an inferior employee in the erstwhile State of Punjab, and, therefore, his age of retirement should be treated as 60 years.
The argument is devoid of any merit.
The determining factor is to see the status of a particular employee when the impugned orders were passed.
It is not disputed that a constable in the services of State of Punjab is a Class IV employee and as such the plaintiff could be validly retired at the age of 58 years and not 60 years, as claimed by him.
The counsel Shri Sharma has also placed reliance on certain authorities of this Court reported as Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(2) Recent Services Judgments 140 : 1994(2) SCT 413(P&H); Gulzara Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1983(1) All India Services Law Journal 690 and a short order dated 20.11.1995 passed in R.S.A.
No. 2610 of 1995 State of Punjab v. Mohinder Singh.
All these authorities are of Single Bench which cannot supersede and take precedence above the Division Bench authority of this Court which is clear and admits no other exception.
11.
In this view of the matter appeal of the State of Punjab is hereby accepted and the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are hereby set aside and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent Piara Lal stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.