RL Anand, J - Ombir Singh has filed the present writ petition against the Management of M/s Partap Steel Limited, Mathrua Road, Faridabad and another, under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the impugned award dated 2221994 Annexure P-1 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad and the impugned action of the Management i.e. respondent No. 1 terminating the service of the petitioner w.e.f.
25121989.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was a workman and was employed as Mechanic w.e.f.
251988 by the Management i.e. respondent No. 1.
His last drawn salary was Rs. 825/- per month.
He was appointed against a permanent post.
His work was satisfactory throughout and his services were terminated without assigning any reason on 25121989.
He was not paid any retrenchment compensation and the action on the part of the Management is in violation of provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
After the termination of his services he raised an industrial issue which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication but the Labour Court passed the award dated 2221994 holding that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief in view of the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The petitioner alleges that the award is liable to be set aside as he had completed one year continuous service before the termination of his services and that his services could not be terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act and in these circumstances, the award as well as the action on the part of the Management was illegal.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to respondent No. 1 which filed reply and contested the averments of the petitioner.
According to the respondent the petitioner was appointed as a Tractor Mechanic w.e.f.
251988 against a temporary post on a salary of Rs. 650/-.
He was appointed up to 25121989 when the contract of his services came to an end and relationship of employer and employee automatically came to an end.
This action on the part of the respondent does not amount to retrenchment and provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act are not applicable.
4.
This writ petition is being disposed of with the assistance of Shri CP Sapra, Advocate, who gave appearance on behalf of the petitioner, and Shri PK Mutneja, Advocate, who appeared on behalf of respondents.
5.
The learned Labour Court while rejecting the claim of the petitioner has held in paras No. 9 and 10 as follows :-  ``9.
The workman examined himself on oath and also placed the copy of ESI Card Ex.W-1, Wages slips Ex.W-2 to Ex.W-18.
A copy of ESI card of one Raghubir Ex.W-19.
He also deposed that Raghubir Mechanic who was junior to him was retained and his services were illegally terminated.
On the basis of this evidence, it has been contended on behalf of the workman that the workman had rendered continuous service for a period of more than 240 days.
His services thus, could not be terminated without making payment of retrenchment compensation under Section 25-F In the end, it was urged that the impugned action of the management is illegal, as the services of a junior mechanic Raghubir were not terminated.
Consequently, the workman is entitled to be reinstated into service with full back wages.
10.
Workman admitted in his cross-examination that he had given an application Ex.M-1 for seeking appointment.
The order of appointment is printed on the last page of the application Ex.M-1 in which it is mentioned that the workman was being appointed upto 251289.
This order was also got noted from the workman and his signatures to this effect also appear on the same application form.
The management has further placed on record a copy of the appointment letter Ex.M-2 in which it was mentioned that the appointment was purely temporary and was likely to last up to 251289.
In the end of this appointment letter, it is mentioned that contents of the letter (Ex.M-2) have been made to understand to the workman and that he had agreed to abide by these terms and conditions.
The signatures of the workman are available on this appointment letter Ex.M-2.
The perusal of these signatures and the admitted signatures of the workman available on the application Ex.M-1, clearly shows that the same were of the workman.
The plea taken by the workman that he had not appended his signatures on the appointment letter Ex.M-2 is thus, not tenable.
Consequently, it is held that its stands, proved from the evidence of record that the workman was appointed on purely temporary basis for a fixed period up to 25121989''.
6.
Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act defines retrenchment, which means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include termination of the service of a workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of the employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein.
7.
A reference of Annexure R1 shows that the Management while issuing appointment letter appointed the petitioner as the temporary workman against a purely temporary vacancy on a consolidated salary of Rs. 650/- w.e.f.
251988 and it was further written in the said appointment letter that the services of the petitioner were likely to continue up to 25121989.
Thus the case of the petitioner is squarely covered under Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act and it does not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) and this aspect of the case has been rightly considered by the Labour Court and I do not see any error of jurisdiction on the part of the Labour Court while appreciating the evidence.
This Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal over the judgment of the Labour Court and writ of a certiorari cannot be issued even if this Court is likely to take a different view than the one taken by the Labour Court on the appreciation of evidence.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.