RL Anand, J - Girdhari Lal has filed the present civil writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for the quashment of the orders Annexure P-1 to P-4 against the Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh and the Secretary House Allotment Committee, respondents No. 1 and 2 respectively.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he is working as a peon in the office of the Director of Industrial Training Haryana, Sector 17, Chandigarh and was allotted Govt. accommodation No. 2645-A, Sector 27-C, Chandigarh in the year 1971 and since then he is living in the said house.
His brother-in- law Tilak Raj is staying with him.
At the instance of one Hem Raj Sharma who is residing in House No. 2644-A, house allotted to the petitioner was cancelled by respondent No. 2 on the grounds that the petitioner had sublet the house in dispute to his brother-in-law Tilak Raj without ascertaining the real facts.
According to the petitioner, his brother-in-law Tilak Raj is a young man of 20 years and is unmarried and is living with the petitioner in the said house.
By no stretch of imagination it could be said that the petitioner has sub-let the house in question in favour of his brother-in-law.
The Secretary, House Allotment Committee, Chandigarh cancelled the allotment vide orders dated 2731984 on the ground that the petitioner had sublet the Govt. accommodation to Tilak Raj.
The petitioner gave reply to the said letter and it was categorically averred that the petitioner is living in the said house and he had not parted with possession in favour of any one much less the question of subletting does not arise in favour of Tilak Raj who was living temporarily with the petitioner as his brother-in-law.
This objection of the petitioner was not considered by the House Allotment Authority and no opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead evidence to establish his plea.
Resultantly, order Annexure P-1 was passed which according to the petitioner is illegal, arbitrary and discriminatory, mala fide and void on the ground that the petitioner never parted the possession of the quarter to his brother-in-law who was residing with him temporarily being the brother of his wife.
The petitioner along with his wife and children is still occupying the Govt. accommodation and he is in exclusive possession.
On the basis of the orders Annexure P-1, orders Annexure P-2 were passed by the Estate Officer while exercising the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, who issued a notice under section 4(1) of the said Act.
Thereafter, final orders were passed vide Annexure P-3 and the petitioner was directed to vacate the premises.
The petitioner filed an appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, who also dismissed the appeal vide judgment dated 17.5.1985 Annexure P-4.
According to the petitioner, a person will be considered to be unauthorised occupant only if he in breach of his allotment letter sublets any portion of the same or commits contravention of the terms of the allotment.
In the present case, the petitioner has not committed any contravention.
Even if, it is assumed for the sake of argument that Tilak Raj is sub-tenant of the petitioner still the occupation of the petitioner with regard to the quarter allotted to him would not be considered as unauthorised in view of the provisions of the Public Premises Act.
With the above averments, the petitioner has prayed for the quashment of the orders Annexures P-1 to P-4.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
No written statement has been filed on the record.
4.
I have heard Shri Ravinder Chopra, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner had Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Sr. Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
It is a matter of common knowledge to all of us that when a Govt. employee is allotted a Govt. accommodation, it is allotted for this benefit and of the benefit of his family.
Such allottee is not supposed to either sublet the Govt. accommodation or part thereof to anybody else.
A relation of such Govt. employee, if visits his relation cannot be termed as a sub-tenant or a person who is in unauthorised possession of the premises.
However, if the allottee allows his relation to use the premises with such intention that he may settle under his shelter in that house/accommodation, such act on the part of the allottee will be considered as unauthorised.
Family means that wife or the husband, as the case may be, and children, step-children, legally adopted children, parents, brothers or sisters as ordinarily reside with the employee and are dependent upon him.
A brother-in-law is not a member of the family.
Keeping in view the definition of the family, it cannot be said that Tilak Raj, the brother-in-law of the petitioners who was an employee in the Needle factory was the member of the family of Girdhari Lal petitioner.
Sub- tenancy as understood under the Tenancy Act has no relevancy with the definition of unauthorised occupant as required under the Public Premises Act, 1971.
As I stated above, the allotment of Govt. accommodation is a facility which is being extended to the employee and as an employee and such employee is not supposed to convert the user to the property in such a manner that he may induct his relation with such intention or knowledge so as to allow his occupation in the said premises.
In this regard, I would like to refer to Annexure P-1 which speaks of that the House Allotment Committee was conclusively satisfied from the report of the Vigilance Authority that Girdhari Lal had sublet the Govt. quarter to Tilak Raj who was working in the Needle factory.
It is the case of the petitioner himself that he was heard and was allowed to put forth his case.
Thereafter, the proceedings went to the camp of Estate Officer exercising the powers under the Public Premises Act, 1971 and he issued notice Annexure P-2 to the petitioner calling upon him to establish why he should not be evicted from the premises.
Not being satisfied with the explanation of the petitioner orders Annexure P-3 were passed under Section 5 of the said Act against Girdhari Lal petitioner and against all such persons who were in unauthorised occupation of the premises to vacate the premises within 30 days.
The Act provides the remedy to the unauthorised occupant to satisfy the Court and in present case the Court of Additional District Judge, Chandigarh heard the appeal of Shri Girdhari Lal and disposed of the matter vide operative para No. 3 of the judgment which is reproduced as follows :-  ``Now in appeal it has been contended before me that subletting, in fact, involves parting with possession for some consideration.
According to him living of Shri Tilak Raj with the appellant in the same house does not amount to subletting.
The appellant also placed on the file copies from the record of the schedule show that the children of the appellant are shown therein as residing on this address of the house.
In support of this contention the counsel for the the appellant cited before me Feroze Ali Shah v. Jamil Ali Shah and another, 1981 Vol.
I RCJ 77, Nanak Chand v. Sansar Chand and another, 1982(1) RCR (Rent) 220.
Both these authorities are given on the provisions of Rent Restriction Act and in these authorities it has been held that there cannot be subletting in favour of a near relation.
More so when they are residing with the tenant in the same premises.
There can be no dispute with the proposition of law laid down in these two authorities.
But the question is as to whether these provisions of subletting applies to the occupants of Govt. premises.
I am of the view that subletting as ascertained by the court for the purposes of Rent Act case will not apply in the case of Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act, under Premises Act family has been defined under section SR 317-AMI(G) as under :- ``Family means that wife or husband, as the case may be, and children step children, legally adopted children, parents, brothers or sisters as ordinarily reside with the employee and are dependent on him.''
``A perusal of the above shows that the brother-in-law of the appellant does not come within the definition of family.
Moreover, it is also to be seen that he is not dependent upon the appellant.
It is not disputed in the present case that Tilak Raj is an employee in the needle (sic) upon the appellant.
As living of Shri Tilak Raj, who is not a member of the family of the appellant is admitted by the appellant, so I am of the view that this eviction was rightly passed and there is no ground to interfere with same in this appeal''.
6.
The entire stress of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Tilak Raj, in no manner, could be held to a sub-tenant of Shri Girdhari Lal petitioner and in support of his contention, the interpretation sought to be given to a sub-tenant under the Rent Act is being pressed.
But that interpretation would not come to the rescue of the petitioner, once it is established that in breach of the terms of allotment he has allowed Tilak Raj to stay in those premises not as a causal visitor but with the intention or knowledge to continue there for a long time, this would certainly make the petitioner as unauthorised occupant as he had committed the breach of the terms of the allotment.
Otherwise also, it is difficult for the authorities to prove the sub-tenancy by direct evidence.
Even if, it is assumed for the sake of argument that Tilak Raj is a close relation of the petitioner.
After all it is a secret arrangement between the allottee and sub-tenant and the authorities at no point of time could be a witness to such arrangement which can only be proved by circumstantial evidence.
This court is not to sit as a court of appeal over the decision of the authorities under the Act but to ensure itself that there must not be any lragment violation to the said provisions.
It is the case of the petitioner himself that he was heard by the House Allotment Committee.
He could again prove his case successfully before the authorities under the Act in response to the notice issued under Section 4(1) of the Public Premises Act, 1971.
He could not prove it successfully.
The learned Additional District Judge also affirmed that verdict of the authorities, and dismissed the appeal of the appellant.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to establish that the impugned orders Annexures P-1 to P-4 are illegal, against the vires of Public Premises Act, 1971.
Even if this Court may take a different interpretation than the one given by the Additional District Judge, still while exercising the writ jurisdiction, the question of fact cannot be disturbed because sub-tenancy/unauthorised occupation is a matter of evidence which can be only proved by leading evidence before the authorities.
Once the proper procedure has been followed and the evidence has been appreciated and discussed, the scope of this court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India does not go to the extent to disturb this findings which are based on the proper appreciation of evidence.
7.
In this view of the matter, this Court is of the opinion that the petition is devoid of any merit which is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.