NK Aggrawal, J - This is a petition by the employer filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, seeking the quashing of the award dated 1591980 whereby the Labour Court held the termination of service of the workman, Shiv Dutt Sharma, as bad in law.
2.
The petitioner-company is a private limited concern.
Workman Shiv Dutt Sharma had been employed on 1121974 on probation for six months.
The probation period was to expire on 3151975 but, before that, the petitioner-company extended the probation period, vide order dated 2851975 for a further period of six months.
During this extended period of probation, the services of the workman were terminated with effect from 3171975.
3.
The workman challenged the termination of his service before the Labour Court and his plea was accepted.
The Labour Court directed the employer- company to reinstate the workman.
4.
The petitioner's plea in support of the termination order of the workman is based on the principle that no reason is required to be assigned either while extending the period of probation or dispensing with the services of a probationer during the extended period of probation.
5.
While extending the period of probation of the workman, Shiv Dutt Sharma, the employer-company informed him on 2851975 in the following terms:-  ``Your services during the initial six months' probation have not proved to be up to the mark but, at your request, the Management has decided to give you further opportunity, and your probationary services have been extended for a further period of six months w.e.f.
161975.
You are expected to improve your performance during the extended period of probation.''
The petitioner's main thrust of the argument is that the probationary period had been extended because the workman had not proved up to the mark and, moreover, it was at his own request.
It is contended that no reasons were required to be given except saying that the services of the workman have not been found up to the mark.
However, there is no grievance against the order dated 2851975 whereby the period of probation was extended for further six months with effect from 161975.
6.
The order, whereby the probationer's services were dispensed with, was issued by the employer-company on 3171975.
The extended period had not expired and it is during the period of extension that the services of the workman were dispensed with.
The following two paragraphs of the termination letter dated 3171975 are relevant :-  ``Your probationary period was extended at your request with effect from 161975 giving you opportunity to improve on your performance.
It has been found that, instead of showing improvement, your performance has further deteriorated as regards discipline and devotion to duty.
In view of the further deterioration in your performance, it has been decided by the Management to terminate your services with effect from 31st July, 1975 (AN).''
7.
The Labour Court agreed with the plea raised by the employer-company that the workman was a probationer at the time his services were terminated.
However, while deciding issue No. 2, as to whether the work of the workman was unsatisfactory, and if so, to what effect, the Labour Court reached the finding that the Management had failed to prove this issue by any cogent evidence.
The Labour Court noticed that the witness of the Management had admitted the fact of over-time allowance at single rate and, therefore, it seemed that this may be a cause of grievance for the Management in case of demand of overtime allowance by the workman concerned.
The view taken by the Labour Court is patently incorrect because there was nothing on record to show that the workman had been punished on account of raising a grievance about the over-time allowance.
In the termination order, there is no mention of any charge or a grievance.
It has already been noticed that the employer-company, while terminating the service of the petitioner, simply made an observation that the workman had not shown improvement and his performance had further deteriorated as regards the discipline and devotion to duty.
This observation cannot be treated to be in the nature of a charge or a stigma.
A probationer's service is liable to be terminated if his work is found to be unsatisfactory.
If, however, a charge is levelled, it is necessary to conduct an enquiry and the termination would depend on the result of that enquiry.
The workman in the present case has neither made any allegation of mala fides against the employer-company nor any such evidence was brought on record.
The extension of the probation period, on the other hand, indicated that the employer-company did not nurture any mala fides otherwise the probation period would not have been extended at all.
It appears that the employer-company wanted to give an opportunity to the workman for improvement and, therefore, at the request of the workman, the probation period was extended for further six months.
Since the workman did not show any improvement in his performance, his services were dispensed with after the expiry of two months during the extended probationary period of six months.
There was no occasion nor any requirement to serve the charge-sheet or to hold an enquiry inasmuch as there was neither a charge put up against the workman nor any grievance, other than that relating to unsatisfactory performance, had been raised.
If the work and conduct of any employee are found to be not satisfactory or not up to the mark, the employer can dispense with the services of the probationer before the expiry of the probationary period.
Supreme Court had an occasion to examine the case of a probationer, whose services had been terminated, in Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 2192.
That was a case where certain charges of misconduct against a member of the Subordinate Judicial Service had been made.
Though the officer was a probationer but, since certain charges of misconduct were under examination in enquiry, the termination of the service was held to be illegal, because the termination was by way of punishment.
In another matter relating to the termination of a probationer, the Supreme Court in Bishan Lal Gupta v. The State of Haryana and others, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 363, observed as under :-  ``Where a probationer's services are terminated by an innocuous order after holding summary inquiry only for determining his suitability to continue in service and giving him ample opportunity to answer whatever is alleged against him, the Supreme Court would certainly not interfere under Article 136 on a merely technical plea that the case deserved a further enquiry.
It must be shown that such an enquiry could serve a useful purpose.
The facts must indicate that, if this fuller inquiry was held, the Government servant will be found to be blameless.
Otherwise, further prolongation of such litigation is pointless.''
8.
In KV Krishnamani v. Lalit Kala Academy, 1996(3) RSJ 381 : 1996(4) SCT 255, the Supreme Court observed that the very object of the probation is to test the suitability and, if the appointing authority finds that the candidate is not suitable, it certainity has power to terminate the services of the employee.
In that case, the employee had been appointed initially on ad hoc basis and thereafter, with a view to regularising his services, he was kept on probation.
During probation, his services, having been found to be not satisfactory, were terminated.
The Supreme Court dismissed the appeal of the workman.
9.
In the case of the petitioner, the termination order dated 3171975 does not contain any charge against him and only speaks of the deterioration in his performance.
Since the workman failed to show improvement during the extended period of probation, his services were dispensed with.
The order does not suffer from any illegality or invalidity.
10.
The petition succeeds and the order of the Labour Court, dated 1591980 is quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.