RL Anand, J - Raj Kumar petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents with a prayer for the issuance of a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ or direction for quashing the part of the award dated 381988 passed by respondent No. 2 who did not reinstate the petitioner into services, rather awarded compensation to the extent of Rs. 3,000/- in lump sum.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the Labour Court erred in not reinstating the petitioner into services and also in not awarding the full back wages.
2.
The case of the petitioner in the present writ petition is that he worked as Electrician (Generator Operator) with respondent No. 1 for more than 5 years when his services were terminated w.e.f.
10.7.1986.
Respondent No. 1 did not pay any retrenchment compensation.
The petitioner raised as industrial issue and took a specific plea that his services were terminated without the compliance of provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The matter was referred to Labour Court, respondent No. 2 who gave award Annexure P-1 on 381988 and held that retrenchment of the petitioner was void ab initio.
But instead of granting the relief of reinstatement with full back wages, the Labour Court gove compensation amount of Rs. 3,000/- which in the opinion of the Labour Court was adequate for the illegal retrenchment.
It has been, inter alia, alleged by the petitioner that once the Labour Court had found that the termination was void ab initio, the only relief which the Labour Court could give was to put the petitioner into service with full back wages and by not doing so, the Labour Court had committed illegality.
It has also been pleaded that at least the Labour Court was bound to award back wages w.e.f.
10.7.1986 up to the date of the award dated 381988.
Even the compensation which has been assessed by the Labour Court is too inadequate.
It ought to have awarded 12 years wages on the basis of the last wages drawn by the petitioner while awarding the compensation.
With the above averments, the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent No. 1 who preferred not to file any reply to the writ petition inspite of the its admission.
4.
Now the writ petition has been disposed of with the assistance of Ms. Sabina, Advocate appearing on behalf of petitioner and Shri KS Gill, Advocate, who has given appearance on behalf of respondent No. 1.
5.
The facts of this case are lying in a narrow compass.
It is admitted case that the petitioner Raj Kumar was working as electrician with respondent No. 1 and he served for more than 4 years when his services were terminated without the compliance of provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act on the plea that the post against which the petitioner was working had been abolished.
Moreover, the petitioner was not holding the requisite qualifications for the post of Operator (Generating set).
The Labour Court in the award Annexure P-1 has categorically held that it has been proved on the record that the applicant (petitioner) served the respondent for more than 4 yeas continuously before his services were terminated without notice and compensation as envisaged in Section 25 of the Act.
That being so, the retrenchment of the petitioner was void ab initio.
It has also been held by the Labour Court that as per the statement of the witness of the employer the workman was retrenched as the Punjab Agricultural Marketing Board abolished the post of workman because the minimum qualifications for the post of an electrician was matriculate with Diploma while the petitioner did not have such qualification.
In these circumstance, the point survives for determination is whether the findings of the Labour Court to the extent that the petitioner was entitled to Rs. 3,000/- only by way of compensation for his illegal retrenchment is justified or not ?
While awarding this amount by way of compensation to the petitioner learned Labour Court had taken into consideration that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualifications.
He was only edqucated up to 5th/6th Class.
Basing the opinion on the above data the Labour Court awarded six months pay which in its opinion was adequate compensation and further ordered for the payment of Rs. 3,000/- as compensation.
6.
It may be mentioned here that the management has not challenged this award by filing any separate writ petition.
So much so even written statement has not been filed in the writ petition and in these circumstances, the argument of the learned counsel for the respondent that turning out the petitioner from the services did not amount to retrenchment as this act was on account of abolition of post.
The argument of Mr. Gill is devoid of any merit in view of the fact import definition of the retrenchment under Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Even with the abolition of the post, if the services of the workman had been terminated, it would amount to retrenchment.
More so, the witness of the management himself admitted before the Labour Court that the petitioner was retrenched on account of abolition of the post.
7.
It was submitted from the side of the petitioner that the Labour Court was not justified in awarding the amount of Rs. 3,000/- only.
The three courses were open to the Labour Court; (i) To reinstate the petitioner into service with full back wages; (ii) In case the post was abolished, the back wages should have been awarded from the date of termination up to the passing of the award; and (iii) in case of loss of confidence on the part of the management, a multiplier of 12 years of should be applied to the last wages drawn by the petitioner while awarding the adequate compensation.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is partly correct.
The afirst proposition raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner would not be applicable to the facts in hand on account of abolition of post.
Similarly 3rd proposition would not came into play because it is not the impugned order of termination of the services of the petitioner that management had lost faith in the petitioner.
In the present case, the 2nd proposition propounded by the petitioner can be taken into consideration.
The Court is of the considered opinion that the amount of Rs. 3,000/- awarded to the petitioner was too meagre.
Rather the 3rd yardstick as envisaged above could not be applicable in the present case.
The Labour Court ought to have awarded back wages from 7.10.1986 to 381988 and at the most could apply a reasonable cut into the wages.
In the opinion of this Court the respondent No. 1 should pay back wages to the petitioner at the rate he was drawing i.e. full back wages, as being received by the petitioner on the date of his termination.
By not doing so, the learned Labour Court had committed an illegality by not appreciating the relevant provisions of law.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is partly allowed and directions are given to respondent No. 1 to pay full wages to the petitioner which wages will be calculated by respondent No. 1 for the period starting from 7.10.1986 to 381988 on the basis of last wages being drawn by the petitioner as on 7.10.1986.
With the above directions the present writ petition stands disposed of with no order as to costs.