NK Sodhi, J - By an order dated 27101986 passed by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Rohtak one increment of the plaintiff-respondent with cumulative effect was withheld as a measure of punishment.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration on 931991 challenging the order of punishment on the ground that it was null and void and did not effect the rights of the plaintiff.
The suit was contested by the State of Haryana and inter alia it was pleaded that the suit of the plaintiff was barred by time.
The order was also sought to be justified on merits.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the impugned orders dated 2061986 and 27101986 are illegal ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is bad for mis-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit has not been properly valued for the purpose of court fee ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
The trial court decided all the issues against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants and came to the conclusion that the plaintiff was not entitled to the declaration prayed for.
It was also held that the suit was barred by time.
In appeal, the Additional District Judge reversed the findings of the trial court on issue 1 and it was held that since the defendant had not held a regular departmental inquiry before passing the impugned order dated 27101986 withholding one increment with cumulative effect, the same was in breach of the principles of natural justice.
As regards limitation, the lower Appellate Court held that the order imposing punishment being in violation of the principles of natural justice had no legal existence and, therefore, it was not necessary for the plaintiff to have it set aside from the Court.
In other words, the lower Appellate Court was of the view that the impugned order imposing punishment could be ignored by the plaintiff, it being null and void.
The learned Additional District Judge also observed that in such like cases, the plea of limitation was not available to a welfare State like the appellant herein.
The judgment and decree passed by the trial Court was reversed and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent decreed.
It is against this decree passed by the lower Appellate Court that the State of Haryana has filed the present second appeal.
2.
Having heard counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the appeal deserves to succeed.
Even if one were to assume that the order dated 27101986 was null and void, the plaintiff had to approach the Court for a declaration to have it set aside and this could be done only if the suit had been filed within the prescribed period of limitation.
It is not open to the plaintiff to ignore such an order without approaching the court.
It has been held by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh, Ashok Kumar, AIR 1991 SC 221 : 1991(3) SCT 488(SC) that a suit for declaration that an order passed against the plaintiff is wrongful, illegal or ultra vires is governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act whereunder the period of limitation prescribed is three years from the date of the order.
In the instant case, the impugned order whereby one increment of the plaintiff was withheld with cumulative effect was passed on 27101986 and the suit for getting this order declared invalid was instituted on 931991.
The suit having been filed beyond the period of three years was barred by time, and the trial court was right in deciding issue 5 against the plaintiff and in favour of the State.
The approach of the lower Appellate Court was not correct in the matter and I have no hesitation in reversing the finding recorded by it under issue 5.
In the result, the appeal is allowed, the judgment and decree of the lower Appellate Court set aside and that of the trial court restored.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.