Swatanter Kumar, J - The plaintiff was appointed as conductor in Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur.
The plaintiff was placed under suspension and charge- sheet was served upon him dated 331983.
An enquiry was conducted against the plaintiff and thereafter the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur removed him from service vide order dated 22.12.1983.
It is this order which was challenged as being illegal, wrong, perverse, unconstitutional and against the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 and being violative of the principles of natural justice.
The plaintiff also alleged that there was no definite charges in the charge sheet and the copy of enquiry report was not supplied to him in spite of his request.
The ex parte proceedings against him were not justified as his leg was fractured and he remained confined to bed and he had informed the enquiry officer in this regard.
The defendant in the suit admitted the appointment, termination and service of notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
However, a plea with regard to limitation was taken.
It was averred on behalf of the defendant that the enquiry was in accordance with rules and the order does not suffer from any of the infirmity, as alleged by the plaintiff.
The allegations relating to non-issuance of tickets to some passengers, the Inspector had found that the tickets of the value of Rs. 4320 were not given to the passengers and the enquiry officer held thr new charges to have been proved which resulted into the passing of the impugned order, was reiterated.
2.
Learned trial Court framed only two issues, the onus of one issue was on the plaintiff while onus of other issue was on the defendant.
After some discussion the learned trial Court held that there was no violation of the rules and the Disciplinary Authority had rightly imposed the punishment of dismissal form service upon the plaintiff.
The Disciplinary Authority in its wisdom had passed the order under rule 13(2) of the Rules exempting the enquiry and it was held that there was no violation of principles of natural justice.
Issue No. 2 with regard to limitation was decided by the trial court in favour of the defendant.
Consequently the suit was dismissed with costs.
3.
On appeal, the Appellate Court set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court dated 1781988 and passed the decree in favour of the plaintiff.
4.
The basic issue that arises for consideration in this appeal is whether non-supply of enquiry report to the delinquent official would vitiate the termination order or not.
Under Rule 811 of the Rules, there was obligation upon the Disciplinary Authority to furnish the copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent official which was admittedly not furnished.
The non-furnishing of such report has certainly caused a definite prejudice to the right of the delinquent official to put up his case in proper prospective before the Disciplinary Authority.
The plaintiff was handicapped by non-supply of enquiry report because he was not able to meet the points stated to have been found against him.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant tried to argue that there was on need for supplying the enquiry report to the delinquent official as the rules were subsequent to the year 1990 and as such, the action of the Disciplinary Authority cannot be vitiated on this ground.
Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar reported as 1994(1) Recent Services Judgments 443 : 1994(1) SCT 319(SC).
6.
In fact this is the judgment which has clarified the earlier view taken by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the earlier case where it was held that non-supply of enquiry report to the delinquent official would vitiate the proceedings irrespective of the facts as to which point of time the enquiry was commenced.
In fact this judgment even covered the cases which were pending in the Courts and even where decrees were passed in favour of the Department.
7.
In para 20 of the judgment in the case of Managing Director ECIL (supra), the Supreme Court held as under:-  ``In Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra), the question squarely fell for consideration before a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court viz., that although on account of the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, it was no longer necessary to issue a notice to the delinquent employee to show cause against the punishment proposed and, therefore, to furnish a copy of the inquiry officer's report along with the notice to make representation against the penalty, whether it was still necessary to furnish a copy of the report to him to enable him to make representation against the findings recorded against him in the report before the disciplinary authority took its own decision with regard to the guilt or otherwise of the employee by taking into consideration the said report.
The Court held that whenever the Inquiry Officer is other than the disciplinary authority and the report of the Inquiry Officer holds the employee guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any punishment or not, the delinquent employee is entitled to a copy of the report to enable him to make a representation to the disciplinary authority against it and the non-furnishing of the report amounts to a violation of the rules of natural justice.
However, after taking this view, the Court directed that the law laid down there shall have prospective application and the punishment which is already imposed shall not be open to challenge on that ground.
Unfortunately, the court by mistake allowed all the appeals which were before it and thus set aside the disciplinary action in every case, by failing to notice that the actions in those cases were prior to the said decision.
This anomaly was noticed at a later stage but before the final order could be reviewed and rectified, the present reference was already made, as stated above, by a Bench of three learned Judges.
The anomaly has thus lent another dimension to the question to be resolved in the present case.''
Thus, applying this principle to the facts of the present case, the rules in question are of 1970 and as such, the order of the disciplinary authority would stand vitiated for non-supply of enquiry report to the delinquent employee.
Learned counsel for the respondent has also relied upon the case of Homar B Munshi v. PG Shroff and others, reported as 1990(2) SLR 101.
8.
I further find that in the present case, the Appellate Court had rightly held that there was violation of principles of natural justice in addition to the violation of specific rules provided for conducting such an enquiry.
There is obligation on the part of the disciplinary authority to ensure the supply of charge-sheet, statement of imputation, documents and statements supporting such charge-sheet and further list of documents which the Department wishes to rely upon during the course of enquiry.
Nothing of this kind was ensured by the disciplinary authority or enquiry officer.
In fact, during the course of enquiry, a specific question was put to the delinquent official which reads as under :-  ``Have you received charge-sheet bearing No. 6885 TC dated 331983 levelled by the General Manager ?
Ans.
I have received copy of the charge-sheet only.
No other paper attached to it has been received by me and attested papers have been given to me today.
``Non-furnishing of these documents which have seriously prejudice the case of the delinquent official at all stages, would render the departmental proceeding open to successfull attack.
Non-compliance of statutory provisions and the principles of natural justice causing prejudice to the case of delinquent official in all probabilities would have the effect of vitiating the inquiry report and consequently the order of punishment.
In this regard reference can be made to the case of State of Haryana v. Som Dutt reported as 1981(1) SLR 647.
9.
On the question of limitation, the learned Ist Appellate Court has relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Amrit Singh v. State of Punjab, reported as 1980(2) SLR 616.
In view of the judgment, I find no reason to interfere with the finding of that learned Ist Appellate Court on this issue as well.
For the reasons aforestated, I affirm the judgment and decree of Ist Appellate Court and consequently dismissed the appeal.
There shall be no order as to costs.