RL Anand, J - Smt. Maya Sethi, Ex-Draftsman, has filed the present civil petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents i.e. the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, Chief Administrator, Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board, Panchkula and its Executive Engineer, respondents No. 1, 2 and 3 respectively for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned award dated 30.8.1993 passed by respondent No. 1 and it has been averred by the petitioner that she was appointed as draftsman on daily wages with respondents No. 2 and 3 w.e.f.
1.10.1989 and she worked continuously with respondent No. 3 upto November, 1990 and according to the satisfaction of the superiors.
Her services were illegally terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act and also against the provisions of Section 25-G and 25-H of the said Act.
Her case was referred for adjudication by the appropriate Government to respondent No. 1 in the month of January, 1992 and vide impugned award Annexure P.1 dated 30.8.1993 passed by respondent No. 1, it was held that the termination order of the petitioner was right.
The petitioner attacked the findings of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, respondent No. 1 on the ground that he had failed to take in consideration the Sundays and paid holidays while computing 240 days in the preceding 12 calendar months before the termination of the services of the petitioner and for this reason she is entitled to be reinstated into service with full back wages and with all incidental benefits including the benefit of continuity of service etc. and the award Annexure P.1 passed by respondent No. 1 is liable to be set aside.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and respondents No. 2 and 3 had tried to justify the award by taking the plea that the petitioner had worked only for 207 days starting from October, 1989 to September, 1990.
It was also pleaded that respondents No. 2 and 3 did not violate the provisions of Section 25-G and 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act and no error of the Industrial Disputes Act and no error of law has been committed by respondent No. 1.
3.
With the above small pleadings the only point servives for determination before me is whether the petitioner Maya Sethi worked for 240 days with the management and whether the Labour Court respondent No. 1 had committed any patent error on the face of the award while calculating the working days of the petitioner.
As submitted above, if the entire allowance is given to the defence of the respondents it would be patently clear that the petitioner had worked more than 240 days, in the preceding 12 months of the termination.
In para No. 2 of the written statement, respondents No. 2 and 3 had calculated 207 days starting from October, 1989 to September, 1990 though the case of the petitioner is that she had worked up to November, 1990.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the petitioner had served up to September, 1990 yet from the calculations made by respondents 2 and 3 it would be clear that Sundays and paid holidays have not been included and on this short ground the writ is liable to succeed.
In view of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 458, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold as follows:  "The qualification for relief under Section 25-F is that he should be a workman employed in an industry and has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer.
What is continuous service has been defined and explained in Section 25-B of the Act.
In view of sub-section (2) of Section 25-B the workman shall be deemed to be in continuous service if he has "actually worked under the employer" for particular period.
The expression "actually worked under the employer" cannot mean those days only when the workman worked with hammer, sickle or pen, but must necessarily comprehend all those days during which he was in the employment of the employer and for which the he had been paid wages either under express or implied contract of service or by compulsion of statute, standing orders etc.
Thus, Sundays and other paid holidays could be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the total number of days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked".
4.
The Industrial Disputes Act is a piece of social legislation primarily enacted for the benefit of the workman and also to promote the smooth relationship between the workman and the management.
In the above citation, it has been clearly held that Sundays and other paid holidays could be taken into account for the purpose of counting the total number of working days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked.
Admittedly, in the present case while retrenching the services of the petitioner within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the statutory provisions of Section 25-F of the said Act had not been complied.
As a result of this the retrenchment of the petitioner has to be quashed.
5.
The second point which survives for determination is whether the petitioner should be awarded full back wages or some cut should be imposed ion the present case keeping in view the peculiar facts of the case.
So far as the position of law is concerned, there is no dispute that once reinstatement is ordered by the Labour Court by quashing the termination of a workman, odinarily such workman is entitled to full back wages.
In the present case, however, there are slight deviations.
Petitioner Maya Sethi was unmarried girl when her services were terminated.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioner stated in all fairness that the petitioner remained employed with some private firms for her survival and later on she got married.
Keeping in view the factum that the petitioner is now married and that she remained employed for some period in private firms for her survival and keeping in view the peculiar facts of the case, I am of the opinion that ends of justice would be fully met if the petitioner is awarded back wages at the rate of 60 per cent from the date of the demand notice.
Of course, the petitioner shall be entitled of the other benefits such as continuity of service.
Directions are given to respondents 2 and 3 to reinstate the petitioner and the award to the Labour Court Annexure P.1 is hereby set aside.
The respondent Nos. 2 and 3 shall try to comply with the directions of this Court within one month from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
No order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.