Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to show the original answer-sheets of the petitioner in respect of three compulsory subjects of English and English Essay, Hindi and Hindi Essay and General Knowledge and also the original awards received from the examiners in respect of these papers along with fictitious secrecy roll number allotted to the petitioner in the examination held in the last week of November, 1992 by Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh, in pursuance of Advertisement Annexure P1 for filling up of various posts for Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other Allied Services.
2.
Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh, (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) vide Advertisement No. 7 advertised various posts for H.C.S.
(E.B).
Details of the posts was specified in the advertisement notice.
Thousands of candidates applied for those posts and took the examination which commenced from 2101993 and concluded on 15101993.
Sealed answer books are stated to have been received from different centres in the office of the Secretary of the Commission by that date.
During the process of preparation of merit list, due to bickerings between the members of the Commission, the whole of the examination was scrapped.
Satish and others filed C.W.P.
8584 of 1994 in this Court for quashing the scrapping of the examination result inter alia alleging therein that harsh action of passing the orders scrapping the examination was due to fight between the Chairman on one hand and the Members of the Commission on the other hand.
Serious allegations of mala fides and nepotism between the Members of the Commission and in-fighting between the members of the Commission were made.
The said writ petition reported as Satish and others v. Haryana Public Service Commission and others, 1995(2) R.S.J.
1 : 1995(2) SCT 586 (P&H)(DB) was accepted by a Division Bench of this Court and the order of the Commission scrapping the examination was set aside.
While accepting the aforesaid writ petition, the Court observed and issued the following directions :  ``47.
We have, therefore, come to the conclusion that even though there was no justification for the cancellation of the written examination, yet on account of the uncalled for publicity given to the controversy regarding the evaluation of question papers, certain safeguards are required to be provided and appropriate directions issued for the finalisation of the examination in the interests of the candidates who appeared by maintaining the purity and fairness of the ultimate selection.
In order to protect the interests of the candidates and to inspire confidence of the common man in the institution of the Commission entrusted with the employment of public service, we hereby quash the impugned order by which the whole of the written examination was scrapped but with the following directions:- (a) That all actions taken after 15101993 which have become the basis of controversy shall be deemed to have been quashed.
(b) The process of preparation of key, clipping would commence afresh and the earlier fictitious roll numbers mentioned on the answer-sheets shall be removed.
Appropriate safeguards shall be taken for the maintenance of secrecy and purity of the examination; (c) The answer-sheets with fictitious roll numbers shall be sent to the new Examiners for re-evaluation who are directed to award marks separately without being influenced by the earlier marks awarded by the erstwhile Examiners by using different ink and the earlier marks awarded shall be properly covered; Before sending the answer books for re-evaluation, such scripts which disclose the identity of any candidate in any manner shall be excluded and their papers in that result shall be deemed cancelled; (d) After the receipt of the answer books along with the award list, scrutiny of marked answer books for checking totals, tallying of marks in the abstract vis-a-vis body of answer book, detection of unmarked part, over attempted questions from different sections, detection of any attempt for disclosing identity of the candidates and carrying out corrections in the scrips, the result of all such candidates shall be prepared candidate-wise with fictitious roll numbers; (e) After the preparation of the `key and the Clipping', the aforesaid key and clipping shall be sealed and locked and kept in a safe custody.
The merit-wise result shall be prepared in accordance with the prevalent practice; (f) The process of re-evaluation and compliance of directions (a) to (e) above shall be carried out by the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala who shall do the needful as per the procedure prevalent and in accordance without directions contained in this judgment.
The process of completion of the written examination shall be carried out as expeditiously as possible and preferably within three months; (g) The expenditure involved in the process of re-evaluation and compilation of the result shall be at the cost and expense of the Haryana Public Service Commission which shall be reimbursed to the Punjab Public Service Commission or demand; (h) The record seized in the matter shall be handed over by the District and Sessions Judge (Vig.)
Haryana to the Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, against a proper receipt within a period of one week from today.
(i) After the preparations of the merit list, the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission is directed to ensure the holding of proper interview by the Members of the said Commission and by taking assistance of the expert Members, if required, and finalising the selection; (j) After the finalisation of the selection, the record shall be retuned to the Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission after three months unless otherwise directed by any Court of law.
48.
All the members of the Commission including the Chairman are liable to pay the costs which are assessed at the rate of Rs. 5,000/- each.
The costs shall be deposited in the Registry within one month.
After the deposit of the total amount, the same shall be paid to the Haryana Legal Aid Cell.
49.
These directions shall not be deemed to be an aspersion on the newly constituted Haryana Public Service Commission.
50.
A copy of these directions shall immediately be supplied to the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala for appropriate directions and compliance.''
Commission filed Special Leave Petition against the abovesaid directions and the Hon'ble Supreme Court reversed the abovesaid judgment insofar as it ordered that Punjab Public Service Commission would get the answer-sheets re- evaluated and conduct interviews on behalf of Haryana Public Service Commission.
3.
In compliance with the directions issued as modified by their Lordships of the Supreme Court, the result of the written test was published in the Indian Express newspaper on 2211996.
Petitioner was called for interview which took place on 1321996 in the office of the Commission in Sector 17-A, Chandigarh.
Petitioner has averred that the fared well in the interview and answered all the questions which due diligence and care.
In view of the excellent written test and in view of his performance at the time of interview, petitioner was sanguine for his success in the H.C.S.
(E.B) examination, 1992.
The final result of H.C.S.
(E.B) examination 1992 was declared which was published in the Indian Express on 1731996 and the petitioner was surprised and shocked not to find his name amongst the successful candidates.
4.
Petitioner being confident of his success was keen and desirous of knowing the detailed marks in each subject so as to satisfy himself as to the manner he had been evaluated by the Commission.
He approached the Commission to supply him the detailed marks subject-wise.
Petitioner also sent telegram to the Commission to supply him the detailed marks-sheet of the examination.
Detailed marks-sheet was received by the petitioner at Pathankot on 29.4.1996.
It is averred that on seeing the detailed marks-sheet, petitioner was simply aghast at marks scored by him in the examination particularly compulsory subjects and viva-voce.
A perusal of the detailed marks-sheet issued by the Commission shows that the petitioner fared quite well in the optional subjects and had scored 67% in Public Administration, 57% in Sociology and 62% in English Literature.
However, in the compulsory subjects petitioner scored 40% in Hindi and Hindi Essay, 53% in English and English Essay and 48% in General Knowledge.
Besides the petitioner scored only 26% in viva-voce.
Petitioner was dissatisfied with the marks obtained by him in the compulsory subjects and viva-voce.
Petitioner has given a resume of his academic career to show that he had been a good student in his academic career and has been a Lecturer in English for the last 15 years in a College; that apart from the academic sphere, the petitioner during his school days was declared all round best boy having participated in and won various prizes in Essay Competition, Editor of the College Magazine at Govt. College, Gurdaspur and had won several first and second prizes in the Inter College Declamation/Poetical recitation contests; that the petitioner had all round excellent personality and he has maintained a consistently good academic career and record.
The marks given by the Commission in compulsory subject to the extent of 40%, 53% and 48% in compulsory subjects of Hindi and Hindi Essay, English and English Essay and General Knowledge is not fair and do not fit in with the otherwise consistent academic record.
In view of the fact that petitioner has been a keen debater, dramatist and sportsman, the fact that he scored 26% marks in viva-voce shows serious lapse on the part of the Commission in grading a candidate in making a fair assessment.
5.
Under these circumstances, petitioner has prayed that original answer- sheets of the petitioner in respect of his three compulsory subjects of Hindi and Hindi Essay English and English Essay and General Knowledge be produced in Court for his perusal as he suspected that his papers may have been switched in order to help some other candidate.
On perusal of these papers, a writ of mandamus be issued to the respondents to select and appoint the petitioner to H.C.S.
(E.B) Examination held in 1992 in pursuance of advertisement No. 7 Annexure P1, the result of which was published in Indian Express newspaper on 1731996.
6.
Notice of motion was issued and the respondents were directed to produce in Court the answer-sheets of the petitioner of three compulsory subjects in Hindi and Hindi Essay, English and English Essay and General Knowledge subject to the petitioner's depositing a sum of Rs. 3,000/- as costs within one month.
7.
In pursuance of the notice of motion issued to the respondents, written statement has been filed.
Allegations made in the petition have been controverted.
It has been maintained that Commission conducted the written examination and the interviews in a very fair and just manner and a candidate cannot be a judge of his own performance.
On the basis of his performance in the written examination and the interview, petitioner could not come within the zone of selection.
Petitioner has been given marks in viva-voce as per his overall performance at the time of his interview and the dissatisfaction of the petitioner as alleged is based on surmises and conjectures.
There is no question of any lapse on the part of the Commission in any manner in the assessment and grading of the candidate in making a fair assessment.
It has been denied that the interview conducted by the Commission was nothing but farce.
Original answer-sheets of the three papers demanded by the petitioner were produced before a Division Bench of this Court.
After examining the answer-sheets, the following order was recorded by the Bench :-  ``Learned counsel representing the Haryana Public Service Commission has produced before us the answer-sheets of the petitioner in respect of (i) English and English Essay, (ii) General Knowledge and Everyday Science, (iii) Hindi and Hindi Essay.
On going through the answer-sheets, we find that all the questions attempted by the petitioner have been evaluated and marks correctly totalled and given to the petitioner.
We do not find any defect in the marks or addition of marks.
Answer books have been returned.
Post the main case for final hearing on 25.9.1996.
Sd/- (K. Sreedharan) Chief Justice Sd/- (N.K.
Sodhi) Judge 1891996'' Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The original answer-sheets of the petitioner were examined by this Court.
It was observed that on going through the answer-sheets, it was found that all questions attempted by the petitioner were evaluated and marks correctly totalled and given to the petitioner.
No defect was found either in the marking or addition of marks.
Allegations of the petitioner that his papers might have been switched and commission of any other irregularities by the Commission in evaluating the answer-sheets in the given circumstances cannot be accepted.
8.
Previous academic record or winning of prizes in declamation contests and sports is not reflected in any subsequent examination taken by a candidate.
No doubt, acquired knowledge as well as inborn intelligence in a person is reflected in any examination which he undertakes but this does not necessarily mean that a person gives his peak performance every time he takes an examination.
There is no allegation of bias against any person.
Except for making general allegations and relying upon the findings given by this Court in `Satish and others' case (supra) relating to the same examination, no material was placed before us to show that any irregularities were committed.
A candidate cannot be a judge of his own performance and we would assume that the marks obtained by the petitioner in the interview were correctly given as per the assessment made by the Members of the Commission who took the interview.
9.
It would be seen that even in Satish and others case (supra), this Court did not find any irregularities in the conduct of examination.
It was held that there was no justification for the cancellation of the written examination' yet on account of the uncalled for publicity given to the controversy regarding the evaluation of question papers, certain directions were issued for finalisation of the examination in the interest of the candidates who had appeared in the examination for maintaining the purity and fairness of the ultimate selection.
Directions were issued to protect the interest of the candidates and to inspire confidence of the common man in the institution of the Commission entrusted with the employment of the public service.
10.
All actions taken after 15101993 which had become the basis of controversy were deemed to have been quashed.
Bench ordered re-evaluation to remove the uncalled for controversy regarding the evaluation of answer-sheets.
Answer-sheets with fictitious roll numbers were sent to new examiners for re- evaluation who were directed to award the marks separately without being influenced by the earlier marks awarded by the erstwhile examiners by using different ink.
Petitioner was awarded the marks obtained by him in the compulsory papers on re-evaluation as directed by this Court.
Commission was constituted afresh soon after scrapping of the examination in the year 1994 and two members belonging to the previous Commission did not participate in the re-evaluation process and interviews.
In `Satish and others' case (supra) this Court had specifically observed that the directions given in the judgment shall not be deemed to cause aspersions on the newly-constituted Commission.
Plea of the petitioner that it was not possible for him to secure low marks is unfounded and based on surmises and conjectures.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.