Harphul Singh Brar, J - This is a regular second appeal filed by the State of Punjab and the Director of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh against the judgment and decree dated 461993 of the learned District Judge, Faridkot who had set aside the judgment/decree of the Addl.
Senior Sub Judge, Faridkot dated 141992 and ultimately the suit of the plaintiff was decreed for mandatory injunction against the State of Punjab directing the latter to count ad hoc service rendered by the plaintiff-appellant during the period 26121962 to 30.4.1964 towards seniority, promotion and other benefits.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that Santokh Sigh plaintiff had filed a suit for mandatory injunction against the State of Punjab through Collector, Faridkot and the Director of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh directing them to count the ad hoc service rendered by him as Radio - TV Mechanic Instructor with effect from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 at Industrial Training Institute, Bhatinda.
It is alleged in the plaint that he was appointed as Radio-TV Mechanic Instructor on ad hoc basis on 26121962 and he worked continuously on this post with effect from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 at Industrial Training Institute, Bhatinda.
He appeared before the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala and on the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission, he was given regular appointment as Radio-TV Mechanic Instructor with effect from 151964.
According to the plaintiff, he has thus put in continuous service with effect from 26121962 onwards.
The Director of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, according to the plaintiff, did not count the ad hoc service rendered by him towards seniority, promotion etc.
It is then stated by the plaintiff that a representation was also made by him to the concerned authority for counting the ad hoc service rendered by him towards seniority, promotion etc. but that was dismissed.
3.
The defendants contested the suit of the plaintiff.
It was urged by them that the plaintiff's suit was not maintainable and it was barred by time.
According to the averments made in the written statement filed by the defendants, it was stated that the plaintiff's appointment was ad hoc.
He was regularised with effect from 151964.
The ad hoc service, according to the defendants, could not be counted towards seniority, promotion etc. in view of the letter circular No. 1028/G-11-57/27804 dated 2931957 issued by the Punjab Government to all Heads of the Departments etc.
The representation of the plaintiff, according to the defendants, was rightly rejected by the Director of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh vide Endorsement No. IT-EC/99/223/38302 dated 871982.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial court :-  1.
Whether the service from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 is liable to be counted for promotion and other purposes as prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is barred by time ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to sue ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the suit is not valued properly for court fee and jurisdiction?
OPD 6.
Whether no legal and valid notice has been served on the defendant ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
The trial court dismissed the plaintiff's suit by holding that it was barred by time and the suit was held not to be maintainable as the ad hoc service rendered by him with effect from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 could not be counted as regular service and he could not be taken to have joined with effect from 26121962.
Rather he could be taken to have joined on 151964, i.e. the date when he was given regular appointment on the basis of the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
5.
Consequently, issues No. 1 to 4 were decided by the trial court against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants.
Issue No. 5 was decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants by holding that the suit of the plaintiff was properly valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction.
Issue No. 6 was also decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants by holding that the notice Ex. P1 before filing the suit was legal and valid and was served correctly on the defendants.
Ultimately, on the basis of the findings on the above said/issues, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed with costs.
6.
The learned District Judge has set aside the judgment/decree dated 141992 of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Faridkot and has ultimately decreed the suit of the plaintiff by holding that the ad hoc service rendered by him shall be counted towards seniority, promotion etc.
Hence this Regular Second Appeal.
7.
The main point to be determined in this appeal is as to whether the ad hoc service rendered by the plaintiff-respondent from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 could be counted for promotion and other purposes.
The point involved is no longer res integra.
It has been held by a Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(1) SCT 800(P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 382, on which both the counsel for the plaintiff- respondent and the appellants rely that ad hoc service per se cannot be counted to determine appointee's service in the cadre.
It has been held by the Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh's case (supra) as under :-  ``For the purpose of present enquiry, clauses (A) and (B) in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) coupled with elucidation of these clauses in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra) and also the view expressed in the earlier judgments of the apex Court, it can be said : (i) that the period as an ad hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of an incumbent; (ii) it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop-gap arrangement, and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered will be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre; (iii) in the absence of Rules, it would have to be kept in view as to whether the appointment so made is against an existing vacancy and not for a limited period and in that case, the period so spent by an incumbent can be considered to determine his seniority in the cadre; (iv) if the appointment is otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural defects, such defect/defects stand cured with the subsequent regularisation; (v) mere long stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of the delinquent officer or on account of interim direction of the Court will not clothe an appointee with any right to tag such a period to determine his seniority in the cadre.
Period of service as a stop-gap arrangement shall be ignored while determining his seniority in the cadre.
The above points are only illustrative and not exhaustive in content.
Any point which is not specifically covered therein is to be examined in the light of clauses (A) and (B) of Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) as explained in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra).''
While holding so, the Full Bench has taken into consideration the Supreme Court decisions in The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607 and State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(3) Recent Services Judgments 113 : 1993(2) SCT 734(SC).
8.
In the light of the judgments of the Supreme Court in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra) and in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association's case (supra), a civil servant is entitled to the benefit of ad hoc service for being counted to determine his seniority, if his case is covered under the circumstances referred to and enumerated hereinabove.
9.
It follows, therefore, that if the initial appointment is made by following the procedure laid down by the Rules and the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of service in accordance with the Rules his period of officiation/ad hoc service shall be counted.
However, if the ppointment is not made according to the Rules or the Appointee has not continued or is not regularised, such period of officiation/ad hoc service shall not be counted for the purposes of his seniority.
Where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to the rules and is made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
10.
This view of the Full Bench in Chambel Singh's case (supra) has further been affirmed by a later judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Rakesh Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(4) Recent Services Judgments 586 : 1995(4) SCT 285(P&H).
11.
In the case in hand, the plaintiff has not even placed on record his appointment letter.
He has simply stated in the plaint that he was appointed as Radio-TV Mechanic Instructor on ad hoc basis on 26121962 and he worked on that post with effect from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 till his regularisation on the post with effect from 151964.
The plaintiff has not brought any evidence on record vide which he could establish as to whether at the time of his ad hoc appointment, he was even otherwise eligible for appointment to the post and fulfilled the qualifications for the same, or he was appointed against a regular post.
12.
It has been averred by the defendant-appellants in their written statement that the appointment of the plaintiff was just a make-shift arrangement and could not count towards seniority as per instructions embodied in circular dated 2931957 issued by the Punjab Government to all the Heads of the Departments.
13.
The plaintiff has, thus, not been able to bring his case under the exception as laid down by the Full Bench in Chambel Singh's case (supra) that the ad hoc service per se cannot be counted to determine appointee's seniority in the cadre.
The learned trail court has, thus, rightly dismissed the suit of the plaintiff by holding that the plaintiff was not entitled to get the period of ad hoc service counted towards his seniority and promotion etc.  14.
The learned District Judge has, thus erred in law and on facts in setting aside the judgment/decree dated 141992 of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Faridkot by holding that the service rendered by the plaintiff on ad hoc basis will be counted towards seniority, promotion etc.
The judgment/decree dated 461993 of the learned District Judge, Faridkot is thus, liable to be quashed and the judgment/decree of the trial court is thus restored.
15.
While deciding issue No. 3, the learned District Judge has also non- suited the plaintiff by holding that the suit of the plaintiff was not within limitation and was barred by time.
16.
Though it is not necessary to give my finding on this issue, as has been held by me above that the ad hoc service rendered by the plaintiff with effect from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 shall not be counted towards seniority, promotion etc. and the plaintiff succeeds on that score alone, but still I find that the District Judge has erred in law and on facts in reversing the decision of the learned trial court on this issue by holding that the suit was within limitation as the question of seniority was a continuing` cause of action.
17.
Ex. P5 shows that the seniority list containing the name of the plaintiff was circulated against which objections were called and the plaintiff filed the representation (Ex.P6) on 841982 and the said representation was forwarded by the Principal to the Director-Technical Education vide his letter dated 1641982 (Ex. P7).
The plaintiff again put in a request Ex. P8 to the Director, Technical Education and the same was rejected by the Director Technical Education vide letter Ex. P9.
The plaintiff thus, pressed his claim for counting the period of ad hoc service towards seniority, but his request was finally rejected by the Director Technical Education vide his letter dated 871982 Ex. P9.
Admittedly, the suit in question was filed by the plaintiff on 28.9.1990.
If the period of limitation is calculated from 871982, then the plaintiff was entitled to file the suit upto 871985 in accordance with the Indian Limitation Act.
Thus, the suit filed by the plaintiff was barred by time also.
18.
When the plaintiff had staked his claim and represented to the authorities concerned for counting his ad hoc service from 26121962 to 30.4.1964 for the purposes of seniority etc. and his plea was rejected, then in my view, he could not agitate about his stale claim after about 8 years.
If the plaintiff is allowed to continue his stale claim like this for ever, then there cannot be an end to litigation.
Rather after such a long time, the rights that right have accrued to many other persons cannot be disturbed.
Thus, It set aside the finding of the District Judge on this issue also and affirm the finding of the trial court on the issue of limitation.
Resultantly, the judgments/decree dated 461993 of the District Judge, Faridkot is set aside and the judgment/decree dated 141992 of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Faridkot is affirmed and the appeal is allowed without any order as to costs.