SC Verma, J - The petitioner was initially appointed as Member of Bharat Tibet Seema Force by order dated 30th July, 1990 and was posted as Senani with 20th Battalion, Indo-Tibet Border Police Force, Bareilly, UP The petitioner joined the duty on 20th August, 1990 in the pay scale of Rs. 800- 1,200.
The petitioner had applied for leave from 4th February to 20th March, 1992 for 45 days.
The petitioner had to extend his leave for medical treatment and he sent telegram on 2131992 for extension of leave for one month.
The application for one month leave was sent by the petitioner on 6th April, 1992 through registered AD Post on the ground that the petitioner was receiving natural treatment at Dargah Shareef Ratlam.
The petitioner reported for duty on 6th October, 1992 and he continued to work till the impugned order was passed.
On 18th November, 1992 the Company Commandant sent a complaint to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and Commandant 20th Battalion, Indo Tibet Border Police Force, Bareilly, UP to try the petitioner judicially.
In the above complaint the petitioner was charged for unauthorised absence with effect from 21st March, 1992 to 5th April, 1992 without sufficient cause.
2.
A case No. 3 of 1992 was registered against the petitioner under Section 10(m) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') and the petitioner was served with a notice on 20th November, 1992 to attend the court on 30th November, 1992.
The petitioner appeared before the Judicial Magistrate, I Class on 30th November, 1992 and he represented his case including the evidence and submitted the documents to establish his innocence.
The petitioner also submitted the leave certificate and the copy of the telegram etc., and the proof of his stay at Ratlam for treatment.
3.
The petitioner was punished by order dated 4th December, 1992 for the offence under Section 10(m) of the Act and was confined to remain in the Court room, till the proceedings were over for the day.
On the basis of the order dated 4th December, 1992, the Commandant, 20th Battalion Indo-Tibet Border Force, passed an order dated 5121992 in exercise of powers under Section 12 of the Act, dismissing the petitioner from service with effect from 4th December, 1992 with forfeiture of all pay and allowances and any other money due to him as well as any medals and decorations received by the petitioner.
The petitioner was further disqualified for re-entering in Government service and his absence from duty was treated from 21st March, 1992 to 5th October, 1992 as an extraordinary leave.
4.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the impugned order before the Deputy Inspector General of Police in accordance with the provisions of Rule 28 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
The appeal of the petitioner was rejected only on the ground that the Commandant 20 Battalion is not the competent authority to decide the appeal for an action under Section 12 of the Act and the appeal was rejected by order 6th March, 1993.
5.
Aggrieved by the order dated 4th December, 1992 and the order dated 6th March, 1993 the petitioner approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution on the ground that the petitioner has not undergone imprisonment by way of punishment under the provisions of Section 10(m) of the Act.
He was only confined to the Court till the proceedings were over for the day and this would not amount to imprisonment in the lock-up or in the jail.
The authority committed error of law in automatically awarding punishment under Section 12 by dismissing the petitioner from service The petitioner further alleged taht the authority while awarding the punishment of dismissal from service under Section 12(1) did not consider the gravity of the charge or the nature of punishment awarded to the petitioner under Section 10(m) of the Act and without applying his mind and giving objective considerations and without mentioning any reason in the order automatically passed the impugned order awarding the punishment of dismissal from service.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of Union of India, the respondents.
7.
In my opinion the contention raised by the petitioner has substantial force.
8.
The word `imprisonment' has not been defined under the Central Reserve Police Force Act and we have to look into the meaning from legal dictionaries.
According to the meaning given in the Legal Glossary `imprisonment' means "the fact or condition of being imprisoned i.e. confined in prison."
9.
According to the meaning given in the Webster Comprehensive Dictionary `imprisonment' means (1) The act imprisoning, (2) Confinement in or as in a prison.
10.
According to the meaning given in Black's Law Dictionary `imprisonment' means, "The act of putting a man in prison; the restraint of a man's personal liberty; coercion exercised upon a person to prevent the free exercise of his powers of locomotion."
11.
It is also necessary to quote the provisions of Section 10(m) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.
"Section 10.
Less heinous offences.
- Every member of Force who -  (a to 1) x x x x x x x x  (m) absents himself without leave, or without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  (n to p) x x x x x x x x shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may be three months' pay, or with both."
12.
From the order passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate on 4th December, 1992 contained in Annexure-10 to the writ petition, it is clear that the petitioner was awarded sentence to be confined to the premises of Court Room till the rising of the Court and he was not sent to any police lock-up or Jail to undergo the sentence which may ultimately have resulted in his imprisonment.
For the above reasons I am satisfied that the petitioner was not sentenced to imprisonment for any term by way of punishment under the provisions of Section 10(m) of the Act by the Chief Judicial Magistrate on the basis of order dated 4121992.
13.
The provision of Section 12 of the Act are also necessary to be quoted to appreciate the nature imprisonment required and the action of the respondents in dismissing the petitioner from the service.
"Section - 12.
Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment :-  Every person sentenced under this Act to improsonment may be dismissed from the Force, and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay, allowances and any other moneys due to him as well as of any medals and decorations received by him.
(2) Every such person shall, if he is dismissed be imprisoned in the prescribed prison, but if he is not also dismissed, from the Force, he may, if the court or the Commandant so directs, be confined in the quarter- guard or such other place as the Court or the Commandant may consider suitable."
14.
The above provision no doubt provided by the use of the word `every person' to indicate that whosoever has been sentenced to imprisonment under this Act may be dismissed from the Force and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay, allowances and any other moneys due to him as well as of any medals and decorations received by him.
The provisions of sub-section (2) make it very clear that every such person if he is dismissed has to be in imprisonment at the prescribed prison.
The imprisonment in the prescribed person as provided under sub-section (2) of section 12 further established that the imprisonment has to be either in Police Lock-up Jail or such other place where a person sentenced for any offence is kept for confinement under detention.
15.
The provision of sub-section (2) of Section 12 also provides that if the incumbent has not been dismissed from service the sentence of imprisonment may be served by confinement in the quarter-guard or such other place.
The confinement in court room till rising is not such a punishment of imprisonment on the basis of which the incumbent may be dismissed from service.
The legislature by providing a different type of imprisonment to those who have not been dismissed from service was conscious by use of the word `may' in sub-section (1) of the Section 12 of the Act to give the authority the discretion to award the punishment of dismissal from service after considering the nature and term of imprisonment which has been inflicted under Section 10 of the Act.
16.
The detention of the petitioner in the Court room of the Chief Judicial Magistrate does not indicate that he was imprisoned in any Jail or police lock-up and liable to be dismissed from service.
17.
The authority awarding the punishment under Section 12 of the Act, it appears, did not consider this aspect of the matter and without applying his mind in a routine manner dismissed the petitioner from service, merely because an action under Section 10(m) was taken against him.
It may also be considered that the use of word `may' is also significant in Section 12(1) of the Act which indicates that the authority must apply his mind objectively before awarding the punishment of dismissal from the Force.
The action of dismissal being severe major punishment has to be awarded only if there are very serious charges and the action of dismissal from service should be commensurate to the gravity of the charges.
Merely because a person has been directed for imprisonment would not automatically mean that his services are liable to be dismissed from the Force or he would be deemed to be dismissed from service in view of the provisions of Section 12 of the Act.
The authority has to apply his mind and provide reasons as to why in case he is dismissing the incumbent from service on the ground that he was imprisoned and an action of dismissal from service was necessary on the facts and circumstances of the case.
18.
In the case of Union of India v. Tulsi Ram, 1985(51) FLR 362 SC the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that:  "Where a disciplinary authority comes to know that a Government servant has been convicted on a criminal charge, it must consider whether his conduct which has led to his conviction was such as warrants the imposition of penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be.
For that purpose it will have to peruse the judgment of the criminal Court and consider all the facts and circumstances of the case and the various factors set out in Challappan's case.
This, however, has to be done by it ex parte and by itself.
Once the disciplinary authority reaches the conclusion that the Government servant's conduct was such as to require his dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank he must decide which of these three penalties should be imposed on him.
This too it has to be do by itself and without hearing the concerned Government servant by reason of the exclusionary effect of the second proviso.
The disciplinary authority must, however, bear in mind that a conviction on a criminal charge does not automatically entail dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of the concerned Government servant having decided which of these three penalties is required to be imposed, he has to pass the requisite order.
A government servant who is aggrieved by the penalty imposed can agitate in appeal, revision or review as the case may be that the penalty was too severe or excessive and not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
If it is his case that he is not the Government servant who has been in fact convicted, he can also agitate this question in appeal, revision or review.
If he fails in the departmental remedies and still wants to pursue the matter, he can invoke the Court's power of judicial review subject to the Court permitting it.
If the Court finds that he was not in fact the person convicted, it will strike down the impugned order and order him to be reinstated in service.
Where the Court finds that the penalty imposed by the impugned order is arbitrary grossly excessive or out of all proportion to the offence committed or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case or the requirements of that particular Government service the Court will also strike down the impugned order."
19.
In view of the law down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the reasons indicated above, I am of the view that the order of punishment of dismissal from service passed under Section 12 of the Act, dated 5121992 is not in accordance with law and is liable to be set aside.
20.
Further the appellate order also, in my opinion, is not in accordance with law.
The petitioner has filed an appeal dated 18.2.1993 addressed to the Deputy Inspector General of Police against the order of dismissal from service dated 5121992 passed by the Commandant 20th Battalion, which is contained in Annexure-14 to the writ petition.
The Commandant 20th Battalion by order dated 631993 rejected the appeal on the ground that he is not the competent authority to decide the appeal against the order passed under Section 12 of the Act.
The petitioner has addressed the appeal to the correct authority in accordance with requirements of Rule 28 and in case the Commandant was not the competent authority he should have transmitted the record of the appeal to the appropriate authority instead of rejecting the same merely on the ground that he is not the competent authority.
The Provisions of Rule 28 of the Rules clearly provide that in case an order has been passed by the Commandant the appeal would lie to the Deputy Inspector General.
21.
For the above reasons, the petition is allowed.
The orders dated 15.2.1992 and 631993 are quashed.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service forthwith and to be treated in continuous service and would also be entitled to all consequential benefits that may have accrued to him during this period of continuous service.
Petition allowed.