Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On November 9, 1985, the petitioner was reverted from the rank of Havildar to that of a Sepoy.
On January 4, 1986, he was ordered to be discharged from the Indian Army with effect from January 5, 1986.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P 2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner filed an appeal, which was rejected vide order dated November 21, 1988 by the Chief of the Army Staff.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P 7 with the writ petition.
The petitioner impugns the orders of his reversion to the rank of a Sepoy, discharge from the Army and the rejection of his appeal.
He prays that these orders be set aside and it be declared that he continues in service with all consequential benefits.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Sepoy on March 25, 1974.
On August 6, 1981, the petitioner was promoted as a Naik.
On January 1, 1984, he was promoted to the rank of Havildar.
In October 1985, the petitioner was granted annual leave with effect from October 14, 1985.
He was permitted to suffex October 13, 1985 being a holiday.
The petitioner alleges that he left the Unit on October 12, 1985 and he reached his Village Bhatgaon, District Sonepat on October 13, 1985.
In October 16, 1985, Subedar Ajit Singh reached his village and informed the petitioner that he was to report back in the Unit ``for field firing''.
He reached his unit on October 18, 1985 and found that ``he has been involved in a false case of rape.
Major AK Bhakri has taken Gunner Balbir Singh to civil (Civil) Police Station at Pathankot and his wife Smt. Sheela Devi and lodged FIR.''
Thereafter, the petitioner remained in close custody till January 3, 1986.
A Court of Enquiry was conducted.
He was punished by Lt. Col. P Subaramanium, Commanding Officer, on November 9, 1985 and awarded deprivation of acting rank of Havildar, Naik and L/Naik.
Thereafter, a show cause notice dated November 14, 1985 was served on the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why he be not discharged from service in view of the fact that he had been punished for offences committed on June 10, 1975, March 10, 1979 and October 12, 1985.
According to this notice, the petitioner had been awarded 28 days' Rigorous Imprisonment for the first offence which was under Section 48 of the Army Act, 1950.
He had been then awarded seven days' Rigorous Imprisonment for an offence under Section 39(a).
He had been deprived of the rank of Havildar, Naik and Lance Naik, in view of the offence under Section 63.
Another show cause notice to the same effect was also served on the petitioner by the Commander of the 39 Artillery Brigade.
On January 4, 1986, the order of discharge was served on the petitioner.
It is alleged that the order dated November 9, 1985 was contrary to the provisions of Section 80 of the Army Act.
In any event, the petitioner had been promoted after the award of punishments for offences committed in the years 1975 and 1979.
Vide order dated August 6, 1981, the petitioner had been promoted as a Naik and on January 1, 1984, he had been promoted to the rank of a Havildar.
It is further alleged that the petitioner is a semi-literate person.
He was under closed arrest when the show cause notice was delivered to him.
He had requested for the copies of the Court of Enquiry and documents that were relevant.
These were not provided to him.
The petitioner refers to the undated letter, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.5, addressed by him to the Commanding Officer for supply of the copies of certain documents.
Nothing was supplied and on the contrary, the impugned order of discharge was passed.
The petitioner challenges the order dated November 9, 1985 and orders at Annexure P 2 and P. 7 on various grounds which shall be presently noticed.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner had been granted annual leave for the year 1985 from October 14, 1985 to December 12, 1985.
He was re-called on October 17, 1985.
The allegation that he was kept in close custody till January 3, 1986 has been denied.
It has been further pointed out that an FIR was registered against the petitioner at the instance of Smt. Sheela Devi with the Police Post at Shahpur (Kandi), Pathankot alleging that she had been raped by him.
It has been further stated that the petitioner had left the Unit Lines On October 12, 1985 for proceedings on leave.
However, instead of proceeding to his home, the petitioner had gone to the family quarter of Gunner Balbir Singh who also belonged to the same Unit ``without a specific valid permission''.
He consumed liquor at Balbir Singh's quarter and was alleged to have raped the wife of Gnr (GD) Balbir Singh on that night ie night of 12/13 Oct 85.
The individual was recalled from leave and a Court of Inquiry was ordered to investigate the matter.
The Court of Inquiry found the individual guilty of committing `rape' and visiting the ORs family quarters without any valid permission and consuming liquor which is an act prejudicial to good order and military discipline''.
He was deprived of the acting ranks under the provisions of section 80 of the Army Act by the Commanding Officer for an offence under Section 63.
Thereafter, a show cause notice was given to him.
He did not submit any reply.
It was considered that he was not fit to continue in service and was, accordingly, discharged.
It has been admitted that ``copies of Court of Inquiry and Summary of Evidence were not supplied to the individual as he was discharged on administrative grounds and not on disciplinary grounds i.e. he was not court martialled''.
On these premises, the respondents deny the various allegations made by the petitioner and pray and the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Major SS Johal (Retd.
), learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the action of the respondents in first reverting the petitioner and then discharging him from service is absolutely arbitrary, unfair and thus, illegal.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner has been punished primarily on the ground that he had raped the wife of a subordinate in the Army.
However, the petitioner and been actually found to be innocent and had been acquitted by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur vide his order dated August 4, 1986.
Thus, the charge of rape was not established.
In this situation, the action of the respondent in reducing him in rank especially after he had been promoted in the years 1981 and 1984, was arbitrary and unfair.
Still further, the petitioner had not been given a due and reasonable opportunity to show cause against the impugned action before he was actually discharged from the service.
The petitioner had asked for a copy of evidence recorded during the court of enquiry.
It was not supplied to him.
In this situation, the petitioner could not have shown any cause effectively.
In any event, the order dated November 21, 1988 by which the petitioner's appeal was rejected by the Chief of the Army Staff, is not a speaking order.
Consequently, it cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf on the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. SK Pipat, learned counsel for the respondents.
He has also produced before me the original file.
5.
A perusal of the file produced by the learned counsel for the respondents shows that Gunner Balbir Singh had submitted a representation to the Commanding Officer alleging inter alia that the petitioner had visited his house on October 12, 1985.
He had asked for food.
His wife had started cooking.
He and the petitioner had talked for some time, when the petitioner said - ``let us have some Rum ........ we shall eat thereafter''.
After having two drinks, he (Balbir Singh) refused to have any more.
However, the petitioner insisted and gave him more liquor.
As a result, he became unconscious and went to sleep and did not know as to how much liquor had been given to him.
When he got up at 4 in the morning, he found that the petitioner was lying on one bed and his wife was lying on another.
She looked frightened and was complaining of pain in her abdomen.
He took her to the adjoining room when he was informed that after he had gone unconscious after taking liquor, the petitioner had shown her knife and threatened her that in case, she made any noise, he would kill her as well as her husband.
He had raped in spite of the fact that she was pregnant.
6.
On the basis of this complaint, the petitioner was recalled from leave.
A Court of Inquiry was ordered to ``investigate the veracity of the contents of the application given by ......... Gnr (GD) Balbir Singh dated 16th October, 85''.
The petitioner was duly associated with this Court of Inquiry.
He stated that he had left the Unit at 7 pm on October 12, 1985 and reached the Pathankot Railway Station around 830 pm He had boarded Jehlum Express which had left the Railway Station between 2400 hours and 0015 hours.
His effort was to prove that he was not in the Unit on the night intervening October 12 and October 13, 1985.
He was questioned at length.
Various other witnesses were also examined including Gunner Balbir Singh, his wife Smt. Sheela Devi and five others.
The documentary evidence with regard to the date and time on which the petitioner had travelled from Pathankot to Sonepat was also collected.
Thereafter, on October 29, 1985, the Commanding Officer found that ``a prima facie case of rape exists against him''.
He further found that the petitioner had also committed an offence under Section 63 of the Army Act inasmuch as his act was ``prejudicial to good order and military discipline and that he on 12th October 1985 visited the family lines of ORs, placed out of bounds, without any valid permission.''
With regard to the allegation of rape, it was observed that as it ``falls under the jurisdiction of civil courts in terms of AA Section 70 and Defence Service Regulation Para 419(a), it is intended to hand her the individual to civil police/court for further investigation.''
With regard to the offence under section 63, it was observed that disciplinary action has been taken against the NCO by the CO.
Thereafter, a summary trial was held and vide order dated November 9, 1985, the petitioner was ``deprived of the acting rank of Havildar, Naik and appointment of L/Naik.''
On November 11, 1985, the petitioner was given a show cause notice.
It was mentioned that since his enrolement, he had committed a number of offences for which the punishments had been awarded to him.
It was further observed that ``it is evident from record of service that you have not conducted yourself in the best interest of your profession and have set a bad example to other persons in the Unit''.
Accordingly, the petitioner was called upon to show cause as to why his services be not terminated under the provisions of ``Army Rule 13(3) Item III(v) in the interest of the State.''
A similar notice was also sent to the petitioner by Brig.
PS Malhotra.
A copy of the notice has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
In the writ petition, it has not been stated as to whether or not the petitioner had sent any reply to the show cause notice.
However, the original file indicates that the petitioner had sent a reply (in Hindi) in which he stated that he had served for about 13 years.
On account of the mistake, he had been reverted from the rank of Havildar to that of a Sepoy.
He has to serve for two more years before he can earn pension.
He is from a poor family.
He wants to lead an ordinary life.
If he is sent back home before earning any pension, it would be difficult for him to feed his children.
On these premises, he requested that he may permitted to continue in service for two more years.
He gave an assurance that in future, he would not commit any other mistake.
Thereafter, vide order dated January 4, 1986, a copy of which is at Annexure P 2, the petitioner was discharged from service on the ground of ``being undesirable..... '' The petitioner filed an appeal.
Before it could be decided, it appears that he approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 5217 of 1987.
It was disposed of with a direction that the appeal be decided within three months.
These directions were conveyed to the Army Head Quarters.
Thereupon, the matter was considered.
It was found that the petitioner's discharge under Army Rule 13 was ``in order''.
He had been given a show cause notice and informed about the punishments awarded to him.
He was not entitled to the copies of the Court of Enquiry.
He had been awarded Rigorous Imprisonment on two occasions and deprived on of ranks of Havildar, Naik and appointment of Lance Naik.
It was further observed that "the points brought out by the complainant in his appeal to COAS (Chief of the Army Staff) are fragile and there are no technical lacunae in the legal aspects of merit review of the cause for reinstatement.''
With these observations, the Director placed the matter before the Chief of the Army Staff.
On November 17, 1988, he approved the proposal and in pursuance thereof, a communication dated November 21, 1988 was sent to the petitioner.
7.
It is in the background of the above-noted factual position that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner have to be examined.
8.
The first order which is challenged by the petitioner was passed on November 9, 1985.
It was passed under Section 80 of the Army Act, 1950.
This provision authorises the Commanding Officer to impose the punishment of imprisonment or detention, confinement, extra guards and ``deprivation of a position of the nature of an appointment or of corps or working pay and in the case of non-commissioned officers, also deprivation of acting rank or reduction to a lower grade of pay''.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the order had been passed by the Commanding Officer.
It is also not disputed that a court of enquiry had been held.
The record further shows that after the Court of Enquiry, a summary trial had also been held.
The evidence on the record clearly indicates that the petitioner's plea that he had left his Unit on October 12, 1985 could not be sustained.
It is also clear that the petitioner was not only questioned but was even permitted to cross- examine the witnesses who had appeared against him during the Court of Enquiry.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the order passed by the respondents by which the petitioner was deprived of his acting ranks of Havildar, Naik and Lance Naik on account of a conduct which was unbecoming of a member of the Armed Force, was either illegal or arbitrary.
Consequently, no ground for interference with the order dated November 9, 1985 by which the petitioner was deprived of his ranks is made out.
9.
It is also clearly established on the record that the petitioner had been given a show cause notice.
He was called upon to submit a reply.
Even though in the petition, the petitioner has not indicated that he had submitted a reply, the record shows that he had sent an undated reply.
He had not denied the allegation levelled against him in the show cause notice.
He had only made a plea for clemency.
He had requested the Commanding Officer to allow him to complete 15 years of service so as to enable him to earn his pension.
The fact that the petitioner had been punished on three occasions prior to the issue of show cause notice was not denied.
10.
Major Johal submits that the show cause notice could not have been issued to the petitioner on the basis of three punishments.
He relies upon the instructions issued vide letter dated July 21, 1973 in which it has been inter alia observed that ``the fact of award of four or more Red ink entries does not, however, by itself make it incumbent that the OR (Other Rank) must be discharged.''
The learned counsel submits that an order of discharge cannot be passed unless a Sepoy has earned four or more Red ink entries.
This contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, it deserves mention that the order of discharge has been passed under Rule 13(3) Item 3(v) whereunder it has been clearly provided that an order of discharge can be passed - (i) ``on fulfilling the conditions of his enrolment''; (ii) on completion of a period of Army Service only, there being no vacancy in the Reserve''; (iii) having been found medically unfit for further service; (iv) at his own request before fulfilling the conditions of his enrolment; and (iv) all other classes of discharge.
This (clause iv) is the residuary provision.
It permits the authority to get rid of a person who is not covered by sub-clause (i) to (iii) but he is otherwise considered to be undesirable for further retention in service.
The safeguard provided to the employee is in the form of ``an opportunity to show cause against the order of discharge''.
This requirement had been duly complied with.
Still further, the facts of the case speak for themselves.
It is probably on account of the serious allegation of rape that, the petitioner had pleaded for clemency.
He had not suggested that his work and conduct had been good.
He had only prayed for mercy.
In view of the circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that the authority had acted either unfairly or arbitrarily.
11.
It was also pointed out that the order passed by the Chief of the Army Staff rejecting the petitioner's appeal was not a speaking order.
It is true that the communication dated November 21, 1988 did not by itself assign any reason.
However, the record as produced by the respondents shows that the facts of the case had been examined and thereafter, the impugned communication had been sent to the petitioner.
In this situation, it cannot be said that there was no application of mind or that the appeal had been rejected without proper consideration.
12.
Major Johal also submitted that the whole case was trotted out against the petitioner on account of the fact that his relations with Major AK Bhakri were not cordial.
He has pointed out an allegation in the petition that a civil truck bearing registration No. PAP 0106 owned by his brother-in- law was kept parked near the Unit gate for about three months.
Mr. Bhakri had asked him (the petitioner) to provide free food from the ``Unit langar'' to the driver of the truck.
He had resented this improper order.
Therefore, Mr. Bhakri was against him.
Resultantly, the petitioner was got involved in a false case of rape in which he has been acquitted.
13.
The contention raised by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
Firstly Mr. Bhakri has not been impleaded as a party.
Secondly, it appears that Major Bhakri had appeared as witness No. 9 during the Court of Enquiry.
The petitioner was given an opportunity to question him.
He asked him only one question.
``Did he saw (see) me around 1900 hours on 12th boarding the Bus at RP gate ?''
No question regarding the truck or serving of food to the truck driver was asked.
Consequently, it appears that this plea has been raised by the petitioner only at a later stage when he was tried for the offence of rape.
It may also be mentioned that in his appeal to the Chief of the Army Staff, the petitioner had mentioned that he had been deprived of his acting rank under section 63 of the Act on the basis of a complaint filed by Balbir Singh, Smt. Sheela Devi and Major AK Bhakri in Civil Court.
However, no allegation regarding the truck etc. was made.
In this situation, especially in view of the fact that Major Bhakri has had no chance to controvert the allegation, the plea raised by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
14.
Before parting with the case, it may be noticed that discipline is of paramount importance in the Army.
The petitioner's conduct had been found wanting on various occasions.
In the year 1975, he had been awarded 28 days' rigorous imprisonment for being intoxicated.
In the year 1979, the petitioner had been awarded seven days' rigorous imprisonment for absence from place of duty.
Again he was found guilty of conduct unbecoming of a member of the Armed Forces.
Taking all these facts into consideration, the competent authority could have come to a reasonable conclusion that the petitioner has not shown a sense of discipline or responsibility expected of a member of the disciplined force.
Even though he has been acquitted subsequently by the Court, the fact remains that Balbir Singh and his wife had categorically stated during the investigation that he had raped Smt. Sheela Devi in spite of the fact that she had been in an advanced stage of pregnancy.
She had undoubtedly resiled from her statement before the Court.
Mr. Pipat states that this must have happened on account of the fact that the petitioner had already lost his job and out of sheer kindness, the lady had chosen to resile from her earlier statement so that he did not have to suffer substantive sentence of imprisonment.
It may be so.
However, in the circumstances of the case, no ground for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
If persons who are discharged from the Army on account of conduct unbecoming of a member of the Armed Forces are ordered to be reinstated, the discipline is bound to suffer.
In the circumstances of the case, the action of the respondents appears to be justified.
It calls for no interference.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
However since the petitioner has already lost his job, there will be no order as to costs.