NK Kapoor, J - Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he has acquired the status of a regular employee in Haryana Roadways at Jind and is, thus, entitled to remain in service with all consequential service benefits.
According to the plaintiff he was appointed by defendant No. 2 as Helper/Water Boy on daily wages from 131987 and his appointment was extended from time to time and this way he worked for more than 275 days and so defendant No. 2 acted illegally and arbitrarily in not according sanction to plaintiff to remain in service after 30111987.
According to the plaintiff since he had already rendered a continuous service for more than 240 days his services are liable to be regularised in view of the instructions issued to all the General Managers of Haryana Roadways.
2.
Defendants resisted the suit on a number of grounds including that the civil Court has got no jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the plaintiff has attained the status of regular employee under he defendants ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPP.
(2) Whether the civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
(3) Whether the suit is bad for want of requisite notice under Section 80 CPC ?
OPD.
(4) Relief.
3.
Trial Court on the basis of evidence came to the conclusion that the plaintiff has worked for more than 240 days and so has attained the status of a regular employee.
This issue was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 2 the Court held that in view of the full Bench decision of this Court in Sukhi Ram v. State of Haryana, 1982 PLR 717 civil Court can entertain and adjudicate the present dispute.
Accordingly, this issue was decided against the defendants.
Issue No. 3 was also decided against the defendants.
Resultantly, suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
4.
The lower appellate Court relying upon the decision of apex Court in The Premier Automobiles Ltd. v. Kamlakar Shantaram Wadke and others, AIR 1975 SC 2238 as well as the decision in Jitendra Nath Biswas v. M/s Empire of India and Ceylon Tea Co and another, 1989(3) Supreme Court Cases 582 held that the precise dispute can be appropriately examined under the Industrial Disputes Act and so reversed the finding of the trial Court in respect of issue No. 2.
This way, judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the lower appellate Court has erred in law in non-suiting the plaintiff on the ground of want of jurisdiction.
According to the appellant this Court in Sukhi Ram's case (supra) held that if the right or liability flows from the Act itself then the remedy would lie within the procedural provisions of the same statute alone.
Where the right or obligation giving rise to the industrial dispute springs from a source other then the Act, that is, under the general law, then the workman is expressly given two alternative remedies.
In such a case it is his discretion to either make resort to the ordinary jurisdiction of civil Courts or to seek the remedies under the Act.
In the instant case, the plaintiff exercised his option and so approached the Court for the necessary relief.
As a matter of fact in the facts and circumstances of the present case no such precise dispute is to be resolved by an Industrial Court, for the reason that the precise claim in relation to the post is based upon his service record which as per documents plainly has proved that he worked for more than 240 days.
So, in the context of the present case and especially in view of the policy of the Government to regularise such persons who have worked for more than 240 days he is merely to seek the declaration as prayed in the present suit and its consequential benefits.
So, the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court deserves to be set aside.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand argued that the matter in dispute is squarely covered by the decision of the apex Court as noticed by the lower appellate Court as well.
According to the counsel, the precise matter falls within the ambit of Industrial Disputes Act and so the appeal deserves to be dismissed on this ground alone.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision in Jitendra Nath Biswas's case (supra).
6.
In The Premier Automobiles Limited's case (supra) the Court held as under :-  ``The principles applicable to the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in relation to an industrial dispute may be stated thus : (1) If the dispute is not an industrial dispute, nor does it relate to enforcement of any other right under the Act the remedy lies only in the Civil Court.
(2) If the dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a right or liability under the general common law and not under the Act, the jurisdiction of the civil Court is alternative, leaving it to the election of the suitor concerned to choose his remedy for the relief which is competent to be granted in a particular remedy.
(3) If the industrial dispute relates to the enforcement of a right or an obligation created under the Act, then the only remedy available to the suitor is to get an adjudication under the Act.
(4) If the right which is sought to be enforced is a right created then the remedy for its enforcement is either Section 33-C or the raising of an industrial dispute, as the case may be.''
In Jitendra Nath Biswas's case (supra) dilating upon Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code as well as upon Sections 2(k), 10 and 12 of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Court held that ``the scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act clearly excludes the jurisdiction of the civil Court by implication in respect of remedies which are available under this Act and for which a complete procedure and machinery has been provided in this Act''.
7.
In the context of the present case plaintiff claims regularisation as well as his continuance in the post.
He was appointed as a Helper/Water Boy on daily wages and as per the case of the plaintiff had worked for almost 275 days.
Whether the plaintiff in fact worked for more than 240 days and whether same confers upon him such rights being a worker consequently lie within the ambit of a Labour Court.
Jurisdiction of civil Court is specifically barred with regard to the disputes which are covered by the Industrial Disputes Act.
Thus, I find no infirmity in the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court.
8.
Since the plaintiff had been bona fidely prosecuting the case and was also successful before the trial Court, the time spent by the plaintiff in prosecuting the proceedings before all these three Courts needs to be excluded while calculating the period of limitation within which a worker is to file a claim before a Labour Court.
Thus, while dismissing the appeal, I direct that the time spent by the plaintiff i.e. from the date of filing of suit till the passing of the judgment of this Court be excluded.
Appeal dismissed.