NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order of Senior Superintendent of Police dated 1281983 and of DAG, Patiala Range, Patiala dated 1271985 are illegal, null and void, ultra vires, un- constitutional, against the principle of natural justice and against service rules and regulations governing services of the plaintiff and so are liable to be set aside.
3.
Briefly put, the appellant was recruited as a Constable on 161982.
He was sent to Police Recruiting Training Centre, Jahan Khelan, District Hoshiarpur, for a nine months training.
It is during the training period that he suffered from acute ankle pain and so was allowed to get himself medically checked up.
Plaintiff remained under treatment of one Hakim Ram Parshad from 25.5.1983 but could not recover.
Thereafter he again obtained five days leave from Deputy Superintendent of Police but did not recover on account of acute ankle pain for the period from 3151983 to 561983.
However, according to the plaintiff, Superintendent of Police at the training centre marked the plaintiff as absent during the aforesaid period and finally passed an order for discharge under Rule 1221 of Punjab Police Rules.
4.
Defendants contested the case on a number of grounds, namely, that the Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit as no cause of action has arisen at Patiala; that the plaintiff was discharged from service under Punjab Police Rules 12.21 vide order dated 1281983 and since suit has not been filed within a period of one year from the order of discharge dated 1281983, the same is barred.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the order of S.S.P., Sangrur dated 1281983 and of DIG Patiala dated 1371985 are illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void against the principles of natural justice and service rules and regulations ?
If so its effect ?
OPP.
(2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPP.
(3) Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD.
(4) Whether the Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the present suit ?
OPD.
(5) Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
(6) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
(7) Relief.
6.
Under issue No. 1 the trial Court came to the conclusion that the order of SSP, Sangrur dated 1281983 and DIG, Patiala dated 1271985 are legal, valid and constitutional.
So, this issue was decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 3 was decided against the defendants and in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 4, the Court held that civil Court at Patiala had jurisdiction to try the suit.
Under issue No. 5, the Court held that as the order of discharge is dated 1281983 suit having been filed on 11111987 is time barred.
Issue No. 6 was not pressed and so was decided against the defendants.
In view of the findings of the Court in respect of issues No. 1 and 5, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
7.
Lower appellate Court too on considering the matter found no ground to vary or reverse the findings recorded by the trial Court.
Thus, the appeal too was dismissed.
8.
Challenging the concurrent findings of the Courts below, the learned counsel for the appellant has termed these to be wholly illegal.
According to the counsel, the Courts have erred in law in coming to a conclusion that the order of discharge exhibit P-16 is a valid order.
According to the counsel, it is the case of the defendants that the plaintiff wilfully absented himself from the training at PRTC, Jahan Khelan on two different occasions without any leave/permission.
It has been further stated in the written statement that plaintiff when sent to civil Hospital, Hoshiarpur for his medical check up regarding his knee injury did not get his treatment from civil Hospital and instead of that wilfully absented without obtaining any leave or permission.
Thus, order of discharge is in fact based upon the alleged wilful default of the plaintiff and so it was incumbent upon the authorities to hold an appropriate enquiry before terminating his service.
Reliance has been placed upon the following decisions:-  (1) Brahma Nand v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 360(P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 509.
(2) State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 427(SC) : 1995(2) RSJ 869.
(3) Samsher Singh (Ex-Constable) v. State of Haryana of others, 1996(1) SCT 383(P&H) : 1996(1) SLR 298.
(4) Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, 1984(1) SLJ 428.
9.
Counsel for the respondents on the other hand argued that impugned order of discharge dated 1281983 is order of discharge simpliciter.
As per Punjab Police Rule 1221 a person who is not likely to become good police officer can be discharged in terms of Punjab Police Rule 1221 within three years from the date of his appointment.
The authorities after watching his performance during his short span of service came to the conclusion that the plaintiff is not likely to prove a good police officer and so decided to dispense with his services.
The order of discharge does not cast any stigma upon the plaintiff.
The order is in confirmity with the decision of the full Bench of this Court in Sher Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(1) PLR 456.
Otherise too, both the Courts on appreciation of evidence have come to the conclusion that the order of discharge does not cast any stigma upon the plaintiff.
The appeal is thus, devoid of merit and deserves to be dismissed.
10.
Facts have been briefly noticed.
Plaintiff was appointed as a Constable on 161982 and sent for training to PRTC, Jahan Khelan, during which time he is stated to have remained absent on two different occasions without any permission or leave ultimately leading to the passing of order of discharge on 1281983.
Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rule reads as :-  ``A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule.''
While dispensing with the services of the plaintiff, the Senior Superintendent of Police has passed the following order :-  ``Constable Krishan Kumar No. 735/SGR is not likely to become a good police officer and as such, he is discharged under PPR 12.21 with effect from 1281983.
Issue orders in OB and to all concerned for compliance.''
11.
The precise point came up for consideration before the full Bench in Sher Singh's case (supra), wherein it has been held as under :-  ``(1) A Constable can be discharged from service under Rule 1221 at any time within three years of his enrolment in spite of the fact that there is a specific allegation which may even amount to misconduct against him; (2) A Superintendent of Police can form his opinion regarding the likelihood or otherwise of a constable making a good police officer not only on the basis of the periodic reports contemplated under Rule 195 but also on the basis of any other relevant material; and (3) The provisions of Rule 1625 and Article 311 shall be attracted only when the punishing authority decides to punish the constable.''
12.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the plaintiff has been discharged as he is not likely to become a good police officer.
Such a remark cannot be construed to be a stigma upon a person.
No material has been brought on record on the basis of which the Court could infer that the order of simpliciter discharge is merely a ruse.
Rule 1221 is intended to weed out the inefficient, indisciplined and incompetent police personnels.
In the instant case it has come on record that the plaintiff absented during his training without seeking permission of the concerned authority.
So, the view taken by the Courts below that the order of discharge is as per Punjab Police Rules 12.21 is perfectly legal being in conformity with the decision of the full Bench, referred above.
13.
The judgment in Brahma Nand's case (supra) has in fact no applicability on the facts of the present case.
In that case, the petitioner's services were dispensed with on the ground that wilfully absented from duty on about different seven occasions.
A specific reference was made to the period during which he wilfully absented from the duty.
It is in this context that the Court held that it was incumbent upon the authorities to issue him a show cause notice and thus afford an opportunity to rebut the accusations made.
In the present case, there is no such allegation in the order of discharge exhibit P-16.
14.
Similarly, in State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander's case (supra), the Court held that in case an order of discharge causes stigma, principles of justice do require that an opportunity should be given to explain the grounds on which the SP proposes to pass an order of discharge.
In the aforesaid order it was mentioned that he is not likely to prove an efficient officer because he is a habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and indisciplined.
It is in these circumstances that the Court held that since proper procedure has not been adopted the order of discharge is vitiated by manifest error.
15.
To the similar effect is the observation of the division Bench in Samsher Singh's case (supra) that the order of discharge cast a stigma.
16.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment the order of discharge is simpliciter and is in confirmity with the mandate of the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The Courts below on considering the matter have come to the conclusion that whereas the order of discharge was passed on 1281983 and appeal therefrom too was dismissed on 1271985 (though no such appeal was maintainable) yet the suit was filed on 11111987 i.e. after the expiry of the period of one year as per Article 100 of the limitation Act.
No meaningful argument has been advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant assailing the correctness of the decisions of the Courts below in respect of issue No. 5.
On the considering the matter, I am of the view that the suit is barred by limitation also.
17.
Thus, finding no merit in the appeal the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.