Swatanter Kumar, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2.
This petition under Section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, filed by the petitioner with a prayer that the respondents have failed to carry out the orders of a Division Bench of this Court dated 19121995.
Vide this order a writ for issuance of Mandamus was disposed of by the Division Bench directing the respondents to reimburse the medical expenses incurred by the petitioner on his treatment in PGI Chandigarh.
While allowing the writ petition the Division Bench directed the respondents to reimburse the amount of Rs. 67,85200, the amount of bill which was submitted in November, 1993, along with interest at the rate of 12% per annum for a period of two years.
The respondents were directed to make payment within one month of the receipt of the copy of the order which was directed to be given dasti to the counsel.
In the event of default the respondents were liable to pay interest at the rate of 18% per annum from the date immediately after the period of one month as aforestated.
The petitioner on 5.2.1996 made a representation along with the copy of the order, to the respondents and thereafter submitted reminder on 1931996.
However, the petitioner was not paid these amounts, thus compelling him to file the present contempt petition on 251996.
3.
Shri KK Srivastava, J vide order dated 351996 passed a fresh direction that the respondents are directed to release the amount due, together with interest at the rate mentioned in the order of Division Bench, within one month from the date on which copy of the order dated 351996 was furnished to them.
In default, notice was issued for 1771996.
This order was admittedly served upon the respondents still they did not make the payment to the petitioner within one month ie or the before 461996.
As a result of the non-compliance of the above directions notice was issued to the respondents for 1771996.
The respondents have filed their replies.
4.
It is conceded before me that the payment was made to the petitioner on 371996 admittedly much after the lapse of one month as granted by the Division Bench and the said order of the Division Bench dated 19121995 was passed in the presence of counsel for the parties.
5.
The petitioner has also placed on record as Annexure P-4 instructions issued by the Government of Punjab, Department of Personal Administrative Reforms on 27.10.1994 referring to a judgment of this Court and directing the concerned departments to dispose of such medical bills expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of receipt of such bills by the concerned department.
These instructions were in existence much prior to the filing of the writ petition even.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents no reasons whatsoever, has been given for all this delay and for non-complying with the order of the Division Bench as well as the direction issued by the learned Single Judge.
6.
This prima facie is a contempt of the orders of the Court as because of mere callousness and irresponsible attitude the orders of the Court have not been carried out in spite of repeated directions.
But what is the most material consideration that falls for consideration before this Court is as to who should pay the penal interest i.e. interest at the rate of 18% per annum from the date immediately preceding the expiry of the one month's period granted by Division Bench.
Should it be a common man who in fact should be responsible to pay such penal interest because of such amounts paid by the department are ultimately taken out from the Government Exchequer which is a public money.
Is it the some officials of the department who are particularly in default and it is their default which should result in un- necessary expenditure of public money or they should be held personally liable in this regard.
There is no justification worth the name to show why the payment was not made after 18.1.1996 till 371996.
In any case, why the payment was not made after 351996.
Another direction was issued by the Court in this contempt petition itself.
The irresponsible attitude is writ large in this case and the petitioner has been forced to approach the Court on two different occasions without any sufficient reason or ground.
The Government of Punjab having issued such instructions could hardly leave any scope for delaying the payment of the bill of the petitioner which was the reimbursement of the amount already spent by him in a Government Institute i.e. PGI Chandigarh.
Should an employee be made to suffer and run from piller to post in various offices of the administration to request for payment of such claim and then ultimately approach Courts for each step to be taken towards such payment.
This would never the intention of the Rules nor it could be in the interest of employee and employer's relationship.
This irresponsible and callous attitude of the employees of the departments certainly needs to be condemned and appropriate steps need to taken by the concerned authorities to prevent such harassment to employees and un- necessary burdening of the public funds.
There could not be occasion for payment of the penal interest if the respondent could have acted with a little care, caution and sense of responsibility.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents has placed emphasis on the entire additional affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents to show that the delay has been explained.
The contention needs to be rejected, because files have to move from one table to the others.
They have to be seen by the concerned officer and they must go to the concerned departments.
Question is whether they should move at a right pace and expeditiously and specially when the orders of the Courts have been issued in this regard, or they should be dealt with utmost disregard to the directions of the Court and in a causal manner.
8.
The counsel for the petitioner has brought to the notice of the Court that large number of contempt petitions are being filed every day against these very respondents because their attitude is that they do not carry out the orders and directions of the Court within the stipulated time.
This fact is also correct and cannot be ignored because there are certainly number of contempt petitions filed against this department.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondents while tendering an un-conditional apology on behalf of his clients submits that in future every possible effort would be made to carry out the directions of the Courts and not to invite such contempt petitions under any circumstances.
10.
I am not quite satisfied with what has been submitted on behalf of the respondent and keeping in view the above facts and circumstances of the case, following directions are issued:-  (i) Both the respondents No. 1 and 2 shall appear in this Court on 581996.
They shall file a personal affidavit before this Court assuring that the directions of the Court would be implemented in every case within the stipulated time and they would take all possible steps to streamline the working of the department so as to avoid filing of large number of un- necessary contempt petitions/cases in courts.
This affidavit would be filed by them while they are present in person in Court.
(iii) The petitioner would be entitled to interest at the rate of 18% per annum from 19.1.1996 to 271996.
(iii) The balance amount of interest payable to the petitioner would be paid positively by the respondents on the next date of hearing in Court.
This interest of 18% for the afore mentioned period initially would be paid by the Government.
(iv) Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 shall be personally liable to conduct a departmental enquiry; conclude the same within three months from today; fix responsibility of all the officers/officials who delayed this case/payment right from November, 1993 till 271996 and the persons held to be responsible shall pay in equal share this amount.
(v) The result of the enquiry after conclusion would be submitted by the respondents No. 1 and 2 to the Registrar of this Court irrespective of the fact that this petition may be disposed of prior thereto.
(vi) Respondent No. 1 and 2 shall also submit to the Registrar of this Court the steps taken by them for implementing the directions issued by the Punjab Government as well as to improve the functioning of their department as assured by learned counsel for the respondents.
List the matter for further directions on 581996.
Copy of the order be given dasti to the all concerned duly attested by the Reader of the Court.