SC Malte, J - This appeal can be disposed of at the motion stage.
Appellant Ram Kumar was appointed as a Constable on 17.8.1970.
He was subjected to departmental enquiry on the allegation that he remained absent unauthorisedly for a span of 42 days since the time he left for one day's casual leave on 13.3.1985.
Appeal filed against that order failed.
The plaintiff-appellant therefore, filed a suit.
His main contention was that the departmental enquiry was conducted contrary to the provisions or rules, and that he was not afforded reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
These contentions came to be denied by the defendant-State.
2.
The trial Court held that sufficient opportunity had been granted to the plaintiff to defend himself in the departmental enquiry.
It further found that there was no illegality conducted during the course of enquiry.
Consequently, it dismissed the suit.
Against that judgment and decree, appeal was preferred to the District Court.
The District Court concurred with the finding given by the trial Court and dismissed the appeal.
Against that judgment and decree, present appeal was filed.
3.
In so far as it pertains to the ground that sufficient opportunity was not afforded to defend during the departmental enquiry, I find that aspect has been gone into details by both the Courts below.
The District Judge in his judgment in para 16 has observed that the plaintiff failed to establish that sufficient opportunity was not afforded to him to defend himself in the departmental enquiry.
The trial Court has also taken into consideration the various factors which indicate that sufficient opportunity was afforded to the plaintiff to defend himself.
The departmental enquiry was conducted in accordance with the rules under the Punjab Police Rules, of 1934.
As per these rules, a summary of allegation and list of witnesses and other documents was supplied to delinquent Ram Kumar-plaintiff.
Sufficient opportunity was afforded to him to cross-examine the witnesses.
Thereafter he led the defenence evidence also.
In para 10 of the trial Court's judgment all these aspects have been dealt with at length.
Briefly stated, therefore, I find no substance in the contention that sufficient opportunity was not afforded to the appellant to defend himself during departmental enquiry.
4.
The next point raised before me was that the departmental enquiry was hit on account of error of law and fact in the course of its conduct.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that as per rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, the punishment of dismissal can be awarded only in cases of (i) gravest act of misconduct; or, (ii) when as a result of cumulative effect of continued misconduct, the delinquent was proved to be incorrigible and completely unfit in the police service.
He further submitted that Rule 162 requires that while passing the order of dismissal, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to the pension.
On this premise he submits that this was not a case in which such an extreme punishment could have been awarded.
This argument would have been justifiably considered had the appellant-plaintiff appropriately raised it by way of contention in the plaint.
Thereby he could have raised the issue as to the correctness or otherwise of the extent of punishment as per the rules mentioned above.
In that event, the other side would have been afforded an opportunity to give its say in that respect and submit material to substantiate the sufficiency of the punishment thus awarded.
The plaintiff has unfortunately not raised that issue at the initial stage in the pleadings; nor such issue has been ever argued in the lower appellate Court.
First time in this Court submissions are being made in that respect.
The counsel for the appellant brought my attention to a case reported as Union of India v. Giriraj Sharma, AIR 1994 SC 215 in which their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed that overstaying for a period of 12 days by itself would not be such a conduct that would justify dismissal from service.
That was a case under Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.
The text of that judgment indicates that unauthorised absence in that case was a solitary incident, and that was not considered to award sufficient punishment.
On the other hand, the counsel for the respondents submitted that the appellant was dismissed on finding that he repeatedly committed such act of unauthorised absence for which he was variously punished in the past also.
In the context of that, he referred to the text of the order of dismissal passed by the Superintendent of Police who has observed that such unauthorised absence on the part of the appellant was a repeated act.
That observation had been based on the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer.
Briefly stated, therefore, had this issue been properly raised in the trial Court, the State could have also sufficient opportunity to place on record all such material that had ultimately led to the conclusion that the dismissal from service was the only proper punishment in this case.
The counsel for the respondents brought my attention to a case of this Court decided by a Division Bench in case of Karnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(4) SCT 770 (P&H) : 1993(4) RSJ 448.
In that case their Lordships of this Court observed that the absence in that case was not an isolated act, and that such absence was repeated.
In the set of those facts punishment of dismissal was not interfered.
The provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules were considered in that case.
In the conclusion, it was observed that the petitioner in that case was a habitual absentee and, therefore, the punishment awarded to him did not warrant any interference by the Court.
5.
I find that on the question of fact regarding affording sufficient opportunity during departmental enquiry, both the Courts below have given concurrent finding; and nothing could be shown to indicate that the reason given by the Courts below had suffered from any mistake.
In so far as it pertains to following the rules and procedure during departmental enquiry, nothing was spelt out to justify interference in the second appeal.
6.
For the reasons stated above, this appeal stands dismissed with costs.