NK Kapoor, J - This judgment shall dispose of RSA Nos. 271, 293, 994, 995, 1000 of 1989, 1228 of 1992 and 1487 of 1998, as the question of law as well as of fact is common.
Facts are being taken from R.S.A.
No. 271 of 1989.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from implementating order dated 18.7.19986 passed by the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Zira by virtue of which the services of the plaintiff were being terminated.
3.
It is the case of the plaintiff that in pursuance to the advertisement in the daily `Ajit', the plaintiff applied for the post of a Sewadar and was called for interview on 28.8.1985 and selected.
Plaintiff was appointed on regular basis on 31101985.
Pursuance to order of appointment plaintiff joined the service in November, 1985 and had been working to the entire satisfaction of his superiors.
The plaintiff assailed the order of termination being contrary to the Rules/regulations governing such an appointment and otherwise too being discriminatory in nature, sought a declaration that the order be declared as illegal, against Rules, and against principle of natural justice.
4.
Defendants in its written statement accepted the factum of appointment of plaintiff.
The defendants also accepted the averment made by the plaintiff that one Ashok Kumar, who too was appointed as an Octroi Clerk in pursuance to the same advertisement has been retained in service.
Other averments made in the plaint have been denied/controverted.
Preliminary objections with regard to the maintainability of suit, non-issuance of notice under Section 49 of the Punjab Municipal Act and the suit having become infructuous too were pressed by the defendants.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 1871986 passed by the Executive Officer of Municipal Committee, Zira as well as the order dated 1771986 passed by the Administrator are illegal, null and void and against the rules and principles of natural justice ?
OPP.
2.
Whether notice under Section 49 of the MC Act, 1911 has not been given to MC ?
If so its effect ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff has become infructuous ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to the suit ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permanent injunction as prayed for ?
OPP.
7.
Relief.
Crux of the dispute revolved around issue No. 1.
The trial Court on carefully examining the oral as well as documentary evidence adduced by the parties came to the conclusion that the order passed by the Executive Officer is illegal, against the principle of natural justice, and in fact has been passed with a mala fide intention.
Accordingly, this issue was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was not pressed by the defendants and so was decided accordingly.
Under issue No. 3 Court came to the conclusion that since the plaintiff was on casual leave from 1771986 to 3171986, no service was effected upon the plaintiff and so the report to the effect that service has been refused by the plaintiff does not appeal to reason.
Accordingly this issue too was decided against the defendants.
Similarly, issues 4 and 5 were decided against the defendants.
Taking up issues 6 and 7 together, the trial Court held that since the order of termination is illegal, the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction restraining the defendants from implementing the impugned order.
Thus, the suit was decreed.
6.
The appellate Court once again examined the matter on fact as well as law.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that as per the appointment letter appointment of all these plaintiffs was on probation for one year.
This being so, their services could be terminated at any time within one year from the date of their appointment without assigning any reason.
Moreover, it being a contract of personal service cannot be enforced by issuance of an injunction.
Otherwise too, it has come on record that these plaintiffs were relieved from service on 1871986 as has been admitted by them in their subsequent communication making a prayer to the Municipal Committee to take them back in service which by itself is sufficient to dis- entitle each one of them to the relief granted by the trial Court.
Since no attempt has been made to amend the plaint and so seek relief in view of the changed circumstances, grant of injunction is impermissible in law.
The lower appellate Court found substance in the contentions raised by the appellant and so accepted the appeal, thus, dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
7.
The learned counsel for the appellant has termed the conclusion of the Court below to be wholly illegal and otherwise unsustainable on facts on record.
According to the counsel the lower appellate Court has erred in law in making out entirely a new case for the defendant-respondent.
Since no such plea that the plaintiff was appointed on probation had been taken by the contesting defendant, such a plea could not be raised and accepted by the Court below.
Elaborating the counsel argued that as per averment in the written statement it is the case of the defendant-Municipal Committee that the services of the plaintiff were in fact terminated in view of some communication of the Punjab Government prohibiting them from making fresh appointments.
So, it was incumbent upon the Court to examine the legality or propriety of the impugned order in the light of the pleadings of the parties only.
Interestingly, whereas the Courts below have come to a positive conclusion that there was no embargo on the recruitment of persons (in the context of the present case) by the Punjab Government yet all the same a legitimate relief has been declined on a ground which has not even been urged by the defendant.
This way, the lower appellate Court has indeed travelled beyond the ambit and scope of the pleadings of the parties.
Besides it, the Court below has erred in law in placing reliance upon an application filed by the plaintiff seeking his reinstatement in view of the decision of the trial Court and so inferring that the plaintiff had in fact been relieved on 1871986.
According to the counsel, firstly no attempt has been made by the defendant-the respondent to prove this communication according to law and secondly, even if this document was to be taken into consideration it was incumbent upon the Court to grant a reasonable opportunity to the plaintiff to rebut the same.
Similarly, the Court erred in law in declining the claim set up by the plaintiff on the ground that a contract of personal service cannot be enforced.
According to the counsel, no doubt under general law a contract of personal service cannot be enforced but in the instant case the appointment having been made by a statutory authority in terms of the provisions of the Act and the Rules, the same could be dispensed with only in strict compliance of the Rules governing such a service.
Otherwise too, Constitution of India guarantees certain fundamental rights to its citizens.
So, the Court ought in the facts and circumstances of the case examine the case in the light of the provisions of the Constitution and Rules governing the service which aspect has been simply glossed over, thus, resulting in failure of justice.
8.
Facts have been briefly noticed i.e. calling plaintiff for interview on 28.8.1985, finding him fit for appointment as Sewadar and issuance of appointment letter dated 31101985 and his joining of the service in the month of November, 1985.
Defendant on the other hand has justified the termination of the services of the plaintiff on the ground that since plaintiff was appointed during the ban imposed by the Punjab Government so the Committee passed a resolution No. 97 dated 1771986, thus, dispensing with the services of the plaintiff.
Thus, it is admitted case of the parties that the plaintiff's services have been dispensed with on account of the ban imposed by the Punjab Government regarding induction of new persons to the various posts.
The trial Court examined this aspect and on the basis of the material placed before the Court, came to the conclusion that firstly the so called ban on fresh recruitments by the Punjab Government did not see light of the day and secondly, the same was not applicable to the case of the plaintiff as the appointment was earlier in point of time.
The trial Court on the aforesaid two grounds held that order to be illegal.
Before the lower appellate Court the defendant Municipal Committee did not press it and so it can be taken that the observation made by the trial Court as to non-existence of any such ban or its applicability has been accepted by the lower appellate Court as well.
This in fact was the only defence set up by the defendant to resist the claim of the plaintiff.
Precisely for this reason the trial Court found no substance with regard to non-issuance of notice under Section 49 before filing the suit.
The plea that plaintiff's services have been terminated/dispensed with during the period of probation was raised before the lower appellate Court.
There being no pleading such a plea could not be examined by the lower appellate Court, especially when no prayer was made to seek amendment of the written statement to raise this specific plea by way of additional objection.
This way the Court below travelled beyond the pleadings of the parties and thus has faulted to this extent.
There is no denying the fact that services of a probationer can be dispensed with during the period of probation but all the same it has to be a conscious decision of the authorities.
Concededly, at no time the authorities thought of dispensing with the services for any such legitimate ground.
9.
The case can be examined from another angle as well.
As to whether the plaintiff has been served with any notice or paid in lieu of period of notice before terminating his services.
This too has not been complied with by the Municipal Committee.
The appellant has assailed the order on the ground of discrimination as well i.e. whereas Ashok Kumar, who was appointed as Octroi Clerk in pursuance to the same advertisement as that of the plaintiff has been retained in service, services of the others like the plaintiff have been terminated.
This fact has been accepted by the Municipal Committee.
No attempt has been made to justify the termination of the services of some of the employees while retaining the others.
So, the charge of discrimination stands proved.
10.
Whether contract of personal service can be enforced by issuance of an injunction is another point which has been strenuously argued by the appellant as well as by the respondent.
Broadly put, a contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced.
The Court will not compel one man to continue to employ another in service of a personal nature, i.e. service of such a nature which depends for its efficiency upon the personal qualities of him with whom the contract is entered into and more especially when it is a service of trust and confidence.
So, also agreements strictly personal in nature like hiring of a service for the purpose of pleasure or for the purpose of scientific pursuit etc. etc.
Thus, a person cannot be compelled to employ a person against his will as his confidential servant for duties with respect to due performance of which the utmost confidence is required.
Thus, under the common law the Court will not ordinarily force an employer to retain the service of employee whom he no longer wishes to employ.
But this Rule is subject to certain well recognised exceptions.
It is open for the Court in an appropriate case to declare that a public servant who is dismissed from service in contravention of Article 311 continues to remain in service, even though by so doing the State is in effect forced to continue to employ the servant whom it does not desire to employ.
Similarly, under the industrial law, jurisdiction of the labour and industrial tribunal to compel the employer to employ a worker, who he does not desire to employ, is recognised.
Courts are thus invested with the power to declare invalid the act of a statutory body, if by doing the act the body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by statute, even if by making the declaration the body is compelled to do something which it does not desire to do.
Concededly, the powers of a statutory body are always subject to the statute which has constituted it and so must be exercised consistently with the statute.
The Courts have, in appropriate cases the power to declare an action of the body illegal or ultra vires, even if the action relates to determination of employment of a servant.
The precise point came up for consideration in SR Tewari v. The District Board, Agra, AIR 1964 SC 1680 and the Court held as under :-  ``7.
The question whether the Court would be justified in granting a declaration about the invalidity of the action of a statutory body terminating the employment of a servant was raised before the House of Lords in Vine v. National Dock Labour Board, 1957 AC 488.
The plaintiff, a dock worker in the reserved pool, under the scheme set up under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Order, 1947 failed to obey an order to report for work with a company of stevedores and the local board instructed their disciplinary committee to hear the case against the plaintiff.
The committee terminated the employment of the plaintiff giving seven days' notice, and this decision was confirmed by the appellate board.
The plaintiff then claimed in an action instituted by him a declaration that his purported dismissal was illegal, ultra vires, and invalid, and also damages for wrongful dismissal.
The Trial Court granted the declaration and also damages.
The Court of appeal set aside the declaration.
The House of Lords restored the declaration, for in their view the purported dismissal was a nullity, since the local board had no power to delegate its disciplinary functions.
Prima facie, jurisdiction of the Court in an appropriate case to declare an order passed by a statutory body, even if the order relates to the termination of the employment of a servant of the body, may not be denied.
8.
The contention raised by counsel for The Board that a petition for a declaration that the employment of the appellant was not lawfully terminated and on that account the Board be commanded to treat the appellant as lawfully in service cannot be maintained, must be rejected.
The jurisdiction to declare the decision of the Board as ultra vires exists, though it may be exercised only when the Court is satisfied that departure is called for from the rule that a contract of service will not ordinarily be specifically enforced.''
11.
In the context of the present case admittedly the plaintiff was appointed under the provisions of Municipal Act and the bye-laws of the Municipal Committee.
Order of termination is alleged to be on the basis of a ban imposed by the Punjab Government which document too has not seen the light of the day.
Thus, it can be taken that the termination too is not as per the terms of the appointment letter.
Such an order of termination is legally un-sustainable, especially when it is based on a non-existent ground.
The statutory authority is to act according to Rules and any action of it is to be tested on the touchstone upon the powers which vest with such an authority.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the order of termination having been passed without any valid ground is illegal and non est.
I also do not find any substance in the plea of the respondent that the plaintiff's services were legally terminated before filing of the suit.
Lower appellate Court in para No. 10 of the judgment has made mention of an application filed by the plaintiff to the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Zira requesting that he be put on duty, wherein reference has been made to the termination order dated 1871986.
The lower appellate Court has construed this to be an admission on the part of the plaintiff that in fact he was relieved on 1871986.
Approach of the Court below is erroneous on two grounds; firstly, a photo copy of the communication addressed by the plaintiff for his absorption in view of the judgment of the trial Court in his favour could not be adversely construed against him for the reason that it records the order of termination to be dated 1871986.
A perusal of the communication addressed to the Executive Officer reveals that the plaintiff made a request for his re-induction probably on 14121987 - the date when this application has been received in the office of the Municipal Committee (after the decision of the Court on 2121987).
Secondly, even if this document were to be taken that too without proof; at least an opportunity ought to have been granted to the plaintiff to rebut or explain the circumstances in which such an application was addressed.
On carefully examining the document, I am of the view that this communication was merely addressed to seek the relief which had been granted by the Court and so the same ought to have been examined with the same background.
The trial Court in fact on the basis of evidence adduced has come to the conclusion that no service had been effected upon the plaintiff as he remained on casual leave from 1771986 to 3171986.
Accordingly, I accept the appeals, set aside the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court and affirm that of trial Court.
12.
Plaintiff worked with defendant-Municipal committee for about 7 months.
Plaintiff's service could be dispensed with as per terms of appointment letter - being a probationer.
It is a different matter that Municipal Committee chose to terminate the service on account of a non-existent ground - reason which has weighed with the Court.
So I am of the view that it would not be just in the circumstances of the case, to award the plaintiff backwages for this period on the principle `No work - No pay'.
Accordingly, while accepting the appeal and ordering reinstatement, decline ancillary relief of backwages.
Defendant is directed to allow the plaintiff to join his duties without creating hurdles.
Since the plaintiffs have been unnecessarily dragged to this litigation, I allow these appeals with costs.
Cost is quantified at Rs. 5000/- in each case.