RL Anand, J - The State of Punjab has filed this appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree 24.3.1979 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 661978 passed by the Court of Sub-Judge 3rd Class, Jalandhar, who decreed the suit of the plaintiff Aman Kumar, for declaration as prayed for.
2.
Shri Aman Kumar was Constable of PAP Jalandhar Cantt.
and filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 27.1.1977 passed by the Commandant, 7th B., P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantt., discharging the plaintiff from service was illegal void, unlawful and unconstitutional, arbitrary, capricious, against the provisions of law, Police Rules and rules of natural justice, and was not, therefore, binding upon him and that he continued to serve as Constable as before 27.1.1977 and was entitled to all rights, privileges and emoluments attached to that rank.
3.
The case set up by the plaintiff is that he joined in the Punjab Police Department as Constable in the P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantt.
on 521971.
He worked hard, honestly and to entire satisfaction of his superior officers.
On 811976 the plaintiff proceeded on ten days casual leave as his wife was on family way and had to get the leave extended because of the illness of his wife and his own illness.
The plaintiff alleged that he sent an application for extension of leave to the Department, but no intimation was ever sent by the Department to him regarding sanction or rejection of the leave.
The plaintiff presumed that his leave had been sanctioned.
When he came to the Battalion in order to resume his duties, he was refused to join the duty and was informed that his services had been discharged from the Department with effect from 27.1.1977.
The plaintiff has assailed the order of discharge on various grounds mentioned in paragraph 8 of the plaint.
He also stated that before filing the suit, he served a notice under Section 80, CPC  4.
The suit was contested by the defendant-State and it was pleaded that the plaintiff remained absent without leave.
He did not report for duty till his dismissal in spite of the intimation sent to him.
Departmental inquiry was instituted and on its conclusion, the punishing authority passed the order of discharge.
It was alleged that the order passed by the punishing authority was legal and valid.
5.
The above pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues :-  1.
Whether the order dated 27.1.1977 discharging the plaintiff from service is illegal and void, unlawful, unconstitutional, arbitrary, capricious, null and against the provisions of law, rules and natural justice ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the plaintiff had no cause of action ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the plaintiff is debarred from bringing the suit due to his own conduct ?
OPD.
5.
Whether no valid notice under Section 80, C.P.C., has been served ?
OPD.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence before the trial Court, which decreed the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for.
6.
The State of Punjab filed the first appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, who vide the impugned judgment and decree dated 24.3.1979 dismissed the appeal of the State and the operative part of the judgment of the first appellate Court is contained in para No. 8 of the judgment, and is reproduced as follows :-  ``8.
Ex. P2 is the order of discharge.
Its perusal would show that the punishing authority did not specifically record the finding that the act complained of and proved against the delinquent official was of the gravest type demanding an order of dismissal against him.
All that was recited in the order was to the effect that misconduct of the official was grave violation of the Police Rules.
In omitting to specify on record its conclusion regarding the act proved to be one of the gravest type, the Punishing Authority violated the mandatory provisions of Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
The said rule further envisages that in making such an order, the Punishing Authority shall have regard to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
This part of the Rules has also been completely violated in the order of discharge recorded by the punishing Authority.
In Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab, 1976 Vol. (II) Service Law Reports 443, it has been held that the violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules vitiates the order of dismissal.
The said authority fully applies to the facts of the present case.
The learned trial Court rightly applied the law laid down in the said authority to the order Ex. P. 2 recorded by the Punishing Authority against the plaintiff-respondent Aman Kumar and struck down the order of discharge.
I am in incomplete agreement with the discussion, reasoning and finding of the learned trial court on issue No. 1 and other issues as well.''
7.
Still not satisfied with the decisions of the trial Court as well as the first appellate Court, the State has come in the second appeal, which is being disposed of with the help of Mr. PS Chhinna, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the appellant, and Shri AK Chopra, Advocate, appearing for the respondent, with whose assistance I have been able to go through the record of this case.
8.
Shri PS Chhinna, Senior Deputy Advocate General, has relied upon Karnail Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 770(P&H)(DB) : 1993(4) Recent Services Judgments 448, and submitted that the respondent was a member of the disciplined force.
He remained absent from duty and he did not send any information to the authorities in order to get his leave extended, therefore, the Punishing Authority was justified in passing the order of discharge from service by exercising powers under Rule 162(1) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
This submission is devoid of any merit because in the cited case the dismissal of the employee was on the basis that he habitually remained absent from duty and he did not reform himself.
The record of that official revealed that on previous occasions too he was awarded punishment on eight different occasions for remaining absent from duty.
He remained absent from duty continuously for 5 months and 5 days.
There had been repeated acts of remaining absent from duty for which he had been awarded punishment and the past record was taken into consideration while awarding punishment of dismissal from service.
In such circumstances it was held by the Division Bench that the order of dismissal did not suffer from any infirmity.
9.
No doubt the plaintiff belonged to a disciplined force but every case has to be examined on its own merits.
It is the common case that the plaintiff went on leave on the ground that his wife was on family way.
According to the plaintiff, he applied for the extension of leave on the ground of illness of his wife as well as of himself.
There is no evidence on the record to show that the previous record of the plaintiff shows him to be a habitual defaulter from duty.
The impugned order dated 2711977 (Exhibit P-2) does not indicate that the punishing authority was satisfied and came to the conclusion that the absence from duty of the plaintiff was grave so as to justify the passing of the impugned order of discharge/dismissal from service.
The punishing authority ought to have applied its mind before awarding the extreme penalty and ought to have taken into consideration his entire service record.
10.
Learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, has also placed reliance on VK Verma v. The Hindustan Machine Tools Limited, Pinjore, Tehsil Kalka, District Ambala through its Executive Director/Managing Director and another, 1994(1) SCT 183(P&H) : 1994(1) Recent Services Judgments 138, in support of his earlier argument, which is again to be nullified and repelled because in the cited case the employee was found to be absent from duty more than once and it was noticed that he was virtually a habitual absentee, and in such a situation, if the management found that he deserved the punishment of dismissal and did not find any extenuating circumstances to warrant the imposition of a lesser penalty, no fault could be found with its action.
Here the order Exhibit P-2 nowhere speaks that the plaintiff was a habitual absentee from duty or that his past record had also been taken into consideration or that his length of service and his claim of pension were taken into account before passing the impugned order.
11.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondent Shri AK Chopra, has relied upon Gurdev Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1976(2) SLR 442.
This authority was incidentally relied upon by the first appellate Court and rightly too.
The ratio of this judgment can be applied with full force to the facts in hand.
Learned counsel for the respondent has also relied upon Bhim Singh v. Haryana State and others, 1991(3) SLR 721; and The State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123(P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174, and submitted that the punishing authority did not take into consideration the length of service of the employee and his right of pension nor there is any finding that the alleged misconduct was of the gravest type and in these circumstances the order (Exhibit P-2) cannot be endorsed by the Law Courts.
I am in full agreement with the ratio of all these authorities, which are helpful to me in deciding the controversy in hand and it is held that the order of dismissal/discharge of the plaintiff-respondent (Exhibit P- 1) cannot be upheld in the eyes of law.
No other point was urged before me.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this appeal and by upholding the judgments and decrees of the Courts below, I dismiss the appeal of the defendant-appellant, with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.