Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner claims to be a member of the `Bauria' community.
She appeared in the entrance test held for admission to the medical colleges in the State of Punjab.
The result was declared on July 4, 1994.
The petitioner secured 7450 marks out of a total of 300.
In the result card issued to the petitioner, she was shown to be a member of the Scheduled Castes.
Having failed to secure admission in any course, she filed the present writ petition with a two fold grievance.
Firstly, it was claimed that the respondent-University had wrongly treated her as a member of the Scheduled Castes as she actually belonged to a Scheduled Tribe.
Secondly, the petitioner asserted that the State Government had made reservation to the extent of 25% for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
In fact, separate reservation should be made for the two categories.
On these premises, the petitioner prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the State of Punjab of fix a separate percentage of reservation for the members of the Scheduled Tribes.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and the principals of different colleges, it has been inter alia pointed out that `Bauria' caste to which the petitioner belongs, has been declared as a Scheduled Caste.
Accordingly, an indication was given in the result card.
However, the petitioner was not entitled to admission as she had secured only 7450 marks while the last candidates admitted ``under the reserved category of Scheduled Casts/tribe, in MBBS course has secured 122 marks out of 300 in PMT''.
Vide letter dated November 4, 1974, the State Government had raised the reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes from 20% to 25%.
Accordingly, a provision had been made even in the matter of admission to various courses like MBBS, BDS and BAMS.
It has been specifically pointed out that there are no Scheduled Tribes in the State of Punjab and as such, no separate reservation has been made for them.
3.
A separate written statement has been filed on behalf of the Punjabi University, Patiala-respondent No. 3.
It has been inter alia stated that the University follows the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
The provision has been made in the Prospectus for reservation in accordance with the instructions issued by the competent authority.
In other respects, the written statement is on the same lines as that filed on behalf of the other respondents.
4.
It appears that while the writ petition was still pending for preliminary hearing, the petitioner filed Civil Misc. application No. 10177 of 1994 with a prayer that the State of Punjab be directed to produce the documents/instructions/circulars issued from time to time on the subject of reservation of seats for the members of Scheduled Tribes and that these documents be taken into considerations for a just decision of the case.
Alongwith this application, the petitioner produced a copy of the order dated December 3, 1991 passed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 169 of 1982 Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, as Annexure P-11.
He also produced a copy of the Punjab Government Gazette dated April 19, 1977 in which the list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the Punjab State was given.
According to this document, `Bauria' community was included in the category of Scheduled Tribes.
This was produced as Annexure P.12.
However, at the hearing today, learned counsel has categorically stated that he does not want to rely on the either of these documents.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short contention raised by Mr. RN Raina, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the respondents have made reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Even though, no Presidential Order has been issued under Article 342 of the Constitution specifying that there are any Scheduled Tribes for the State of Punjab, the fact that the State Government has made reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes indicates that there are Scheduled Tribes in the State and as such, the Government should be directed to make separate reservation for them.
6.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the provisions in the Constitution for reservation in favour of any backward class of citizens are only calculated to enable the State to make the reservation.
However, no citizen has any right to claim that the State Government should be directed to make reservation by issue of a mandamus.
Accordingly, the counsel pray that the writ petition should be dismissed.
7.
The President had issued `The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950' in accordance with the provisions of Article 341 of the Constitution Learned counsel for the petitioner concedes that `Bauria' community has been included in the category of Scheduled Castes in the State of Punjab.
He further concedes that there is no order issued by the President of India under Articles 342 for the State of Punjab.
As a result, on Scheduled Tribes have been notified who may be entitled to the grant of any benefit of reservation in the State of Punjab.
In this situation, the only benefit that they can claim is as members of Scheduled Castes.
So far as that is concerned, it is the admitted position that the last candidate admitted to the course had secured 122 marks while the petitioner had been awarded only 7450.
Accordingly, she has no cause for grievance.
Otherwise, no Scheduled Tribes having been specified, the petitioner can have no claim for any reservation.
This court cannot compel the State Government by issue of a mandamus to make reservation in favour of the members of a particular community especially when it has not notified as a Scheduled Tribe.
8.
Mr. Raina submits that the State Government having made reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, it must be assumed that the State Government recognises the need for making reservation in their favour.
This is a matter which has to be decided by the Government.
This Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot compel it to make reservation.
Prima facie, it appears that `The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950' was amended by `The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976''.
In this order, Baurias are mentioned at Sr. No. 6.
It is presumably in view of the language of the order that the State Government has made reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Castes and Schedules Tribes.
However, in the absence of any order under Article 342, the members of Scheduled Tribes have no right to claim reservation as a separate class.
In any event it is a matter for consideration by the State Government.
This court under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot issue any direction compelling the Government to make separate reservation.
9.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Raina referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Marri Chandra Shakher Rao v. The Dean, Seth GS Medical College and others, 1990(2) RSJ 96 to contend that since the petitioner had been admitted in pursuance of an interim order issued by this Court, she should be allowed to continue her studies.
Learned counsel emphasised that in the above noted case, a direction had been given in this behalf by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
10.
A perusal of this decision shows that the matter was left ``to the authorities to take appropriate action about the continuance or dis- continuance of the petitioner in his studies .........'' No positive direction had been given by their Lordships.
It may be also be mentioned that in view of the provisions of Article 142 of the Constitution their Lordships of the Supreme Court haf very wide powers to issue directions.
However, the scope of jurisdiction under Article 226 is vitally different.
In any event, the petitioner had secured a mere 7450 marks out of 300.
She had been awarded only 85% marks in the subject of Physics.
She has no equity in her favour.
Consequently, no interference is called for.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.