Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition the petitioner has prayed that respondents be directed not to proceed with the Departmental Inquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner till the decision of the criminal case which is pending against the petitioner on the same subject.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was arrested on 2nd October, 1994 in pursuance to the FIR No. 50, dated 10th September, 1994 registered at PS Sadar Hissar under Section 409 IPC.
In the FIR it was alleged that the petitioner has committed a fraud of Rs. 65 lacs in various SF Accounts at Sirsa Road, Hissar Branch of the Punjab National Bank.
The petitioner was granted bail by the court of Additional Sessions Judge, Hissar, on 24101994.
Thereafter the petitioner was issued charge sheet dated 1391995 (Annexure P-3).
3.
In this charge sheet, inter alia, it was alleged that while working in the extension counter, Hissar Branch of the Punjab National Bank, he had misappropriated cash deposited by the various customers by making credit entry in their pass books and SFS accounts without entering cash receipt voucher in the cash book and without tendering cash corresponding the cash receipt of the Bank, as per details given in the charge sheet.
It was also alleged that he withdrew the amount from various SFS accounts of the customers under forged signatures as per details given in the charge sheet.
It was then stated that the aforesaid acts constituted misconduct under clause 19.5(j) of the Bipartite settlement and the petitioner was advised to submit his reply within 10 days.
The petitioner submitted his reply dated 25.9.1995 (Annexure P-4).
In reply to the said charge sheet and in his reply, he submitted that the inquiry proceedings may be dropped till the decision of the trial by the court of law.
Request of the petitioner for dropping the inquiry proceedings was not acceded to by the respondent-Bank.
The disciplinary authority of the respondent-Bank by his letter dated 9101995 (Annexure P-5) informed the petitioner that Shri RK Ummat, Senior Manager Branch Officer.
Hissar, had been appointed as Inquiry Officer to conduct the Departmental inquiry against the petitioner.
It was also stated in this letter that the petitioner could get his case represented through a duly appointed representative, in terms of Para 19(12) of the Bipartite Settlement.
The inquiry officer by his letter dated 21101995 (Annexure P-6) directed the petitioner to attend the inquiry proceedings on 2nd November, 1995 in the Branch Officer, Sirsa Road, Hissar.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Mr. Subhash Ahuja, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the first information report was lodged against the petitioner on 10th September, 1994 at the instance of the respondent-Bank and the petitioner was arrested on 2.10.1994 and was released on bail on 24101994.
According to him, if the inquiry was held against the petitioner, he would be materially prejudiced in defence of the case which was of serious nature.
He, therefore, contended that the proceedings before the Inquiry officer should be stayed.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on the following judgments:  i) Shri D.D.
Sehgal v. Punjab National Bank and others, 1981(2) SLR 365; ii) BS Chaudhry v. Punjab University and another, 1987(5) SLR 501; iii) Kushshwar Dubey v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and others, AIR 1988 SC 2118; iv) Sarita Kumari and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1995(2) SCT 143 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 415 5.
Mr. Bajwa, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 2, raised preliminary objection that the writ petition was liable to be dismissed on the ground that the petitioner had approached the Civil Court for the similar relief by way of civil suit No. 1079 of 1995 filed on 5101995 in the court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Hissar.
In this connection, he drew our attention to para 1 of the preliminary objection of the written statement.
6.
Learned Counsel further submitted that in terms Para 194 of the Bipartite Settlement, the respondent-Bank was authorised to conduct the disciplinary inquiry in case the delinquent official was not put on trial within an year of the commission of offence after steps have been taken to prosecute him or to get him prosecuted.
He submitted that in the present case, the FIR was lodged on 1091994 and the petitioner was arrested on 2nd October, 1994 but till today, the challan has not been filed.
He further submitted that there was no prohibition in law on proceeding departmentally also against a Bank employee when a criminal trial was also pending against him.
He, therefore, contended that the writ petition was without any merit.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on two Division Division Judgements of this Court in Rajinder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) RSJ 581, and in the case of Sarita Kumari and others (supra) which has also been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Admittedly, the petitioner had filed a suit bearing No. 1079 of 1995 in the court of Sub Judge, Ist Class, Hissar and he has sought in the present writ petition same relief as was prayed in the civil suit.
The civil suit was dismissed as withdrawn and the following orders were passed:  "In view of the statement of the plaintiff along with his counsel, the suit of the plaintiff is hereby dismissed as withdrawn.
File be consigned to record room after due compliance."
From the above order, it clear that the suit filed by the petitioner was dismissed as withdrawn and he was not given any permission to file the writ petition.
This point came up for consideration before a Full Bench of this Court in Teja Singh v. The Union Territory of Chandigarh and others, 1982 P.L.R.
160.
In this case, the Hon'ble Judges of the Full Bench held that in a case where the plaintiff was not given any liberty at the time of dismissal of the suit, then the writ petition would not be maintainable.
In view of the law laid down by the Full Bench, the present writ petition is liable to be dismissed on this short ground.
8.
Even on merits, we do not find any substance in the contentions urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the case of Kusheshwar Dubey (supra) it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that there could be no legal bar for simultaneous proceedings being taken against the delinquent employee against whom the disciplinary proceedings ;were initiated, yet there may be cases where it would be appropriate to defer the disciplinary proceedings awaiting the disposal of the criminal case.
It was further held that "It is neither possible nor advisable to evolve a hard and fast strait- jacket formula valid for all cases and of general application without regard to the particularity of the individual situation."
9.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rajinder Singh (supra) also held that there is no prohibition in law to proceed departmentally also against the Government servant when a criminal trial was pending against him.
In this case, it was held as follows:  "It should also be pointed out that it is well settled position in law that the nature and scope of criminal proceedings is entirely different from disciplinary proceedings against a Government servant.
The final result of a departmental proceedings can be the imposition of penalty by the master in the exercise of his powers whereas the result of a criminal trial would be that a civil servant is convicted of the offence with which he is charged, penalty as prescribed by the law of the land would be imposed upon him.
Even if a Government servant is acquitted by a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings can thereafter be instituted against him, in respect of the conduct which were considered as constituted an offence, if such a conduct also constitutes misconduct, for imposing penalty in the departmental proceedings."
In the case of Sarita Kumari (supra) another Division Bench of this Court keeping in view the facts of that case held that the case did not involve any complex question of facts and law and as such dismissed the writ petition filed by the delinquent employee in that case.
10.
In the present case, the petitioner is governed by the Bipartite Settlement, applicable to the employees of the respondent-Bank.
In this connection reference may be made to clause 194 of the said Bipartite Settlement which reads as under:  "194.
If after steps have been taken to prosecute an employee or to get him prosecuted for an offence, he is not put on trial within a year of the commission of the offence, the management may then deal with him as if he had committed an act of gross misconduct or of "minor misconduct" as defined below; provided that if the authority which was to start prosecution proceedings refuses to do so or come to the conclusion that there is no case for prosecution it shall be open to the management to proceed against the employee under the provisions set out below in clause 1911 and 1912 infra relating to discharge, but he shall be deemed to have been on duty during the period of suspension, if any, and shall be entitled to the full wages and allowances and to all other privileges for such period.
In the event of the management deciding, after enquiry, not to continue him in service, he shall be liable only for termination with three months' pay and allowances in lieu of notice as provided in clause 193 supra.
If within the pendency of the proceedings thus instituted he is put on trial such proceedings shall be stayed pending the completion of the trial, after which the provisions mentioned in clause 193 above shall apply."
In terms of the above mentioned clause, if after steps have been taken to prosecute an employee for an offence and he is not put on trial, within a year of the commission of the offence, the Management can then deal with him as if he has committed an act of gross misconduct or of minor misconduct as defined in the settlement.
Admittedly, the FIR in the present case was registered on 1091994 and till today challan has not been filed in the Court.
Keeping in view the aforesaid admitted facts, we are of the considered opinion that it would not be appropriate to defeat the disciplinary proceedings awaiting disposal of the criminal case which in fact is not pending in any Court at present.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and accordingly dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioner had pointed out that the petitioner has been proceeded ex parte in the Departmental proceedings as he could not appear on account of his illness.
Since the writ petition of the petitioner has been dismissed, the petitioner shall be at liberty to approach the Inquiry Officer for setting aside the order proceeding against him ex parte in accordance with law.