NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by the workman under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, seeking the quashing of award, dated 25.7.1980 passed by the Labour Court, Patiala.
2.
The petitioner, Harmail Singh, worked as a Clerk in the office of respondent No. 3, the Faridkot Primary Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank.
The petitioner had joined the service of the Bank as a Clerk on 1.1.1977 for a period of 89 days.
After this initial term was over on 3031977, there was a break of one day, i.e., 31.3.1977 and thereafter he was reappointed on 141977 again for a period of 89 days.
His service came to an end automatically on 2761977.
Again break of one day occurred and the petitioner was given the third term of employment for 89 days from 29.6.1977 to 2691977.
The services of the petitioner then came to an end on 2691977.
The petitioner challenged the order of termination, dated 2691977, before the Labour Court but the Labour Court did not give any relief on the ground that the employment of the petitioner was a term employment and, therefore, there was no case for reinstatement.
The Labour Court took the view that, since the workman had been employed on temporary basis for a fixed period, the service of the petitioner came to an end automatically after the expiry of the last extension.
It was not a case of termination but that of the automatic end of service after the expiry of the fixed term.
Since the petitioner had not worked continuously for one year, his plea was rejected.
3.
The petitioner's case is that he had actually worked for not less than 240 days within a period of 12 months and, therefore, he fulfilled requisite condition under the Industrial Disputes Act (for short, the Act).
It is also stated that one Narjinder Singh had been subsequently employed by the employer Bank is place of the petitioner after petitioner's service stood terminated.
The petitioner was neither given notice of one month nor salary in lieu of notice.
The petitioner was also not given the retrenchment compensation, as required by law.
4.
The petitioner has worked for more than 240 days prior to the date of termination of his service.
He was initially employed on 1.1.1977 and his service were dispensed with finally on 2691977.
As stated earlier, the total service is spread over three periods:-  (i) 1.1.1977 to 3031977 88 days (ii) 141977 to 2761977 88 days (iii) 29.6.1977 to 2691977 89 days Total 266 days 5.
The respondents have taken the plea that it was not a case of termination because, in a case of fixed period, there is no termination of the service as such inasmuch as, on the expiry of the fixed period, the term of employment automatically comes to an end.
The workman had no right when he had been appointed for a fixed period.
The services of the petitioner were not extended after 2691977 as per the term of his appointment, because he was found to be surplus.
It was denied that anyone else was appointed after the workman's service was discharged.
Shri Gurdev Singh Brar, Manager of the respondent- Bank, had appeared before the Labour Court to deny the appointment of any clerk in place of the petitioner.
It was stated that the petitioner, being the junior most in his category, was not required to be retained after the fixed term had expired.
No notice was required to be given because it was not a case of termination as such.
There were breaks in service and, therefore, section 25-F of the Act is said to be not attracted.
Since there was no new appointment given to anyone in place of the petitioner, there was no breach of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act also.
6.
The question of ``termination'' has been examined by the Supreme Court in many cases.
One of the earliest cases, in which the question of retrenchment and termination came to be examined before the Supreme Court, is The State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money, AIR 1976 SC 1111.
That was also a case where the employee had been appointed by the Bank off and on.
The intermittent breaks notwithstanding, the total number of days of employment answered the test of deemed continuous service.
It was held that the ``termination ...... for any reason whatsoever'' in section 2(oo) of the Act were the key words.
Whatever the reason, every termination spells retrenchment.
So, the sole question is - has the employee's service been terminated ?
A termination takes places where a term expires either by the active steps of the master or the running out of the stipulated term.
`Termination' embraces not merely the act of termination by the employer but the effect of termination however produced.
It is thus obvious from the observations made by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that an automatic termination, after the expiry of the fixed period of employment, also amounted to `termination'.
7.
The question of ``continuous service'' was also examined by the Supreme Court in Surendra Kumar Verma etc. v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi, and another, 1980 Labour and Industrial Cases 1292.
The provisions of Section 25-B and 25-F of the Act were examined so as to determine as to what was continuous service of 240 days.
It was noticed that Section 25-F required that a workman should be in continuous  service for not less than one year under the employer.
Section 25-B required that, even if a workman had not been in continuous service under any employer for a period of one year, he shall be deemed to have been in such continuous service for a period of one year if he had actually worked under the employer for 240 days in the preceding period of 12 months.
It was held that there was no stipulation that the workman should have been in employment or service under the employer for a whole period of 12 months.
In fact, the thrust of the provisions is that he need not be.
8.
The question of ``continuous service'' and its calculation was again examined by the Supreme Court in Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, 1986 Labour and Industrial Cases 98.
It was held that the expression ``actually worked under the employer'' cannot mean those days only when the workman worked with hammer, sickle or pen, but must necessarily comprehend all those days during which he was in the employment of the employer and for which he had been paid wages either under express or implied contract of service or by compulsion of Statutes, Standing Orders etc.
Thus, Sundays, and other paid holidays should be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the total number of days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked.
9.
In the case of the present petitioner, the question, which is required to be examined, is about the continuous service which the petitioner had rendered.
As already seen, the petitioner had worked during three periods with break of one day each between the periods.
The break of one day between the two periods would not debar the workman from claiming the benefit of continuous service.
If the total number of actual days, spread over three periods, is taken into consideration, the total period comes to 266 days.
This is how the workman qualifies for protection under Section 25-F of the Act.
The requisite condition of continuous service for 240 days in 12 months has been fulfilled.
The break of one day in between two periods would not further reduce the continuous service of 266 days, because that has already been excluded from computation.
In this light, the petitioner is found to be entitled to protection of Section 25-F of the Act.
Since neither one month's notice of termination was served on the petitioner, as required by section 25-F, nor one month's salary in lieu of notice was given at the time of termination, there is found a violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
10.
The petitioner is held entitled to protection under the Industrial Disputes Act.
His termination is held to be invalid.
So far as the payment of back wages is concerned, it is to be noticed that the petitioner had been employed for a period of 89 days each time.
He had served for three periods.
There is no evidence that the petitioner remained without gainful employment after 2691977 till date.
He is, therefore, not allowed back wages.
The nature of term employment and the payment of fixed wages at the rate of Rs. 494/- per month did not make out a case in favour of the petitioner for payment of back wages.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed and respondent No. 3 is directed to reinstate the petitioner in service with immediate effect.
The petitioner shall no be paid any back wages.
No order as to costs.