RL Anand, J - The State of Punjab and others and have filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 6.1.1995 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Faridkot who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 25.11.1992 passed by the Sub Judge II Class, Moga and dismissed the appeal of the State.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Ram Chander plaintiff joined the services of the appellant as a work charge T-mate on 141969 and his service were regularised as Truck cleaner w.e.f.
141975.
He was promoted as a regular mechanic on 1551984 vide order of Executive Engineer Mechanical Division, Ferozepore but the appellants failed to provide him the scale of pay of this promotion post.
The case of the plaintiff-respondent further is that and Pardhan Singh joined the department on 1121985 as work charge T- mate but his services were regularised in the post of driver w.e.f 1121990 ignoring his seniority.
After serving requisite notice under section 80 CPC, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration that he was entitled to be considered for promotion from the date, his junior Pardhan Singh was promoted as driver.
He also claimed consequential relief for payment of all benefits besides mandatory injunction directing the appellants to fix his salary in the scale of mechanic w.e.f.
1551984 when he was promoted as such.
3.
The suit was contested by the official defendants including the State of Punjab and it was admitted that the plaintiff-respondent joined as hammer man w.e.f.
151969 and his services were regularised as T-mate w.e.f.
141975.
It was further admitted that respondent was promoted as mechanic by Executive Engineer Mechanical Drg.
Construction Division Ferozepore but this was subject to the approval by the Superintending Engineer which approval was never accorded and as such there was no question of implementing the said order and fixing the pay of the respondent.
As regards the appointment of Pardhan Singh, appellant it was stated that he joined as T-mate work charge on 1121985 and promoted as driver work charge on 1471989.
It was submitted that the seniority of work charge employees and regular establishments are maintained separately and as the respondent served as regular T-mate he was not considered for promotion against the vacancy of work charge driver.
Later on on occurrence of regular vacancy of driver, the services of Pardhan Singh were regularised w.e.f.
1121990.
4.
From the above pleading of the parties, the trial court framed the following issues :-  (1) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to consideration for promotion from the date when his juniors were promoted ?
OPP (2) Whether the suit is within time ?
OPP (3) Whether the suit is property valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPP (4) Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of causes of action ?
OPD (5) Whether this court has get no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD (6) Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case and the trial court decreed the suit of the plaintiff-respondent No. 1 Ram Chander.
The State filed first appeal in the court of Additional District Judge who did not find any merit in the appeal and dismissed the same and aggrieved by the judgment and decree the present appeal.
5.
I have heard Shri PS Chhinna, Dy.
Advocate General, Punjab on behalf of the appellants and Shri MK Garg, Advocate, on behalf of the contesting respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
This appeal came up for motion hearing on 1781995 before this Court and the learned Dy.
Advocate General relied upon an authority reported as AIR 1992 Supreme Court 111 and contended that plea of limitation was neither considered nor disposed of by the first Appellate Court.
On this contention of the learned Assistant Advocate General, notice of motion was issued to the contesting respondent.
Again this appeal was listed for arguments on 11.4.1996 when the learned counsel for the respondents prayed to the Court and sought time to seek instructions from this client with regard to the period of benefits which could be granted by the Courts below to his client.
Before start of actual arguments, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 stated at bar that his client was ready to accept arrears of 38 months before the institution of the suit and that the judgment and decrees of the courts below may be modified to that extent.
Arguments in the main appeal were also heard and I do not see any infirmity in the well reasoned judgments of the Courts below because admittedly plaintiff Ram Chander joined as work charge hammer man on 141969 and his services were regularised as T-mate on 141975.
Pardhan Singh joined as work charge employee in 1121985 and was promoted as work charge driver on 1471989 and his services were regularised as driver w.e.f 1121990.
Financial benefits have been sought to be deprived to the contesting respondent on the ground that the seniority of work charge and regular employees is maintained separately and as the respondent was a regular T-mate since April 1, 1975, he could not be considered for promotion as no vacancy arose in the work charge capacity.
The argument lacks merit in ignoring the respondent from consideration for promotion as driver if he was duly qualified for the same.
Admittedly, Pardhan Singh was junior.
He was given promotion as driver w.e.f.
July, 1989 i.e. 1471989.
The claim of the plaintiff-respondent No. 1 was superior in every aspect than that of Pardhan Singh and he could not be discriminated on the weak plea of separate seniority as pointed out above.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State could not convince me how the findings recorded by the Courts below and specially in paras No. 9 and 10 of the judgment of the appellate Court were erroneous or against the record or against the competent interpretation.
7.
The question now which requires consideration of this court is whether the plaintiff should be granted arrears right from 1985 or of 38 months prior to the institution of the suit.
I have stated in the earlier portion of the judgment that the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting respondent Ram Chander had stated that his client would be satisfied if the benefit of arrears and other monetary benefits be confined to 38 months.
In fact, this was the only stand taken up by the State at the time of motion hearing.
8.
Resultantly, I partly allow this appeal and modify the judgment and decree of the trial court and grant a declaration to the plaintiff-respondent that he was entitled to be considered for promotion from the date when Pardhan Singh appellant No. 5 was promoted and that plaintiff would also be entitled to all the consequential benefits and that the defendant-appellants are directed to fix the salary of the plaintiff against the post of mechanic wef.
1551984 and to grant consequential benefits not exceeding 38 months prior to the date of the institution of the suit.
In all other aspects the appeal stands dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Decree sheet shall now be prepared accordingly.