RL Anand, J - Unsuccessful plaintiff Rajinder Kumar has filed the present regular second appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 361986 passed by the Court of District Judge, Chanigarh, who affirmed the judgment and decree dated 13.3.1984 passed by the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Chandigarh, who dismissed the suit of the plaintiff- appellant for declaration with consequential relief of mandatory injunction, as prayed for.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that plaintiff Rajinder Kumar filed a suit for declaration and for mandatory injunction on the averments that he was appointed as Draftsman, on ad hoc basis, by the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh, through Employment Exchange, on 941971.
After joining the duty as such, on that date, he continued to work in that capacity on ad hoc basis upto 971972.
Subsequently, he was selected as Draftsman by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short 'the Board'), whereupon he was appointed as such, on regular basis w.e.f.
1071972 by the Chief Engineer on the recommendation of the Board.
He worked there till 3101977 and his work and conduct were found to be satisfactory.
He applied for leave on account of illness for the period 4101977 to 16.10.1977.
Subsequently, he submitted another application for the grant of leave for the period 27111977 to 2.12.1977 and then application for extension of leave upto 15121977.
Thereafter he submitted another application on 15121977 for the grant of leave for the period starting from 17121977 to 1691978.
Yet another application on the ground of illness was submitted on 1431978 for the grant of leave for the period of 17.3.1978 to 1691978.
Then another application was submitted on 1291978 on the ground of illness for the period 17.9.1978 to 16.3.1979 and lastly an application was submitted on 16.3.1979 for the grant of leave and that also on the ground of illness for the period 17.3.1979 to 24.5.1979.
In short the plaintiff moved various applications for the grant of leave with effect from 4101977 upto 24.5.1979.
The plaintiff alleges that his applications were despatched under certificates of posting and those must have been delivered to the addressee.
But he did not receive any intimation as to whether his applications for leave were sanctioned or not, nor he was called upon to produce any medical certificate.
In these circumstances, the plaintiff presumed that he had been granted leave for the entire period starting from 4101977 to 24.5.1979.
He submitted his joining report on 2451979 in the afternoon after the expiry of the leave but his joining report was not accepted and no posting orders were given to him.
On 861979 he addressed another letter to the department requesting it for the issuance of posting orders without any delay, but instead of getting his posting order as Draftsman, the plaintiff received letter dated 771979 from the office of the Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department, Haryana, to the effect that since the plaintiff remained absent from duty with effect from 27111977, without leave and without informing his whereabouts to the office, it has been decided that his services were no longer required by the Department and the plaintiff was given one month's notice vide letter dated 2721979.
It was stated that in terms of the notice dated 2721979 the services of the plaintiff stood discharged on the expiry of the said notice period.
The plaintiff made representation to the Engineer-in-Chief on 1311980, challenging the validity of the order of termination/discharge on account of its being hit by Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India as the impugned order dated 771979 was not a simple order of termination but was passed by way of punishment which cast stigma on him without affording him any opportunity of hearing.
Moreover the order dated 2721979 was served upon the plaintiff through order dated 2561979, on 771979, the Engineer-in- Chief could not terminate his services, retrospectively on the expiry of the notice period given in the order dated 2721979.
The plaintiff also contended that the penalty of termination of his services was extreme and not warranted by law.
He was never informed about the refusal of the leave.
With the above allegations, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the orders dated 2721979 and 2561979 served upon him on 771979 were illegal, void, inoperative, unconstitutional, arbitrary and against the principles of natural and he sought mandatory injunction directing the defendant to take the plaintiff into service with full backwages and also by granting other benefits of service.
3.
The suit was contested by the State.
It admitted the plaintiff's initial appointment as Draftsman on ad hoc basis through the Employment Exchange on 941971 and his subsequent appointment as Draftsman on the recommendation of the Board.
However, the suit was resisted by the State on the ground that the plaintiff was appointed on temporary basis as Draftsman for the period of six months at the first instance upto 10.4.1971 and then on the recommendation of the Board on temporary post of Draftsman on regular basis vide letter dated 1071972.
The State admitted that the plaintiff worked on that post upto 3101977, but his work and conduct was not satisfactory.
It was pleaded that after serving upon him show-cause notice and after affording to him opportunity of hearing he was censured for having remained wilfully absent from duty with effect from 3081976 to 2661977 vide office order dated 1811978.
That period was, however, directed to be treated as extraordinary leave (leave without pay).
It was further pleaded that the plaintiff submitted application on 4101977 for the grant of leave on the ground of illness for the period starting from 4101977 to 16.10.1977.
Thereafter, he remained absent from duty from 28111977 onwards.
Later on his application was received on 2.12.1977 requesting for the grant of leave for the period 28111977 to 2.12.1977.
His other application dated 2.12.1977 was received through special messenger on 28.12.1977 requesting for leave upto 16.12.1977.
All these applications were refused and the plaintiff was informed vide registered AD letter dated 1551978 and he was advised to join duty at once.
The registered letter was sent at the two addresses given by him, but the same were received back undelivered from the postal authorities.
The plaintiff did not join the duty.
The department did not receive his other applications for the grant of leave.
The plaintiff remained wilfully absent from duty with effect from 28111977.
As his services were no more required, he was served one month's notice dated 2721979 despatched by registered AD post conveying that the plaintiff would be considered as discharged from the post of Draftsman on the expiry of one month's notice from the date of issue of that letter.
It was received back undelivered.
The name of the plaintiff was ordered to be scored out on 31.3.1979 and since then he stood discharged from service.
The arrival report given by the plaintiff was not accepted because he had already been discharged from service.
The notice of discharge, received back undelivered from the postal authorities, was presented to the appellant (plaintiff) when he came to the office, but he left without information after refusing the same.
It was again presented to him on 2561979 when he visited the office of the Engineer-in-Chief, but after going through its contents the plaintiff refused to receive it.
It was then despatched to the plaintiff at his postal address but was received back undelivered.
The plaintiff again visited the office on 6.6.1979 and 771979.
The notice of discharge with the forwarding letter dated 2561979 was received by the plaintiff on 771979.
Thereafter he applied for final payment of General Provident Fund and the same was made to him.
In these circumstances, the defendant-State maintained the validity of the order of discharge from service of the plaintiff.
4.
The State also took other pleas, such as that the suit is not properly valued for the purpose of Court-fee and jurisdiction.
It is barred by limitation.
It is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
The plaintiff did not serve any notice under Section 80 of the CPC.
5.
From the above pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the orders dated 2721979 and 2561979 are not valid ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is barred by time ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit has not been properly valued for the purpose of court-fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the notice given under Section 80, C.P.C., is not valid ?
OPD.
6.
Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case, and on the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 11.3.1984 dismissed the suit.
6.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court, the plaintiff filed first appeal in the Court of District Judge, Chandigarh, who vide judgment and decree dated 361986 dismissed the appeal.
The plaintiff-appellant was still not satisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the first appellate Court and he filed the present appeal against the judgments and decrees of the trial Court as well as the first appellate Court.
7.
I have heard Shri PS Patwalia, Advocate, on behalf of the appellant, and Shri Azad Singh, AAG Haryana, on behalf of the respondent- State, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
8.
The plaintiff has been non-suited both by the trial Court as well as by the first appellate Court on the ground that he was appointed on a temporary post of Draftsman on the recommendation of the Board by the Chief Engineer (Projects), Irrigation Works, Haryana, Chandigarh, vide letter dated 1071972 (Annexure D-2), and that the plaintiff was to be governed by the conditions of service on temporary employment in the P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) as given in form No. 112 and by virtue of those rules his services could be terminated at any time by serving one month's notice or giving him one month's pay in lieu of the notice.
The plaintiff had not been confirmed and was a temporary employee when the order dated 2721979 (copy of which is Exhibit D-8) was passed.
Both the Courts below held that the impugned order (Exhibit D-8) was a simple order of discharge and it did not contain any stigma.
In para No. 12 of the judgment, the learned first appellate Court held that since the appellant was discharged from service in accordance with the terms and conditions of his service by giving him one month's notice, and not by way of punishment by making his intentional absence from service, during the said period, as the foundation of the same, the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India were not attracted to the present case and as such no prior show cause notice was required to be served upon the plaintiff, nor any inquiry was to be held against him in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
9.
Learned counsel Shri PS Patwalia submitted that both the Courts have not viewed the present case in a correct perspective of the law.
He submitted that the plaintiff was a regular employee of the Government as is evident from the letter of appointment dated 1071972, which clearly specifies that the name of the plaintiff was recommended by the Board and on the basis of those recommendations the plaintiff was offered a temporary post of Draftsman in the Haryana P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch, Chandigarh; meaning thereby that though the plaintiff was offered a temporary post but he was selected on regular basis.
The absence from duty is a misconduct at the most and the services of the plaintiff could not been thrown away by passing a simple order of discharge as contained in the order (Exhibit D-8) on the expiry of one month's notice, as it has been done in the present case.
Mr. Patwalia further submitted that no show cause notice was issued to the plaintiff, nor any regular inquiry was conducted against him and in these circumstances the impugned orders cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
10.
On the contrary it was submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent that the impugned order was a mere order of discharge and had been passed in terms of the letter of appointment.
This order does not contain any stigma and, therefore, it was not incumbent on the part of the employer either to issue a show cause notice or to conduct an inquiry.
11.
I find sufficient force in the argument addressed by the learned counsel for the appellant.
In Jai Shanker v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the removal of a Government servant from service for overstaying his leave is illegal even though it is provided by the service regulations that any individual who absents himself without permission after the end of his leave would be considered to have scarified his appointment and may be reinstated only with the sanction of the competent authority.
It was also held that a discharge from service of an incumbent by way of punishment amounts to removal from service and the constitutional protection of Article 311 cannot be taken away from him by contending that under the Service - Regulations the incumbent himself gives up the employment and all that the Government is not to allow the person to be reinstated.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold that it is true that there is no compulsion on the part of the Government to retain a person in service if he is unfit and deserves dismissal or removal and one circumstance deserving removal may be overstaying one's leave.
But a person is entitled to continue in service if he wants until his service is terminated in accordance with law.
Reverting to the facts in hand it has to be seen as to in what context the order was passed.
The plaintiff applied for grant of leave which at one point of time was sanctioned but his subsequent applications were rejected by the Department and, thereafter the Department took the shelter of the condition of service and terminated the services of the plaintiff by issuing a order of discharge which prima facie shows that the conduct of the plaintiff leading to his absence from duty was taken into consideration by the Department before passing the impugned order.
This order tantamounts to removal from service of the plaintiff and before doing that it was obligatory on the part of the Department to either issue show cause notice to the plaintiff or to hold a regular inquiry in that regard.
Neither of the two procedures has been adopted.
Rather the principles of natural justice have been violated and on this short ground the impugned order of discharge cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
12.
My attention has also been invited to a Full Bench authority of this Court reported as The Registrar, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and another v. Roop Singh, Superintendent and others, 1980(1) SLR 464, wherein it was held that when an employee overstays his leave, the appointing authority declaring the office vacant due to unauthorised absence, such action on the part of the employer violates the rules of natural justice.
Realising this difficulty, Shri Azad Singh, Assistant Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the respondent-State, submitted that on account of the long absence of the plaintiff from duty, it was not practicable on the part of the Department to hold a departmental inquiry and the punishing authority after taking note of the communications addressed to the plaintiff, passed the impugned orders of discharge.
In support of his contention he has referred to Dev Raj v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1995(1) SCT 406 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 293.
This authority, relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent, is not helpful to him because in the cited case a power was granted to the punishing authority if it was satisfied, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in those regulations, which could consider the circumstances of the case and make such an order as it deems fit.
During the course of arguments I specifically inquired from Shri Azad Singh if the punishing authority passed any orders on the file before dispensing with the provisions of the natural justice that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry against the plaintiff.
Shri Azad Singh fairly conceded the factual position that no order was passed by the punishing authority on the file.
Rather he insisted that the plaintiff remained absent from duty for a long period without intimation to the Department and it gives right to the Department to pass the impugned order.
The contention of Shri Azad Singh cannot be accepted.
The absence from duty or overstaying the leave is a misconduct on the part of an employee.
The plaintiff was a regular employee and his services could not be dispensed with by passing a simple order of discharge which, in my opinion, in fact, is a termination without holding a proper inquiry.
The learned first appellate Court had tried to distinguish Jai Shanker's case (supra) by stating that the cited case "pertained to removal from services of the appellant for over-staying the leave granted to him, whereas in the present case, the appellant had absented himself from duty without, at first, even submitting the application for leave and his having continued to remain absent from duty after his leave, subsequently applied for by him from time to time, had been refused, and without bothering to ascertain the fate of his leave applications."
The distinction sought to be made by the first appellate Court cannot be endorsed.
It hardly makes a difference if an employee remains absent from duty or overstays the leave granted to him.
In both the eventualities, misconduct is there, which, in my opinion, in the present case is the very foundation of the order of termination, though lebelled as order of discharge.
In this view of the matter, the impugned order (Exhibit D-8) dated 2721979 is hereby quashed.
13.
Now the second question which arises for determination of this Court is whether the plaintiff should be awarded the backwages from the date of his termination or not.
The learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon Surinder Kumar Verma v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1981 SC 422, and submitted that once the relief of reinstatement is granted, the employee is entitled to full backwages.
The submission raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is partly correct because the plaintiff's entry into service has been blocked by the Department for no justification and for no valid reasons.
However, the full back wages cannot be awarded to the appellant.
He is only entitled to the back wages for 38 months which will be worked out on the basis of his last pay drawn in the department.
14.
Consequently, I accept the appeal, set aside the judgment and decrees of the Courts below and grant a declaration the plaintiff-appellant to the effect that the orders dated 2721979 and 26.6.1979, whereby his services were terminated, were illegal, void, inoperative, ultra vires the Constitution and against the principles of natural justice.
The plaintiff is also granted the relief of mandatory injunction against the defendants who are directed to take back the plaintiff into service within one month from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
The plaintiff shall be entitled to back wages for the period of 38 months which shall be calculated on the basis of his last pay drawn, when he remained absent from duty.
The plaintiff will, however, get the other benefits of service permissible to him according to law.
There shall be no order as to costs in this appeal.
Appeal accepted.