THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner is an industrial unit engaged in the manufacture of rolled product of steel at is plants situated at Faridabad in the State of Haryana and at Ludhiana in the State of Punjab.
There are more than hundred workers in the unit of the petitioner at Ludhiana who formed a union by name Oswal Steels Employees Union.
In order to regulate the conditions of service, standing orders were drafted and duly approved by the appropriate Government and they were also certified by the Certifying Officer on June 6, 1974.
2.
The General Secretary of the employees union made an application on January 24, 1991, seeking amendments in the Standing Orders with respect to the following matters :-  "(a) There could be no right of transfer; (b) The workman should be permitted to be represented by a trade union leader or an advocate of his choice during the enquiry; (c) Expunction of Clause 14 with regard to promotion; (d) Giving of second show cause notice; (e) That loss to him on account of abandonment be converted into retrenchment; (f) In clause 11(i) "no workman" be substituted by 'any employee of the company.'
3.
On receipt of the above application, the Certifying Officer-cum-Joint Labour Commissioner, Haryana, issued notices to the petitioner who filed its reply.
After considering the contentions of the employees' union and the petitioner, the Certifying Officer rejected the application filed by the General Secretary of the employees' union for amendment of the Certified Standing Orders by his order dated September 11, 1991, vide Annexure P-3.
The employees union filed an appeal to the Industrial Tribunal, Haryana, Faridabad.
The Industrial Tribunal by its order dated July 12, 1994 partly allowed the appeal, directing the Certified Standing Orders to be recast in the light of Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act and that the workman should be given show cause notice before passing order of termination and the enquiry report should also be communicated to the workman.
4.
The petitioner filed this writ petition challenging the order of the Industrial Tribunal dated July 12, 1994, and to quash the same by issuing a writ of certiorari.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner fairly conceded that the workman is entitled to a show case notice along with the enquiry report before passing an order of termination, in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : 1991(1) SCC 588 and Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, 1993(3) SLJ 193.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner challenged the direction of the Industrial Tribunal to recast the Standing Order in the light of Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
According to the learned counsel, Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act has no application to the domestic enquiry and the provisions of Section 36 cannot be made part of the Certified Standing Orders.
7.
Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act reads as follows :-  "Representation of parties - (1) A workman who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) (any member of the executive or other-office bearer) of a registered trade union of which he is a member; (b) (any member of the executive or other office-bearer) of a federation of trade unions to which the trade union referred to in clause (a) is affiliated; (c) where the worker is not a member of any trade union, by (any member of the executive or other office-bearer) of any trade union connected with, or by any other workman employed in, the industry in which the worker is employed and authorized in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) An employer who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) an officer of an association of employers of which he is a member; (b) an officer of a federation of associations of employers to which the association referred to in clause (a) is affiliated; (c) where the employer is not a member of any association of employers, by an officer of any association of employers connected with, or by any other employer engaged in, the industry in which the employer is engaged and authorised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation proceedings under this Act or in any proceedings before a Court.
(4) In any proceeding (before a Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal), a party to a dispute may be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding and (with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be)."
Thus, from a reading of Section 36, it is clear that the section applies only to a proceeding under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Domestic enquiry against a workman is admittedly not a proceeding under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Therefore, there is no question of invoking Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act to give relief to the workman to be represented by a legal practitioner in a domestic enquiry.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the Industrial Tribunal erred in directing the petitioner to recast the certified Standing Orders in the light of Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
8.
There remains the question whether workman is entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner or trade union leader of his choice.
9.
Conditions of Service of Employment are governed by the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.
10.
Under Section 3 of the Act, the employee shall submit to the Certifying Officer the draft Standing Order proposed by him making provision for every matter set out in the Schedule which is applicable to the Industrial establishment.
The Certifying Officer, after following the provisions contained in Sections 4 and 5 of the Act, certifies the draft Standing Orders.
Item 8 of the Schedule relates to "Termination of employment, and the notice thereof to be given by employer and workman."
Item 9 deals with "Suspension or dismissal for misconduct, and acts or omissions which constitute misconduct."
11.
Thus, it is clear that the Standing Orders shall make a provision relating to termination of employment, suspension or dismissal for misconduct.
Such a provision must necessarily include the right of the workman to defend himself effectively.
12.
Standing Order 23 of the petitioner's industrial establishment provides as follows :-  "23.
CHARGESHEET AND ENQUIRY (a) (i) A workman against whom misconduct is alleged shall be served with a charge sheet.
It shall be in writing and set out in detail the allegations alleged against him and he shall be called upon to submit his explanation within 48 hours.
If the workman admits the charge/charges against him, no enquiry need be held.
(ii) If the workman does not submit any written explanation or the explanation submitted by him is not found satisfactory or if he denies the charge(s) alleged against him, an enquiry shall be held, and the workman concerned shall be given an opportunity to explain the circumstances alleged against him.
The workman concerned in the enquiry shall sign at the end of each statement recorded in his presence.
In case he does not sign or refuses to sign, the remarks of enquiry officer in this behalf shall be deemed to be sufficient proof to the correctness and recording of the statement in the presence of the workman concerned.
Such a workman may be assisted by another workman of his choice but he must be working in the Company."
Thus, a provision is made in the above Standing Order for the workman to be assisted by another workman working in the Company.
13.
It is to be seen whether such a provision is sufficient compliance with the requirements of law and is in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
14.
In Dunlop Rubber Co v. Their Workmen, 1965 SC 1392 it has been held as follows :-  "In this connection, we have repeatedly emphasised that in holding domestic enquiries, reasonable opportunity should be given to the delinquent employees to meet the charge framed against them and it is desirable that at such an enquiry the employees should be given liberty to represent their case by persons of their choice if there is no Standing Order against such a course being adopted and if there is nothing otherwise objectionable in the said request.
But as we have just indicated, in the circumstances of the case, we have no doubt that the failure of the Enquiry Officer to accede to the request made by the employees does not introduce any serious defect in the enquiry itself, and so, we have no hesitation in holding that the result of the said enquiry cannot be successfully challenged in the present proceedings."
In Kalindi v. Tata Locomotive and Engineering Co, AIR 1960 SC 914, it has been held as follows :-  "When the general practice adopted by domestic tribunals is that the person accused conducts his own case, we are unable to accept an agreement that natural justice demands that in the case of enquiries into a charge sheet of misconduct against a workman, he should be represented by a member of his union.
Besides, it is necessary to remember that if any enquiry is not otherwise fair, the workman concerned can challenge its validity in an industrial dispute.
Our conclusion therefore, is that a workman against whom an enquiry is being held by the management has no right to be represented at such enquiry by a representative of his union ; though of course, an employer in his discretion can and may allow his employee to avail himself of such assistance."
(emphasis added).
In Crescent Dyes and Chemicals Ltd v. Ram Naresh Tripathi, 1993(2) SCT 268 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 115, the Apex Court formulated the questions as follows in para No. 10 :-  "...The right to be heard in order to be effective must be preceded by notice as to the exact charge which a delinquent is called upon to meet.
Does then the right to be heard include the right to be represented through counsel or agent of the choice of the delinquent ?
If a domestic Tribunal refused permission to a delinquent appearing before it to be represented by an agent would that amount to infringement of the rule of natural justice ?
There can be no doubt that a delinquent must be given an opportunity of presenting his case in such a way suitable to the character of the enquiry which would ensure a fair hearing resulting in fair dispensation of justice.
But does that extend to the right to be represented through counsel or agent is the question which we are called upon to answer."
In paras Nos. 12 and 13, the Apex Court observed as follows :-  "From the above decisions of the English Courts it seems clear to us that the right to be represented by a counsel or agent of one's own choice is not an absolute right and can be controlled, restricted or regulated by law, rules or regulations.
However, if the charge is of a serious and complex nature, the delinquent's request to be represented through a counsel or agent could be conceded."
"The law in India also does not concede an absolute right of representation as an aspect of the right to be heard, one of the elements of principles of natural justice.
It has been ruled by this Court in (i) Kalindi (N) v. Tata Locomotive & Engineering Co Ltd., Jamshedpur, (ii) Booke Bond India (P) Ltd. v. Subba Raman (S), and (iii) Dunlop Rubber Co v. Workmen that there is no right to representation as such unless the company by its Standing Orders recognises such a right."
In para No. 17, their Lordships concluded as follows :-  "It is, therefore, clear from the above case-law that the right to be represented though counsel or agent can be restricted, controlled or regulated by statute, rules, regulations or Standing Orders.
A delinquent has no right to be represented through counsel or agent unless the law specifically confers such a right.
The requirement of the rule of natural justice insofar as the delinquent's right of hearing is concerned, cannot and does not extend to a right to be represented through counsel or agent.
In the instant case the delinquent's right of representation was regulated by the Standing Orders which permitted a clerk or a workman working with him in the same department to represent him and this right stood expended on Sections 21 and 22(ii) permitting representations through an officer, staff member or a member of the union, albeit on being authorised by the State Government.
The object and purpose of such provisions is to ensure that the domestic enquiry is completed with despatch and is not prolonged endlessly.
Secondly, when the person defending the delinquent is from the department or establishment in which the delinquent is working, he would be well conversant with the working of that department and the relevant rules and would, therefore, be able to render satisfactory service to the delinquent.
Thirdly, not only would the entire proceedings be completed quickly but also inexpensively.
It is, therefore, not correct to contend that the Standing Order or Section 22(ii) of the Act conflicts with the principles of natural justice."
15.
Thus, it is clear that there is no right in the workman to insist that he should be permitted to be represented by a legal practitioner or by a person of his choice who is not in the employment of the employer.
There is no question of violating the principles of natural justice.
16.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the direction of the Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad, to recast the Standing Orders in the light of the provisions contained in Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act, cannot be sustained under law.
17.
The Writ Petition, is, therefore, partly allowed and direction of the Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad, to recast the Standing Orders in the light of Section 36 of the Industrial Disputes Act is hereby quashed.
No costs.