Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases were commissioned in the Indian Army on June 13, 1963 and December 15, 1976 respectively.
They were later on promoted.
On April 10, 1986 Major Surjit Singh, petitioner in CWP No. 13587 of 1989 was informed that he will be tried by a General Court Martial.
Similar information was also sent to Capt.
Toor, the petitioner, in CWP No. 12698 of 1989.
Vide letter dated April 20, 1986 the officers were informed that they will be tried jointly.
A charge sheet was issued on April 21, 1986.
It was inter alia alleged that the petitioners had "dishonestly mis-appropriated property belonging to the government."
Details in this behalf were furnished.
According to the charge sheet, the petitioners had misappropriated diesel, brass scrap, and aluminium scrap valued at approximate Rs. 2,59,000/-.
It was also alleged that Major Surjit Singh had knowingly made a false statement that 5,000 Kgs.
of brass scrap "had been received and utilized by his unit in making items of brass."
The petitioners were tried by the General Court Martial.
The charge regarding mis-appropriation in respect of article worth Rs. 1,17,82500 approximately were found to be proved.
Major Surjit Singh was awarded Rigorous Imprisonment for one year.
It was further ordered that he should be cashiered from service.
Capt.
Toor was similarly sentenced for three years Rigorous Imprisonment and was ordered to be cashiered from service.
The petitioners filed the two writ petitions.
On an objection having been raised by the respondents, the petitioners filed a petition under section 164(2) before the Central Government.
It was rejected.
The petitioners amended the writ petitions.
They challenge the findings recorded by the General Court Martial, award of sentence and the order rejecting their petitions under section 164(2) through the present writ petitions on a number of grounds.
It is alleged that the Members of the Court Martial were not selected or detailed by the competent authority.
The charges were not approved by the General Officer Commanding.
The petitioners also allege that there being no evidence in support of the charges, the findings recorded by the court as well as the Central Government are wholly arbitrary and untenable.
2.
The respondents have filed the written statements in both the petitions controverting the claim made by the petitioners.
3.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
The primary issue raised by Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for Major Surjit Singh is that the Members of the Court Martial were not selected or detailed by the competent authority.
Thus, the trial was not by a court which was duly constituted.
This claim has been controverted by Mr. SK Pipat, Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents.
5.
A short question that arises for consideration is : Was the General Court Martial convened by the competent authority ?
6.
The provisions regarding 'kinds' and 'convening of Court Martial' are contained in Chapter X of Army Act, 1950.
Section 108 provides that the Court Martial shall be of four kinds viz. General, District, Summary General Courts-Martial and Summary Courts-Martial.
Section 109 provides as under :  "Power to convene a general Court-Martial : A general court- martial may be convened by the Central Government or the Chief of the Army Staff or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Chief of the Army Staff."
(emphasis supplied).
According to the note under this provision the forms of warrant issued by the Chief of the Army Staff have been issued to "Officers Commanding Army, Corps, Division/Area and independent Brigade and to officers prescribed by the Central Government under Army Act, Section 8."
7.
In the present case it is the admitted position that the charge sheet was issued to the petitioners under the orders of officiating General Officer Commanding, 33 Mechanized Division.
It is the admitted position that the General Officer Commanding the Division was the authority which had to convene the General Court Martial.
8.
The petitioners have produced on record a copy of the order dated April 25, 1986 issued under the name of "Brig.
Foley Noveille, officiating General Officer Commanding, 33 Mechanized Division."
This order has been issued by Lt. Col. CP Pandey "for-officiating GOC 33 Mechanized Division."
In the petition, it has been categorically pleaded that under the provisions of Section 109 read with rule 37 the power of convene the Court Martial vested only in the General Officer Commanding.
However, "the convening authority in this case had neither applied its mind to the charges and the evidence adduced thereon nor did he exercise the personal power in appointing detailing the Members of the Courts Martial."
In fact, a similar plea had been raised by the petitioner Major Surjit Singh in his representation to Central Government wherein it had been specifically alleged that "the convening authority had also not detailed the Members which constituted the court."
Since the claim of the petitioners had been controverted by the respondents, it was considered appropriate to send for the record.
Mr. SK Pipat has very fairly produced the original file.
He has conceded that there is no order passed by Brig.
Foley which may show that he had personally nominated the Members of the General Court Martial.
He has submitted that from a perusal of various documents on record it appears that different names had been proposed and the G.O.C.
had suggested or approved certain changes.
The first document to which Mr. Pipat has made a reference is an order dated April 19, 1986.
It reads as under :-  "I direct that a GCM be convened to try IC 18099 K Maj Surjit Singh (accused No. 1) and IC 34218 Y Capt JSP Toor (accused No. 2) by a Joint Trial, both of 18 Mech Inf att 39 Mech Bde."
Sd/- Brig.
Offg.
GOC."
This order only directs that the two petitioners shall be jointly tried and that a General Court Martial be convened for the purpose.
Nothing more.
A photo copy of the document as furnished by Mr. Pipat is placed on record as 'Mark-A'.
9.
The second document referred to by Mr. Pipat is a copy of the letter dated April 12, 1986.
It is taken on record as 'Mark-B'.
It reads as under :  "ADM ARNGS : GCM  1.
Three to four GCMs are due to held at short notice.
It is expected that 3 GCMs will be scheduled from 17 Apr onwards with the possibility of the second and third GCMs by last week of April and first wk of May respectively.
There is therefore, a necessity of allocating responsibility to Fmns and Div Tp Units.
2.
The responsibilities will be reflected by this office in due course.
However, Fmns are advised to gear up their Hqs for the conduct of one GCM each.
Despite the requirements of collective trg this will be fulfilled.
Due consideration has been made regarding offrs comprising the court and max Div Tp Unit Offrs are being nominated.
3.
The importance and legality involved require max coop so that the ends of justice are effectively fulfilled.
You are advised to initiate priorities for preparation now through your respective DAAGs whose intimate utilization will be made by each Presiding Offr.
Sd/- (N. Foley) Brig.
Dy.
Div Cdr."
A perusal of the above shows that the officer had noticed that 3 to 4 GCMs were to be held at short notice.
The Formations were advised to gear-up their headquarters for the conduct of one GCM each.
It was also indicated that the officers comprising the court 'are being nominated.'
No nominations were made.
10.
The next document produced by the learned counsel is a copy of the letter dated April 20, 1986 signed by Col. Dhillon.
This is taken on record as 'Mark-C'.
When it was put up to the Officiating G.O.C.
he observed "court to be changed."
Mr. Pipat states that this document is indicative of the fact that Brig.
Foley had applied his mind.
It may be so.
However, the officer had merely directed that the court is to be changed which means that the names proposed by Col. Dhillon had not been approved.
There is nothing in this document which may even remotely indicate that Brig.
Foley had actually nominated the officers for constituting the General Court Martial.
11.
The last document produced by Mr. Pipat is a copy of a Signal.
A photo copy of this Signal is taken on record as 'Mark-D'.
On this document the Deputy Divisional Commander has put his initials.
It has the following remarks in green ink : "court is re-composed as desired."
Mr. Pipat concedes that the names of the Members of the Court had not been mentioned.
He is not in a position to explain as to who had desired that the court be 're-composed'.
Mr. Pipat states that it was in pursuance to the endorsement on Mark-D that the communication dated April 25, 1986, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P-10 was issued.
The learned counsel, however, concedes that "there is no order of the General Officer Commanding the Division specifically detailing or naming the officers who will constitute the General Court Martial on record."
This statement of the learned counsel appears to be absolutely fair and settles the controversy.
It clearly establishes that the General Court Martial was not convened by an officer empowered by a warrant of the Chief of the Army Staff as required under section 109 as noticed above.
12.
It is not disputed that the General Court Martial exercises judicial functions under section 118.
General Court Martial has the power "to try any person" subject to the Army Act.
Section 71 enumerates the punishments that can be awarded by the Court Martial.
These range from stoppage of pay and allowances to the award of death penalty.
These judicial functions can only be exercised by a duly constituted court.
On the showing of the respondents themselves there is no order by the competent authority constituting the Court Martial.
In this situation, the inevitable conclusion is that the petitioners were not tried by a legally constituted court.
As a consequence, the findings and the order of sentence cannot be sustained.
These are, thus, set aside.
13.
The petitioners, consequently, succeed on the ground that the Court Martial had not been convened by the appropriate authority.
However, keeping in view the fact that the charges against them are serious, it appears to be appropriate that the respondents should be directed to proceed further against the petitioners in accordance with the law.
The appropriate authority shall be competent to take such action as may be permitted by law.
This shall include the trial by court exercising jurisdiction under the general law.
Mr. Randhawa very fairly states that the petitioners are interested in vindicating their position and they will not raise any objection if they are now tried by a court.
14.
In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to go into the other questions raised by the counsel for the petitioners.
The writ petitions are, accordingly allowed.
In the circumstances, there will be no orders as to costs.