GS Singhvi, J - In view of the fact that these two petitions have been filed for issue of an identical writ, namely, writ of mandamus, to direct the respondents to regularise the service of the petitioner as Clerk in the Excise and Taxation Department on the basis of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide Annexure P-5 and for grant of other appropriate reliefs, the same are being decided by a common order.
2.
Petitioner, Mohinder Singh, joined service w.e.f.
2981978 under the Director, Animal Husbandry, Haryana, when he was appointed as Clerk on ad hoc basis.
The order of his appointment (Annexure P-1) indicated the tenure of appointment of six months but the petitioner continued to serve till 241980.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of the Milk Commissioner, Haryana, where he served upto 21101980.
After a gap of one year and nine months, the petitioner was appointed as Clerk on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
981982 in the Excise and Taxation Department and as on the date of filing of the writ petition, i.e. 12.9.1983, the petitioner was working as ad hoc Clerk in Excise and Taxation Department.
At this stage, it would be appropriate to take note of the fact that while issuing notice of motion on 361983, a Division Bench had passed an interim order and restrained the respondents from terminating the services of the petitioner.
That stay order has continued till this day and, therefore, it is reasonable to presume that the petitioner has remained in continuous employment since 981982.
3.
By placing reliance on the Government circular dated 311983 (Annexure P-5), the petitioner has pleaded that being an ad hoc Clerk, who was in service on 1591982, he has acquired a right to be regularised in service against the vacant post of Clerk which was available in the Excise and Taxation Department and by not passing an appropriate order of regularisation of his service, the respondents have discriminated him.
The petitioner has challenged the decision taken by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, refusing to regularise the service of the petitioner on the basis of Circular dated 311983.
According to him, a number of similarly situated persons have been regularised in other departments and therefore, the respondents should have issued an appropriate order of regularisation of his services also.
4.
In reply, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioner was given ad hoc appointment by the Director, Animal Husbandry and the Milk Commissioner, Haryana, as per the need of those two departments and as the petitioner did not continuously work for a period of two years as on 1591982, he could not be regularised in service.
The respondents have pleaded that the object of the Circular dated 311983 was to regularise the service of those persons who had continuously held a post on the basis of ad hoc appointment for a period of two years indicating regular need of employee to hold a particular post and as the petitioner's ad hoc appointment under the Milk Commissioner came to an end on 21101980 and there was a gap of more than one year and nine months between the termination of his service from the office of the Milk Commissioner and his appointment in the Excise and Taxation Department, the petitioner could not be regularised on the basis of policy decision taken by the Government.
5.
Petitioner Vinod Kumar joined service as Clerk on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
15.11.1979 on the basis of appointment order issued by the Superintending Engineer, Hathikund Barrage Circle, Yamuna Nagar.
He worked upto 14121981 under the Superintending Engineer.
He was given fresh appointment in the Excise and Taxation Department as ad hoc Clerk w.e.f.
1771982.
He too got an interim order from this Court on 2731983 and on the strength of the interim order, he has continued in service till this day.
Claim made by the petitioner for regularisation of service on the basis of Circular dated 311983 is founded on similar grounds as is the claim of the petitioner, Mohinder Singh, and reply filed by the respondent No 2 is also on identical lines.
It is, therefore, not necessary to make a detailed reference to the pleadings of Civil Writ Petition No. 1394 of 1984.
6.
I have heard Shri Mukund Gupta, learned counsel appearing for petitioner Mohinder Singh, and Shri Deepak Sibal, on behalf of the respondents in both the cases.
7.
No doubt, Circular dated 311983 does not use the expression 'continuous service' and, therefore, on a first reading of the Circular dated 311983, argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner, Mohinder Singh, appears to be quite appealing that any person who has completed two years' service irrespective of breaks, is entitled to be regularised in service in case he was in employment on 1591982 and fulfilled other conditions enumerated in the Circular dated 311983.
But on a comprehensive reading of that Circular and consideration of the intentment with which the Government formulated the policy of regularisation of service of ad hoc employee, I am of the opinion that if an employee completed two years' service with intermittent breaks or had served in different departments with intermittent breaks, he did not acquire a right to be regularised in service merely because he had in all completed two years of service as on 1591982.
Service rendered in different departments with break of one year and nine months or eleven months cannot enure to the benefit of the petitioners so as to regularise them in service in terms of the instructions issued on 311982.
8.
The judgment of this Court in Giani Ram v. State of Haryana, 1981(2) SLR 803, on which the learned counsel has placed reliance has no bearing on the issue raised in these petitions.
That was a case in which the employee had served continuously between 10.3.1970 and 31.12.1979 with a small break of few days.
This court interpreted the provisions of an earlier decision of the Government and held that a small break of few days had to be ignored by the Government while taking into consideration the total service rendered by Giani Ram and there was no justification to deny him the benefit of regularisation of service.
9.
I also do not find any substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner Mohinder Singh that his client should have been regularised in service merely because in some other cases, the departmental authorities have passed order of regularisation of service of ad hoc appointees even though they have not continuously worked in that capacity.
A look at the order Annexure P-8 filed along with Civil Writ Petition No. 2918 of 1982 does show that Shri Girdhari Lal was regularised in service just after eight months of employment and there may be large number of similar cases because in the State of Haryana commission of irregularities by the departmental authorities is a rule and not an exception.
However, on the basis of such illegal or erroneous orders, no mandamus can be issued by the Court in favour of the petitioner, because it is well settled that writs are issued for undoing the action of an authority based on mala fide or discrimination and not for passing an order which amounts to violation of law and Constitutional provisions.
10.
Though the petitioners are not entitled to be regularised in service on the basis of Circular dated 311983, it is not possible to ignore the developments which have taken place during the pendency of the writ petition.
After 311983, the Government of Haryana has issued other policy instructions for regularisation of service of ad hoc appointees.
One such Circular was issued on 1521987 for regularisation of service of all Class III ad hoc employee other than Teachers, who had completed two years service on 141986.
This Circular has been referred to in paragraph 4 of the often quoted decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC 118.
Even after 1521987, a number of Circulars have been issued by the State of Haryana for regularisation of ad hoc, casual, daily rated and work charged employees.
Therefore, even though the petitioners may not be entitled to be regularised in service on the basis of Circular dated 311983, I find sufficient justification to issue a direction to the respondents to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their service in terms of the instructions issued vide Circular dated 1521987.
Shri Sibal submitted that there is no foundation and prayer in the writ petition for issue of a direction to regularise the services of the petitioners w.e.f.
1111986.
That may be so and ordinarily the Court will insist upon proper pleadings and appropriate prayer for grant of relief to the petitioner but then it has to be remembered that power to issue appropriate order, direction or writ vests in the Court and in an appropriate case a simple prayer made for issue of appropriate order, direction or writ can enable the Court to modulate the relief which can be granted to a party which has approached it.
With the proliferation of the powers of judicial review and entertainment of letter-petitions and public interest petitions by the Courts for giving relief to the havenots of the society, it is not desirable to deny the relief to the deserving petitioners merely because specific fact has not been pleaded in the writ specific and prayer not been properly articulated.
In my considered opinion, there can be no justification for this Court to withhold its hand and decline relief to the petitioners which is otherwise admissible to them in view of the subsequent policy decision taken by the Government of Haryana, particularly when those policy decisions have been taken note of even by the Apex Court.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are dismissed in se far as claim of the petitioner for regularisation of their service w.e.f.
1591982 is concerned.
However, the respondents are directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of service w.e.f.
1111986 in terms of the instructions issued on 1521987.
Such consideration should be made by the respondents within a period of three months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
If the petitioners or any one of them is found eligible and suitable for regularisation of service on the basis of exercise undertaken by the departmental authorities, then the petitioners or such of them shall be treated as regularised w.e.f.
1111986 with all consequential benefits.