NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner seeks quashing of order of the Labour Court dated 3171995, annexure P-7.
2.
Petitioner is a public limited company having registered office at Faridabad.
Respondent No. 1 and employee of the Company challenged his order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary authority before the Labour Court, who after examining the various contentions raised by the respective parties finally came to the conclusion that in view of the decision of the apex Court in Managing Director, ECIL,.
Hyderabad, v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319(SC) : 1993(5) SLR 532 a delinquent employee is entitled to receive a copy of the enquiry report before the disciplinary authority arrives at its conclusion with regard to the guilt or innocence of the employee with regard to the charges levelled against him.
Since in the instant case the enquiry report had not been furnished to the delinquent employee same deprives him of a reasonable opportunity of placing his view point before the disciplinary authority and so un-just.
The Court came to the conclusion that the enquiry was neither fair nor proper and so the same stands vitiated.
Resultantly, the order of dismissal was set aside.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the Labour Court has indeed erred in law in not properly construing the ratio of the aforesaid judgment of the apex Court which has consequently resulted in failure of justice.
According to the counsel even if it be taken that the report of the enquiry officer had not been furnished to the employee yet no prejudice had accrued to him and nor there is any finding by the Labour Court and so the Court in the facts and circumstances of the case ought to have further examined the effect of non-service of the enquiry report.
As per the aforesaid judgment the Court or Tribunal is not to mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished.
It is for the Courts Tribunals to apply their judicious mind to the question and give reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment.
It is only if the Court or the Tribunal finds that the furnishing of report would have made a difference to the result in that case it should set aside the order of punishment.
In fact setting aside of the order of punishment has certain consequential results leading to payment of back wages and other benefits from the date of dismissal of employee to his reinstatement in service.
This fact has not been adverted to by the Labour Court.
So, the matter needs to be remitted back to the Labour Court for a fresh adjudication in the light of the decision in Managing Director, ECIL's case (supra).
4.
Counsel for the respondents on the other hand argued that the decision of the Labour Court is as per the aforesaid decision of the apex Court calling for no interference.
According to the counsel, a delinquent employee is entitled to supply of enquiry report before the disciplinary authority decides to impose a penalty in the nature of dismissal, as the disciplinary authority is to keep in view the evidence led by the contesting parties, report of the enquiry officer and any fresh representation which a delinquent employee may wish to file for consideration of a disciplinary authority.
This right of the delinquent employee to get a copy of the enquiry report is passed upon the principles of natural justice.
Otherwise such an employee does not get any right to place his view point before any punishment is decided to be imposed upon him.
In the instant case, the Court after evaluating the various contentions has come to the conclusion that it was essential for the management to supply him a copy of the enquiry report and since the same was not given it has resulted in failure of justice.
So, the revision petition deserves to be dismissed.
5.
Both the counsel have sought support from the decision of the apex Court in Managing Director ECIL's case (supra).
The question as to whether the report of enquiry officer/authority who/which is appointed by the disciplinary authority to hold an enquiry into the charges against the delinquent employee, is required to be furnished to the employee to enable him to make proper representation to the disciplinary authority before such authority arrives at its own finding with regard to the guilt or otherwise of the employee and the punishment, if any, to be awarded to him was referred to a larger Bench by a division Bench of the Court.
The Court after considering the views taken in various other judgments of the Court finally came to the conclusion that the right of an employee to receive a copy of the enquiry report is an integral part of the departmental enquiry i.e. when the enquiry officer is not the disciplinary authority the delinquent employee has a right to receive the copy of the enquiry officer's report before the disciplinary authority arrives at its own conclusion that the guilt or innocence of the employee with regard to the charges levelled against him.
A denial of enquiry report is a denial of reasonable opportunity to employee to prove his innocence and, thus, is a breach of principles of natural justice.
Court further held that a delinquent employee has two rights; firstly, to receive the enquiry officer's report and show cause against the findings in the report; and secondly, to show cause against the penalty proposed.
First right to receive the report of the enquiry officer is considered an essential part of reasonable opportunity at the first stage and also a principle of natural justice as the findings recorded by the enquiry officer form an important material before the disciplinary authority which along with the evidence has to take into consideration and thereafter comes a conclusion.
It is difficult to say in advance to what extent the said findings including the punishment, if any, recommended in the report would influence the disciplinary authority while drawing its conclusion.
Moreover, the findings might have been recorded without considering the relevant evidence on record or by misconstruing it or unsupported by it.
It is in this context that the Court held that it is negation of tenet of justice and a denial of fair opportunity to the employee to consider the findings recorded by a third party like the enquiry officer without giving the employee an opportunity to reply to it.
May be the disciplinary authority on evaluating the evidence, enquiry officer's report and the delinquent employee's reply to it finally arrives at its conclusion that the disciplinary proceedings deserve to be dropped and in that case the second stage to hear the delinquent employee as to any proposed punishment may not reach.
It is in this context that the Court held that a delinquent has a right of hearing and state his case at both the stages.
The learned counsel for the petitioner's reference that the Labour Court is not to mechanically set aside the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority in fact refers to the second stage of the enquiry.
In the instant case the Labour Court has come to the conclusion that the employee has been greatly prejudiced by non- supply of the enquiry report.
The conclusion arrived at cannot be termed to be unwarranted.
Thus, finding no merit in the revision petition the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.