RL Anand, J - This is defendant's appeal and is directed against the judgment and decree dated 561991 passed by the Court of District Judge, Bhatinda, who set aside the judgment and decree dated 2451990 passed by the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Bhatinda.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that Raj Singh plaintiff was a conductor in Pepsu Road Transport Corporation.
He was charge-sheeted on certain allegations of misconduct and eventually he was dismissed from service on 7.11.1988 by the Depot Manager of the Corporation.
Originally he was charge- sheeted by the Deputy General Manager, but leter on Depot Manager served a charge sheet upon the plaintiff.
The plea of the plaintiff Raj Singh, now represented by his widow and children, was that the Depot Manager was not competent to issue the charge sheet.
The Punishing Authority did not apply its mind to various questions of controversy, rendering the dismissal bad.
3.
The defendant/appellant i.e. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation contested the suit and sought to justify the enquiry and the order ultimately passed in pursuance thereof.
4.
On the above short pleadings, the trial Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether order dated 26.7.1988 passed by defendant No. 2 dismissing plaintiff from service and dated 7.11.1988 passed in appeal are void, illegal on the grounds alleged in the plaint ?
2.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
3.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
4.
Whether plaintiff is estopped by his act and conduct from filing the suit ?
5.
Whether suit in the present form is not maintainable under Specific  Relief Act ?
6.
Relief.
The parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their respective claims and on conclusion of the trial, the relevant issues, i.e. issue No. 1 and 2 were decided against the plaintiff and his suit was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 2451990.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree aforesaid, the plaintiff filed first appeal in the court of District Judge, Bhatinda, who allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and decree the suit of the plaintiff/respondent.
5.
This time, aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the District Judge, the defendant-Corporation has come up in appeal.
6.
I have heard Ms. Ranjit Kaur Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri Ashok Jindal Advocate, who represented the legal representatives of Raj Singh deceased and with their assistance have gone through the record.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Deputy Manager was competent to pass the impugned order Annexure P1, which was not order of dismissal, rather an order of termination and that the first appellate Court erred in holding that the order of dismissal could be passed by the Deputy General Manager.
The argument is devoid of any merit.
No doubt, the order Exhibit P1 regarding the appointment of the plaintiff, Raj Singh deceased, was issued under the signatures of Depot Manager, but this stand is falsified if letter Exhibit PX is taken into consideration.
It has been issued under the signatures of Depot General Manager, intimating the Depot Manager that Raj Singh had been selected as a training-conductor in the interview held on 2851982.
This letter clearly suggests that the plaintiff was appointed by the Deputy General Manager and not by the Depot Manager, as contended by learned counsel for the appellant.
If that is so, Raj Singh deceased could only be dismissed from service by the Deputy General Manager and not by the Deputy Manager.
8.
The second contention raised by learned counsel for the appellant was that the order Exhibit P1, in fact, is an order of termination.
The contention is again devoid of any merit.
If perused in the light of the show cause notice Exhibit D-19, which clearly suggests that before passing the impugned order, show cause notice dated 361988 was issued and the plaintiff was called upon to show cause why the penalty of dismissal from service should not be imposed upon him.
Thereafter the impugned order Annexure P1 was passed and it is clearly mentioned in it that the plaintiff had rendered himself unfit for any service in the Corporation.
In these premises, the order of dismissal could only be passed by the Depot General Manager and not by the Deputy Manager.
This is the mandate of clause (g) of Appendix B of the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation 1981.
As per item No. 2 Appendix (B), the Deputy General Manager is competent to impose the penalty of dismissal from services.
The impugned order dated 26.7.1988 has been issued by the Depot Manager, who could not pass such orders.
9.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the appellant then submitted that the suit of the plaintiff was not entertainable in the civil court and was barred by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In support of her contention, the learned counsel relied upon the decision in Jintendra Nath Biswas v. M/s.
Empire of India and Ceylone Tea Co and another, AIR 1990 SC 255.
In the cited case, the workman was the employee of a private company, but in the present case Raj Singh deceased was an employees of the Corporation, which is a statutory body, owned by the State of Punjab.
The action of dismissal was of a civil nature, which could be tried and disposed of by the civil court under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
No other point was urged before me.
Resultantly, this appeal being without any merit is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.