NK Agrawal, J -Yash Pal Sharma (non-petitioner No. 1) was employed as Conductor with the Haryana Roadways.
He was on duty on 9111983 as a Conductor of Bus No. 2605 on the Ponta Sahib-Chandigarh route.
A surprise checking was conducted by the Flying Squard of the Haryana Roadways and seven passengers were found travelling in that bus without tickets.
It was thus noticed that the Conductor, Yash Pal Sharma, had mis-appropriated a sum of Rs. 3250 by way of bus fare collected from the seven passengers.
A charge-sheet was given and thereafter he was dismissed from service on 12121988.
2.
The workman challenged the dismissal before the Labour Court with the plea that, at the time of surprise checking of the bus by the Flying Squad, he was in the process of issuing tickets to the passengers but he could not do so because he was busy in making enquiries about the illness of a relative's wife who was also travelling in that bus.
The Labour Court accepted the explanation furnished by the workman and took the view that the dismissal from service was too harsh a punishment.
The workman, Yash Pal Sharma, was therefore, reinstated though without backwages.
3.
The order of the Labour Court is under challenge in the present writ petition.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners, namely, the Haryana Roadways, that there was no reason to take a lenient view after it was found during departmental enquiry that the workman had deliberately not issued tickets to the passengers.
It was not a mere case of negligence as observed by the Labour Court because there was no reason whatsoever for no issuing tickets to the passengers.
The only explanation given by the workman before the Labour Court was that he was attending to a lady who was sick and whom he knew.
This explanation was not supported by any evidence nor it was a plausible explanation.
It is contended that it was not at all a case of negligence in so far as the non-issuance of tickets to the passengers was concerned.
In the absence of any evidence showing the inability of the workman for not issuing the tickets to seven passengers, it was not proper for the learned Judge of the Labour Court to accept the plea of the workman.
It was not a case of simple negligence but a case where tickets were not issued with dishonest intention.
4.
The plea on behalf of the workman is the same which was taken before the Labour Court and it is that the workman was in the process of issuing tickets to the passengers.
No evidence whatsoever was produced by the workman either during enquiry or before the Labour Court in support of this plea.
This is a case where the Conductor Yash Pal Sharma collected money by way of bus fare from the passengers but failed to issue tickets.
Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is not attracted because when the charge stood proved and no evidence was led by the workman to rebut the charge, there was no question of taking a view that it was a case of simple negligence.
In the case of State of Punjab v. Harjinder Singh, 1993(1) RSJ 758 : 1993(1) SCT 767(P&H), a similar question was examined and it was held that, no doubt, a small amount was embezzled but the fact that the workman collected the money from the passengers and did not issue tickets is a conduct which depicts dishonesty and the only justifiable punishment for such misconduct should normally be dismissal.
That was a case where a sum of Rs. 970 had been pocketed by the workman.
The money had been collected from the passengers.
Nothing had been found to show that the departmental enquiry was not fair and proper.
5.
In case of Union of India v. Parma Nand and others, 1989(2) Recent Services Judgments 1, the following observations, which appear to be relevant, have been made by the Supreme Court :  "We must unequivocally state that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to interfere with the disciplinary matters or punishment cannot be equated with an appellate jurisdiction.
The Tribunal cannot interfere with the findings of the Enquiry Officer or competent authority where they are not arbitrary or utterly perverse.
It is appropriate to remember that the power to impose penalty on a delinquent officer is conferred on the competent authority either by an Act of legislature or rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
If there has been an enquiry consistent with the rules and in accordance with principle of natural justice, what punishment would meet the ends of justice is a matter exclusively within the jurisdiction of the competent authority.
If the penalty can lawfully be imposed and is imposed on the proved misconduct, the Tribunal has no power to substitute its own discretion for that of the authority.
The adequacy of penalty, unless it is mala fide, is certainly not a matter for the Tribunal to concern with.
The tribunal also cannot interfere with the penalty if the conclusion of the Enquiry Officer or the competent authority is based on evidence even if some of it is found to be irrelevant or extraneous to the matter."
6.
The award of the Labour Court is not found to be sustainable inasmuch as the workman has been reinstated in service.
There was nothing on record to establish the workman's plea that it was simply a case of negligence that he could not issue tickets.
The lady to whom the workman claimed to be attending at the time of checking by the Flying Squad, was not produced in evidence.
No other flaw in the departmental enquiry was found.
The workman challenged the finding of the Enquiry Officer by way of an appeal but that was rejected.
7.
Consequently, in the facts and circumstances of this case, the award of the learned Judge of the Labour Court, dated 2481993, is quashed.
No order as to costs.