Swatanter Kumar, J - The challenge in this revision is to the order dated 721996.
Vide this order, the learned Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, U.T., Chandigarh declined to set aside the ex-parte award/order dated 14101993, awarding the compensation of Rs. 47,025-00 to the applicant Raj Kumar.
This ex parte order was passed on the basis that service by chaspa had been effected on the Management of Messrs Ensons Industries and there was a report of the postal authorities that "Bar Bar Jane Par Nahi Milta, Vapis Jai" and "Bar Bar Jane Par Factory Ko Tala Laga Rahta Hai".
A compensation claim was filed by Raj Kumar for injuries suffered by him during the course of employment with the company.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
The contention of the learned counsel for the applicant is that they were never served in accordance with law.
According to him, they were not even available at the address given in the petition and also the address which is alleged to have been given by the respondent herein, to the trial Court on which chaspa service is stated to have been effected.
3.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the applicant was served in accordance with law and he intentionally did not appear before the Court and it is only to avoid the payment now that the applicant has come to the Court.
During the course of hearing, I had considered it necessary to call for the records of the trial Court in order to appreciate the contentions raised by respective parties before me.
It has been recorded in the order dated 6.7.1993 that the respondent before the trial Court was avoiding service and he is residing in House No. 3838, Sector 47-D, Chandigarh and copy of order be sent to that place as well.
This is factually incorrect because as per the facts on the record, it is stated that the present applicant was residing at House No. 3421, Sector 37-D, Chandigarh.
There is also nothing on record of the trial Court to show that chaspa service was effected in accordance with law.
Under the provisions of Order 5, Rule 20, Civil Procedure Code, whenever a Court directs service by substituted method, it has to ensure that there is due compliance of such direction.
There is no report available on the record in the form of affidavit by the Process_Server and even the copy of the report would show that in fact the service was effected by substituted method of chaspa.
Under law a preport of the Process Server duly witnessed and in the form of an affidavit has to be available on the record of the Court before the Court directs ex parte proceedings against the party.
In fact there is no even a notice of the summons on record which would substantiate the contention raised by the respondent before this Court except that Postal Authorities had returned the notice from the old address of the company, on the abovementioned ground.
4.
It has also been argued that the Management of the Company had closed its business long back from the premises in question.
If the substituted service had been effected in accordance with law, then the ground taken by the applicant would not have been available to him, but in absence of such report on the record and the fact that there was sufficient medical evidence placed on record that during the period in question, the father of the Managing Director of the Company and his wife were seriously ill and had to be taken for treatment in the GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi.
As such there was possibility of his being not available as alleged.
5.
The learned counsel for the applicant submits that in view of the judgments of this Court in the case of M/s International Steel House, Madras and another v. Vardhman Spinning and General Mills Ltd, Ludhiana and others, 1989(2) PLR 217; M/s. Parma Nand & Sons v. M/s. Adarsh Oil Mills, 1976 (LXXVII) PLR 485 and Satya Devi v. Ram Parkash and another, 1992(2) RRR 375 (P&H) : 1992(1) PLR 618, the Court was not justified in proceeding ex parte against the petitioner.
6.
In spite of the fact that the learned trial Court had duly noticed the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-applicant, still it has not recorded that the basic ingredient of chaspa service was satisfied and the report to that effect was examined by the Court.
The Court has mainly declined to set aside the order on the ground of delay.
7.
This Court is not concerned with the merits of the case, but certainly the learned trial Court was not justified in proceeding against the present petitioner ex parte.
This is not a case where the application can be said to be mala fide and could be rejected on that ground.
The trial Court had noticed the various points but ignored the crucial point with regard to proper service.
If proper service, in accordance with law, is not effected on a party, in that event the application for setting aside ex parte order/decree cannot be frustrated for the reason of delay alone.
Proper and lawful service is based on passing a proper judgment and decree.
Absence of such valid service would render the decision open to interference.
If a party is not served properly and the matter is decided in his absence, it will amount to denial of fair trial and would be in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The basic rule of law requires valid and proper service within the meaning and scope of the Court before a party can be proceeded against ex parte.
The court is under duty to assure compliance of such provisions before directing ex parte proceedings against a party.
For the reasons aforestated, orders dated 14101994 and 721996 are set aside.
Parties are directed to appear before the trial Court on 14101996 on which date the petitioner-applicant, before this Court, shall file reply to the claim petition without fail.
The trial Court then shall proceed with the matter in accordance with law and conclude the proceedings within a period of two months from that date.
There shall be no order as to costs.