NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 221982 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police dismissing him from service and affirmation of it by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated 2191982 is illegal, ultra vires, null and void and thus in-operative on the rights of the plaintiff and so the plaintiff is entitled to consequential relief in the form of pay, seniority etc. from the department.
As per averments made in the plaint the plaintiff was appointed as a Constable on 27.11.1965 by Additional Inspector General of Police, Punjab, Jalandhar Cantt.
in Punjab Armed Police as a regular employee of the department.
Later on he was brought on promotion list C-1 on 151966 and later on promoted as Head Constable by the Deputy Inspector General of Police on 15.6.1966.
It so happened that he was reverted to the rank of Constable in 1980, and thereafter departmental enquiry was launched against him on the allegation that while he was deputed to bring the daily diary register in evidence in a case registered under section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, he after appearing in the Court on 2871980 did not report to the police lines subsequently and so was marked absent.
The plaintiff remained absent for 48 days and reported on 1691980.
An enquiry was held and finally the plaintiff was found to be guilty of the charges levelled.
On appeal, the matter was again remitted by the appellate authority and the matter was once again examined and finally the Superintendent of Police passed an order of dismissal dated 221982.
The appeal also met with the same fate which the plaintiff has now challenged stating these orders to be not in conformity with Rule 16.28 of the Punjab Police Rules.
3.
Defendant put in appearance, filed written statement controverting the various material averments made in the plaint.
On the pleadings of the parties following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the impugned order is null and void as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
(2) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD.
(3) Relief.
4.
The trial Court on the basis of evidence found no substance in the case set up by the plaintiff and so decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendant holding that impugned order can be challenged in a Civil Court.
Resultantly the suit was dismissed.
5.
The appellate Court too found no substance in the appeal and so affirmed the judgment and decree of the Trial Court.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the impugned orders being violative of Rule 16.2(1) and 16.2(4) of the Punjab Police Rules (for short 'the Rules') and thus unsustainable in law.
According to the counsel the sole charge against the plaintiff is that he remained absent for a period of about 48 days which by itself could not be construed to be a case of gravest act of misconduct as envisaged by the aforesaid Rules and so the punishment of dismissal imposed by the authorities is far too excessive and so the order deserves to be set aside/modified.
According to the counsel the authorities while imposing the punishment of dismissal from service of the plaintiff did not keep in view his length of service.
As per Rule 16.2(1) of the Rules, while awarding punishment the authorities are expected to keep in view the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision of this Court in case reported as Constable Om Prakash v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) RSJ 791 : 1995(3) SCT 170(P&H).
7.
Rule 16.2(1) of the Rules deals with the circumstances in which an order of dismissal is to be passed against a person found guilty of gravest act of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The rule further envisages that length of service of the offender and his claim to pension is also to be kept in view.
The precise ambit and scope of this provision has been considered in a number of judicial pronouncements and the view has almost been consistent that dismissal is to be awarded only for the gravet act of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
Thus, all what has to be seen is whether in the context of the present case the punishment awarded is in conformity with the Rules noticed above.
The order dated 221982 refers to various punishments which were awarded to the plaintiff before his absence for a period of 48 years i.e. in between 1967 to 1979 which are briefly given below :  1.
Punishment of reprimand was award for remaining absent from 1.9.1967 to 291987.
2.
One year qualified service was forfeited for remaining absent from 2171973 when checking was done on 2171973.
3.
Three years qualified service was forfeited on permanent basis for remaining absent on six different dates during this posting in Industrial Area Police Station.
4.
One year qualified service was forfeited on permanent basis for remaining absent on different dates during his posting in Police Lines, Ludhiana.
5.
Two years qualified service was forfeited on permanent basis for misbehaving with a Constable during his posting in District Ludhiana.
6.
Five years qualified service was forfeited on permanent basis for remaining absent from 13111975 to 10121975.
7.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded for remaining absent on different dates totalling four days 15 minutes.
8.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 698/79.
9.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 948/79.
10.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 498/80.
11.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 839/80(5).
12.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 839/80(6).
13.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 839/80(7).
14.
Reverted to the rank of Constable vide Order Book No. 674/80.
15.
Reprimanded vide Order Book No. 319/81.
16.
Punishment of reprimand was awarded vide Order Book No. 331/81.
17.
Two years qualified service was forfeited on permanent basis vide Order Book No. 478/81; and finally he again remained absent for a period of 48 days.
It is with this background that Superintendent of Police keeping in view his record finally formed a view that the incumbent is incorrigible and unfit to hold the post.
Even a cursory glance on the various punishments imposed by the authorities during a span about 12 years leads only to one conclusion that the plaintiff is incorrigible and retention of such a person in a disciplined force like the police is likely to prove more harmful as it is likely to convey a message to the other incumbents that despite such major lapses they can remain in service.
Condoning such like misconduct of a person belonging to a disciplined force would make the proviso relating to dismissal on the ground of gravest misconduct almost redundant.
The order passed by the authority is not proved to be vitiated in any manner and so the Courts below have rightly held the same to be valid and appropriate.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant has, however, argued that since the plaintiff had rendered the service for a period of about 18 years, the order of dismissal deprives him of his right to pension and so the matter deserves to be considered more sympathetically.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision of the apex Court in case reported as Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1992(3) RSJ 502 : 1994(3) SCT 335(SC).
In the aforesaid case, the petitioners were tried by Court Martial and ultimately removed from service.
Both of them filed revision petitions and the same were ordered to be dismissed by common judgment.
In these two Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions, a prayer was made for release of petitioners' provident fund, gratuity and pension.
The Court while considering their claim noted that Major GS Sodhi has put in about 17-1/2 years of service whereas Lt. Col. SK Duggal had rendered about 21 years of service.
It is in this background and following the observations made in an earlier writ petition to the effect, " the Court has not inflicted a punishment on him of forfeiture of pension or other service benefits and counsel for the other side has assured the Court that whatever the pension and other service benefits are permissible to the petitioner under the law will be given to him" granted the prayer made by the petitioners directing the authorities to pay the petitioners the entire pension, gratuity and provident fund as per rules.
The order dated 221982 is silent as regards the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
Dismissal from service deprives a person of his right to claim pension i.e. pension in such like cases cannot be claimed as of right.
Thus while finding no merit in this appeal and dismissing the same, I am of the view that in view of the decision of the apex Court in Major GS Sodhi's case (supra), the appellants' claim to pension deserves to be considered by the respondent-authority sympathetically.
Thus, while dismissing the appeal, I direct the authorities to consider the plaintiff's claim in the light of the decision of the apex Court noticed above and pass appropriate orders.
No orders as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.