NK Agrawal, J - Workman Paramjit Singh (respondent No. 2 herein) was reinstated in the service of the petitioner-hospital by an award of the Labour Court dated 2971987.
This award was published in the Official Gazette dated 30101987.
The workman was reinstated in service with full back wages with continuity of service.
The workman is said to have tried to join duties but the Management did not permit him to do so.
Ultimately, the workman joined his duties on 3151988.
An application under section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act) was filed by the workman in the year 1991 claiming interest on arrears of back wages, leave encashment, house rent allowance and certain annual increments.
The Labour Court granted the aforesaid application and allowed the payment of the money to the workman as under :-  1.
By way of interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum on the amount of arrears of wages Rs. 6,803/- 2.
Leave encashment money Rs. 3,445/- 3.
House Rent Allowance Rs. 500/- 4.
Annual increments Rs. 200/- Rs. 10,948.
The Labour Court, while directing the Management of the employer to make the payment as aforesaid within three months, further ordered payment of interest at the rate of 10 per cent per annum if the amount was not paid within the given time.
2.
The petitioner has confined the challenge to the payment of interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum at Rs. 6,803/- and the amount of leave encashment at Rs. 3,445/-.
Thus the payment of house rent allowance at Rs. 500/- and the annual increments at Rs. 200/- has been excluded from the challenge.
The petitioner's primary contention against the grant of interest on the arrears of wages is based on the plea that no interest was allowed in the award dated 2971987.
The Management was simply directed to pay full back wages.
Therefore, it was not within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under section 33-C(2) of the Act to allow any interest on the arrears of wages.
The Labour Court could only direct the Management to make the payment as per the award already given by the Court.
Section 33- C(2) of the Act permits a workman to approach the Labour Court if he was entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which could be computed in terms of money.
If any question arose as to the amount of money due or as to the amount at which such benefit should be computed, then the question may be decided by the Labour Court.
It would be thus clear that the workman could claim any money if he was entitled to do so.
No new claim could be made under sub-section (2) of Section 33-C of the Act.
As per the contention of the learned counsel for the employer-petitioner, neither any interest was allowed nor any leave encashment benefit was given in the award dated 2971987.
The workman could only claim the arrears of wages in terms of the award and the Labour Court under section 33-C(2) of the Act could direct the Management to make the payment within a specified period with a condition that interest shall be payable on the arrears if no payment was made.
The Labour Court could not order the payment of interest on the failure of the Management to pay the arrears of wages inasmuch as no time limit was stipulated in the award for the payment of back wages.
Leave encashment benefit was also not given in the award.
3.
In Victor Oil Company Limited v. Amarnath Das and others, 1961(II) LLJ 113, it was held by the Supreme Court that a workman, who filed an application under section 33-C(2) of the Act for computing the money due to him in accordance with the order of reinstatement made by the Labour Appellate Tribunal, where there was no provision for encashment of leave in the Service Rules, claim for leave salary and compensation for forced unemployment was untenable in view of the claim for full salary for the same period.
In the case of the present workman, Paramjit Singh, neither any provision in the service conditions nor any clause in the Standing Orders has been placed so as to indicate that he was entitled to the benefit of leave encashment.
4.
In the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi, 1995(1) LLJ 395, the Supreme Court was examining the applicability of section 33-C(2) of the Act and it was observed that the Labour Court cannot decide the entitlement of the workman as incidental to its powers and then compute the claim under section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Power of the Labour Court was like that of an Executing Court.
The Labour Court could not determine the dispute of entitlement or the basis of claim in the absence of prior adjudication or recognition by employer.
5.
The plea of the workman is that the employer failed to comply with the award dated 2971987 inasmuch as arrears of back wages were not paid nor the workman was allowed to join till 3151988.
There was a gap of six months and the workman was constrained to file an application under section 33-C(2) of the Act for recovering the arrears not paid in terms of the award as well as for the intervening period of six months after the award.
All benefits accruing through the award were to be made available to the workman.
Payment of arrears was required to be made under the award and if the payment was not so made, interest could be rightly allowed under section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Since full back wages with continuity of service were allowed to the workman under the award, all consequential benefits accrued.
6.
The terms of the award are very simple and clear and need no different interpretation except that the workman was only entitled to receive back wages and nothing more.
There was no mention of payment of any interest in case of non-payment or delay.
Therefore, under section 33-C(2) of the Act, it was beyond jurisdiction of the Labour Court to allow any interest on the arrears of wages.
There was no direction by the Labour Court for payment of leave encashment in the award dated 2971987.
This amount would also not be allowed, being beyond the scope of section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The Labour Court was only acting as an Executing Court and could not go beyond the award.
The workman was not entitled to the encashment of any leave because he was paid the salary for the entire period from the date of termination of services to the date of joining.
In the absence of any specific order in regard to the leave encashment, while reinstating the workman, the Labour Court could not require the Management to make payment to the workman while exercising powers under section 33-C(2) of the Act.
7.
The order of the Labour Court is partly set aside so far as the payment of interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum at Rs. 6,803/- and leave encashment money at Rs. 3,445/- are concerned.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.