Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the letter dated 1321995 (Annexure P.1) passed by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance by which the representation filed by the petitioner for grant of pension was rejected.
It has also been prayed that the respondents be directed to grant pension to the petitioner which he became entitled to.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that when the petitioner was working as Naib Subedar in the Army, he was tried by the Summary General Court Martial for an offence under section 52(a) of the Army Act (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') for committing theft of Government property and the Summary General Court Martial found the petitioner guilty of the offence and sentenced him to be dismissed from service.
Findings and sentence of the Summary General Court Martial were confirmed and consequently he was dismissed from service on 611971.
3.
Aggrieved by the order of dismissal, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 13734 of 1994 praying for the grant of pension.
The said writ petition was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to treat the writ petition as representation on behalf of the petitioner and dispose of the same by passing a speaking order.
Thereafter, the representation of the petitioner was considered by the Government of India and the same was rejected vide memorandum dated 1321995, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-1.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid memorandum dated 1321995, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
4.
Mr. Angad Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner referred to Section 71 of the Act and submitted that unless an order under sub section (h) of section 71 for forfeiture of service for the purpose of pension was specifically passed by the authority concerned, the petitioner could not be deprived of the pension.
He further submitted that the pensionary regulations relied upon by the respondents were contrary to statutory provisions of the Act and as such could not be applied to the facts of the petitioner.
He, therefore, contended that the petitioner was entitled for pension for the services rendered by him in the Army.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on Major Radha Krishan v. Union of India and others, 1996(2) RSJ 427 : 1996(2) SCT 475 (SC).
5.
Mr. Pipat, learned Senior Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that the petitioner was liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches as the petition has been filed after a lapse of about 25 years from the date when the petitioner was dismissed from service.
He further submitted that the petitioner was tried by Summary General Court Martial for offence under section 52(a) of the Act for committing theft of property belonging to the Government and after he was held guilty by Summary General Court Martial, he was dismissed from service with effect from 611971.
He further submitted that since the petitioner had completed 20 years and 336 days qualifying service, his case was forwarded to Army headquarters for obtaining Government sanction for grant of service pension.
The case of the petitioner was, however, rejected as it was not treated as exceptional one in terms of the Government of India, Ministry of Defence's letter No. 1(3)/65/9423/D (Pension/Services) dated 1111967.
He also submitted that as per para 113(a) of the pension regulation part (1), 1961, an individual who is dismissed from service under the provisions of Army Act, was ineligible for pension towards his previous service.
In support of his contention, learned counsel placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court namely Union of India v. Brigadier PK Datta (retd.
), 1995(2) SCT 535 (SC) and Major (retd.)
Hari Chand Pahwa v Union of India, 1995(3) SLR 703.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
Before dealing with the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, it will be relevant to reproduce the relevant portion of Section 71 of the Act and pension regulation para 113(a) of the pension regulation part (1) 1961, which is as under :-  "Section 71 Punishment awardable by Courts-martial.
Punishment may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by person subject to this Act and convicted by court martial, according to the scale following, that is to say - x x x x x  (e) dismissal from the service; (h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose; (k) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or dismissal."
"Regulation 113(a) - An Individual who is dismissed under the provision of the Army Act, is ineligible for pension or gratuity in respect of all previous service.
In exceptional cases, however, he may, at the discretion of the President be granted service pension or gratuity at a rate not exceeding that for which he would have otherwise qualified had he been discharged on the same date."
A reading of both the provisions mentioned hereinabove clearly brings about the distinct fields occupied by them.
Section 71(h) provide the punishment which can be awarded by the Court Martial whereas the regulation 113(a) contemplates a situation where an officer is dismissed and provides how his pension is to be dealt with.
From this it is further clear that regulation 113(a) comes into operation subsequent to the stage of the awarding of the punishment.
The nature and content of both the impositions is altogether different and distinct.
It is true that pension regulations are non-statutory in character but as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Major (retd.)
Hari Chand Pahwa (supra), the pensionary benefits are provided for and are payable only under those regulations and can be withheld or be forfeited under and as provided by those regulations.
7.
In view of the law laid down by the Apex Court, the question whether the petitioner is entitled to any pension, shall be governed by regulation 113(a).
In terms of the said regulation an individual who is dismissed under the provisions of the Army Act, is ineligible for pension or gratuity in respect of all previous service.
However, in exceptional cases at the discretion of the President, service pension or gratuity may be granted to such a person.
In the present case, as stated hereinabove, the case of the petitioner was submitted to the Government but the same was not treated as an exceptional case under regulation 113(a) of the pension regulations.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
The view we have taken finds full support from the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Brigadiar PK Datta (retd.)
(supra).
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.