Swatanter Kumar, J - Both the respondents-contemner are present in Court.
They have filed affidavits in furtherance to the orders of this Court dated 3171996.
They have explained before the Court that there are some practical difficulties with regard to getting sanction from the Finance Department.
According to these officers delay normally results from the fact that they do not have sanction from the Finance Department and the Finance Department takes its own time in sanctioning the reference sent by their department, which results invariably in great delay in disposal of request for reimbursement of medical bills.
This happens even if there are orders of the Court.
2.
Copy of the order dated 3171996 would be sent to the Chief Secretary and Finance Secretary, Government of Punjab, for compliance and it is hereby directed that the Finance Secretary, Punjab shall fix period not exceeding a period of one month from the date on which the bill is received in his department to clear the said bill or pass such other appropriate directions as are called for keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and the rules applicable.
Finance Secretary shall personally along with the Secretary, Education, and Director, Public Instruction (Schools), Punjab, be responsible for conducting the enquiry and submission of report within the stipulated period as granted vide order dated 3171996.
3.
In view of the unconditional apology tendered, more so the assurance given by these officers in person in Court today along with the affidavits filed, I consider it appropriate that another chance be given to these contemners to improve the working and to comply with the orders of the Court and not impose punishment upon them at this stage.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon certain judgments to show that this lip-service and Mantra of unconditional apology has become a routine with the bureaucrats and the civil servants working in offices and in fact they have no respect for the orders of the Court and they normally err in complying with such orders.
It is true that the present case is certainly of such nature which calls for some stringent action because the respondents have violated the orders of this Court and the irresponsible attitude of the officers is apparent on the face of the record, but the purpose of the contempt is not merely to punish a person and especially when it relates to the functioning of the entire State.
The limitations of infra-structure and the procedural delays cannot be over-looked and entirely ignored just with a view that it must result in punishing every person in every case.
The Supreme Court in Baradakanta Mishra v. Mr. Justice Gatikrushna Misra, C.J.
of the Orissa H.C., AIR 1974 Supreme Court 2255, has held as under :-  "It is for the court in the exercise of its discretion to decide whether or not to initiate a proceeding for contempt.
Even if the Court in the exercise of its discretion to decide whether or not to initiate a proceeding for contempt.
Even if the Court is prima facie satisfied that a contempt has been committed, the court may yet choose to ignore it and decline to take action.
There is no right in any one to compel the Court to initiate a proceeding for contempt even where a prima facie case appears to have been made out."
Keeping in view the above judgment in mind and the facts that within a period of three months from 3171996 the contemners have assured to set the entire functioning right and also assured that not only in this case but in no other case there would be delay in complying with the orders of the Court under any circumstances, I consider it proper that the Court must endeavour and attempt to achieve a larger cause and object rather than pass orders which may become unexecutable within the provided system and or cause further unnecessary delay in execution and compliance of the orders of the Court.
5.
In addition to the directions issued in the order dated 3171996 it is directed that the aforementioned Committee of the three officers would submit the report to the Registrar of this Court within the stipulated period, as to what steps have been taken to remedy the faults and who are the persons who have been held liable to pay the element of interest from February, 1966 to July, 1996 as well as the costs imposed under this order.
This committee shall ensure streamlining of entire system so that every medical bill or bill for medical reimbursement is disposed of within the period of six months by the concerned authorities from the date of its submission.
6.
However, before submission of the report to the Registrar, the Committee shall submit the same to the Chief Secretary, Punjab, who after examining the record and the enquiry report if finds that any of the members of the Committee are also responsible for causing delay in execution of the order of the Court shall direct deduction of such amount from their salary which he may deem fit and proper out of the aforestated amount.
The Chief Secretary would, however, ensure submission of the report to the Registrar of this Court within the stipulated period.
7.
In these circumstances, this petition is disposed of with the directions that all the terms and conditions stated in the order dated 3171996 shall form integral part of this order and the additional conditions referred above shall also be carried out within the stipulated period as directed in the order dated 3171996.
8.
Keeping in view of the fact that the petitioner has been harassed to file two contempt petitions even after a direction of Division Bench of this Court for reimbursement of the medical bill which he had submitted in November, 1993, I consider it proper to impose a cost of Rs. 5,000/-.
These costs shall also be paid by the Government at the initial stage but would be subject to adjustment from the salary of all the defaulting persons who are found to be guilty by the Committee constituted by these two orders.
Costs be paid within two weeks from today.
In the event any one condition of this order or the order dated 3171996 is not carried out by any of the contemners or any other person, the petitioner shall be entitled to revive this petitions.
The report submitted to the learned Registrar shall be submitted before this Court on the administrative side.