THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed to quash the award of the Labour Court, Chandigarh, dated September 4, 1992.
2.
The petitioner is a Co-operative Society known as the Haryana State Federation of Consumers' Co-operative Wholesale Stores Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Society) registered under the Co-operative Societies Act.
Its employees formed an association called as the Haryana Confed Employees' Welfare Union, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Union for brevity).
On February 9, 1988, the Union served a charter of demands on the Society.
By an order dated October 23, 1988, the matter was referred to the Labour Court, Chandigarh, for adjudication.
By the impugned award dated September 4, 1992, the Labour Court allowed the demands Nos. 2, 3, and 6 and rejected the other demands of the Union.
The demands Nos. 2, 3 and 6 which have been allowed by the Labour Court are in respect of the following matters :-  1.
To give regular pay scale to Salesmen/helpers on doctrine of equal work-equal pay.
2.
Implementation of Fourth Pay Commission report with effect from January 1, 1986 3.
Revision of pay scales of Accountants.
3.
The Society filed this writ petition challenging the award of the Labour Court.
In this writ petition, the learned counsel for the petitioner-society confined his arguments in respect of equal pay to salesmen working in rural outlets of the Society and in regard to the date from which the revised scales of pay should be implemented.
4.
For a proper appreciation of the controversy involved, it is necessary to narrate certain facts.
5.
The Society was established in the year 1966 to ensure proper public distribution system of the essential consumer commodities in the urban areas of the State of Haryana.
The petitioner-society was created as an apex society having Central Co-operative Consumers Stores in the urban areas as its members.
In the year 1979, the State of Haryana launched a massive production-cum-distribution of Essential Commodities Scheme with the objective to provide the essential commodities at reasonable rates to the consumers living in far off places in the States including in the rural areas.
The task of implementing the Scheme was entrusted to the petitioner-society.
Consequently, the petitioner-society decided to open retail outlets in the rural areas of the State having population of 2000 and above in order to implement the Scheme effectively.
Prior to the implementation of the Scheme of the Government, the petitioner-society was having common cadre of salesmen working in the urban areas and they were appointed on regular pay scales and were governed by the Staff Service Rules of the petitioner-society.
6.
In order to implement the Scheme of the Government of Haryana in the rural areas of the State, the petitioner-society created certain posts of salesmen/helpers with a fixed pay to work in the outlets of the petitioner- society in the rural areas.
The salesmen/helpers were also allowed to have sales incentives so as to enable them to promote the sales of certain items in the rural areas.
The Board of Directors passed resolutions on April 22, 1980, and on January 15, 1981, creating the posts of the salesmen to work in the rural areas.
In pursuance of the said resolutions, certain salesmen have been appointed in outlets of the petitioner-society in the rural areas of the State of Haryana and they are being paid the fixed salary with the incentives.
The demand of the Union is that the salesmen working in the rural areas should also be paid the salary on regular pay scales at par with the Salesmen working in the outlets of the petitioner-society in urban areas.
7.
The real controversy therefore centres round the question whether the salesmen working in the rural areas are entitled to the same scales of pay which their counterparts in the urban areas are getting.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner-society relied upon the letter of appointment of the salesmen in the rural areas dated June 10, 1981, (Annexure P-2).
The relevant portion reads as follows :-  "You are appointed to the post of Salesman on a consolidated salary of Rs. 300/- per month with the following sales incentives :- 1.A) For Salesman posted in the villages having population upto 5000 and also sale incentive will be as under :- i) Monthly sale upto Rs. 8000/- = no incentive ii) Monthly sale exceeding Rs. 12,000/- and upto Rs. 20,000/- = 2% of the sale exceeding Rs. 12,000/- iii) Monthly sale exceeding Rs. 20,000/- = 3% of the sale exceeding Rs. 20,000/- B) For salesman posted in village exceeding population 5000 will be as under :- i) Monthly sale upto Rs. 10,000/- = no incentive  ii) Monthly sale exceeding Rs. 10,000/- and upto Rs. 15,000/- 1% of the sale exceeding Rs. 10,000/-  iii) Monthly sale exceeding Rs. 15,000/- and upto Rs. 25,000/- = 2% of the sale exceeding Rs15,000/- iv) Monthly sale exceeding Rs. 25,000/- = 3% of the sale exceeding Rs. 25,000/- The sale incentive will be calculated on monthly basis and will be paid to at the end of the quarter.
Sale of levy sugar and other rationed commodities will not be included at the time of calculating the incentive to be given to the Salesman.
The work of the Salesman will be considered and the salesmen are now getting fixed wages of Rs. 104670 per month with effect from July 1, 1992.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner-society contended that the salesmen working in rural outlets form a separate class and they are given Sales incentives whereas the salesmen working in urban areas have to attend more work and they have to cater large number of customers when compared to the salesmen working in the rural areas and they have not been paid or granted any sales incentives and, therefore, that there cannot be any comparison among the salesmen working in the rural areas and the salesmen working in the urban areas.
They are not equals and, therefore, the salesmen in the rural areas have been put on consolidated salary with sales incentives.
10.
On the other hand, it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondents-salesmen that the functions, duties and responsibilities of both the salesmen working in rural areas and urban areas are similar and identical and they cannot be discriminated.
The Salesmen working in the rural areas have not been paid any incentive till now and, therefore, salesmen working in rural areas are entitled to equal pay for equal work.
11.
Admittedly, the posts have been created by resolutions of the Board of Directors of the Petitioner-society passed on April 22, 1980, and January 15, 1981.
At the meeting held on April 22, 1980, the item on the agenda was to consider scheme of public distribution and its implementation.
The resolution is to the effect that office proposal/suggestions regarding implementation of Scheme was considered and approved.
The matter was further considered by the Board of Directors at its meeting held on January 15, 1981, and the relevant portion of the resolution reads as follows :-  "Further resolved to create the following additional posts and proposed for successful implementation of the scheme- 1.
Managers 32 (their pattern given in Annexure 'A') 2.
Assistant Managers 32  3.
Storekeepers 224 (160 for local points and 64 for the Hqs of Sub Division Office) 4.
Salesmen 1600 to be opened by Confed.
This number includes 400 posts of Salesmen created under item No. 6.
5.
Helpers 800 The posts will carry usual pay scales.
The post of helper will be on a fixed salary of Rs. 250/- per month keeping in view the Minimum Wages Act.
These posts should be filled keeping in view the actual requirement."
12.
Thus, it is clear that according to the resolution dated January 15, 1981, the posts created therein will carry usual pay scales as applicable to regular employees working in the urban areas.
13.
The letter of appointment was issued on June 10, 1981, that is subsequent to the resolution.
When the Board decided to extend the usual scales of pay to the newly created posts for successful implementation of the scheme, there is no question of giving them the consolidated salary.
The intention of the Board is very clear that they want to treat the salesmen working in the rural areas at par with their counterparts working in the urban areas.
14.
Further, from the record produced before me, the Salesmen working in the rural areas have been transferred to urban areas and vice-versa.
The office orders dated November 11, 1987, (Annexure D), dated November 20, 1992, (Annexure B) dated September 24, 1992, (Annexure C), dated February 16, 1993, (Annexure A), dated October 4, 1994, (Annexure F) and dated January 12, 1996, (Annexure E) are some of the instances to show where the posts of salesmen working in the rural areas and in urban areas are inter-transferable.
The functions and duties of the salesmen working in different outlets are practically the same.
They have to promote the sales.
With regard to payment of incentives, the respondents vehemently denied that they have been paid any incentive.
They also filed an affidavit to this effect.
In the counter affidavit filed by the Managing Director it was stated that some of the Salesmen working in the rural outlets at Faridabad, Panchkula, and Bhiwani districts had been paid some incentives during the years 1980-81 and 1981-82.
But there is nothing on record to show that any incentive was ever paid to the salesmen after 1982.
There is nothing on record to show that even during 1980-82 the salesmen working in the rural outlets of the other districts have been paid any incentive.
It is, thus, clear that no incentive has been ever paid to any salesmen working in the rural areas after 1980-82.
Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-society that the salesmen working in the rural areas are paid incentives which have been denied to the salesmen working in the outlet in the urban areas.
15.
The principle of equal pay for equal work is now well recognised and is no longer res integra.
In a recent judgment of this court in Girdhari Lal and others v. State of Haryana, 1996(2) SCT 132 (P&H) : 1996(1) SLR 152 several authorities of the Supreme Court have been considered as it was held as follows :-  "The principle of 'equal pay for equal work' was further enunciated and approved by the Supreme Court in Savita v.
U.O.I., AIR 1985 SC 1124, Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, 1986(1) SCC 637, Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief AIR 1986 SC 594 Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2049 Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 150 V Markendeya v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1989 SC 1308, State of UP v. JP Chaurasia,AIR 1989 SC 19 and host of other authorities."
After referring to its various earlier judgments, the Supreme Court in Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers Union v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 95 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1173 : (1991(1) SLR 618 (SC) held :- ".....Equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by the Constitution as a fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principles of State policy as contained in Article 39(d) of the Constitution 'equal pay for equal work' has assumed the status of fundamental right in service jurisprudence having regard to the constitutional mandate of equality in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution equal pay for equal work and providing security for service by the regularising casual employment within a reasonable period has been accepted by this court as a constitutional goal to our socialist pattern.
It has ceased to be a judge made law as it is the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensures a welfare socialistic pattern of a State providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similarly placed employees of the State.
This Court has zealously enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice in a number of decisions."
In this case, the Supreme Court further held that the principle of equal pay for equal work was applicable in its full vigour even in establishments which were not a regular department of the State but were instrumentality of the State.
The Court further held that while considering the principle of equal pay for equal work it was not necessary to find out the similarities by mathematical formula.
Reasonable similarity in the nature of work, performance of duties, qualifications and quality of work was sufficient."
16.
On a consideration of the nature of work, duties and functions of the salesmen working in the outlets of the petitioner-society in the rural areas and the outlets in the urban areas and also in view of the decision of the Board of Directors dated January 15, 1981, and in view of the fact that both the posts are inter-transferable, I am of the opinion that the salesmen working in the rural areas are also entitled to the regular pay scales and conditions of service at par with their counterparts working in the outlets situated in the urban areas.
17.
The next question that falls for my consideration is in regard to the date from which the pay scales have to be applied.
The Labour Court directed to apply the pay scales with effect from June 1, 1986, on the basis (sic) State Government Employees have been given the revised scales of pay with effect from that date in pursuance of the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission.
But it cannot be said that the employees of the petitioner-society are to be treated at par with the Government employees.
It is open to the Public Sector Undertakings to have their own pay scales and staff service rules though it is appropriate that the Public Sector Undertakings to follow the policies of the State Government.
It has been observed by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : JT 1992(5) SC 179 as follows :-  "So far as the employees and workmen employed by the statutory public corporations are concerned, it may be noted that they have not issued any orders akin to those issued by the Punjab and Haryana Governments.
Even so, it is but appropriate that they adopt as far as possible, keeping the exigencies and requirements of their administration in view, the criteria and principles underlying the orders issued by their Government in the matter of regularisation and pass appropriate orders" In fact, the petitioner-society addressed a letter to the Registrar of Co- operative Societies Haryana on June 8, 1989, seeking his approval for adopting the revised pay scale to its employees.
The Registrar in his communication dated December 7, 1989, conveyed the petitioner-society the approval of the State Government in its letter dated December 1, 1989, with effect from that date.
Therefore, the revised pay scales are applicable only with effect from December 1, 1989.
The award of the Labour Court is, thus, required to be modified.
18.
Accordingly, the award is modified.
The employees of the petitioner- society are declared to be entitled to the revised scales of pay only with effect from December 1, 1989, instead of from January 1, 1986  19.
In view of my discussion, I am of the opinion that the award of the Labour Court does not require interference by this Court except to the extent of the modification in the date from which the employees are entitled to the revised pay scales.
20.
Subject to the modification in the date of implementation of the revised pay scales i.e., with effect from December 1, 1989, instead of January 1, 1986, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.