KS Kumaran, J - The third respondent Subh Ram (hereinafter to be referred as 3rd respondent) raised an industrial dispute, stating that he was appointed as Work Supervisor with the petitioner - the Haryana Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) with effect from 1461985 on a monthly salary of Rs. 300/- and that the petitioner illegally terminated his services with effect from 29.12.1987 without complying with the provisions of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The attempt before the Conciliation Officer failed and, therefore, the matter was referred to the Industrial Tribunal Gurgaon for adjudication (Reference 71/1988 on the file of Industrial Tribunal, Gurgaon).
The petitioner contended before the Industrial Tribunal that the 3rd respondent was not a workman as defined in section 2(S) of the Act; that he was employed for a specific period to supervise the work of construction w.e.f.
24.6.1986.
The petitioner also contended that the third respondent had been specifically informed that his employment will come to an end of the completion on the work.
Another contention put forward by the petitioner is that the third respondent is gainfully employed.
The third respondent, on the other hand, contended that he was not appointed for any specific job but was performing the work of maintaining records and the duties of a Peon.
2.
The learned Industrial Tribunal, after examination of the evidence, records and the rival contentions of the parties held that the third respondent was not doing any supervisory work, but is a workman as defined in Section 2(S) Of the Act; that the third respondent had worked with the petitioner from 341986 to 29.12.1987 and, as such, had continuously worked with the management for more than 240 days; that the construction work by the petitioner continued up to the year, 1989 and that some other person was also appointed in place of the third respondent.
Therefore, the Industrial Tribunal held that since the third respondent had worked with the petitioner for more than 240 days and since the petitioner did not comply with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, the termination of the services of the third respondent was illegal and unjustified, and that the third respondent is entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
3.
Questioning this award pased by the Industrial Tribunal, Gurgaon, the petitioner-management has come forward with this petition for quashing the said award (Annexure P14) by issuing an appropriate writ.
The contention of the petitioner is that it started the construction work of 30 MT Barley Malt Plant at Jatusana (District Rewari) and in order to supervise the said construction work, the third respondent was appointed on a consolidated pay of Rs. 400/- pm on daily wages with effect from 341986 to 3061986, as per appointment order Annexure P.1.
The petitioner also contends that similar orders (like Annexures P7, P5, P3 and P9) appointing him for specific periods and for specific work were also issued, and that the last order of appointment was up to 28121987 after the expiry of which no further extension was granted as the services of the third respondent were no longer required in view of the stoppage of construction work of 30 MT Barley Malt Plant.
So, according to the petitioner, the case is covered by the provisions of Section 2(oo) of the Act and hence the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act are not attracted to the case of the third respondent.
4.
On the other hand, the third respondent has filed a written statement, stating that the post of Work Supervisor is a duly sanctioned permanent post; that repeated appointment letters were issued to him to such a post which was available, as that the action of the petitioner was a clear case of unfair labour practice.
The third respondent also alleged in his written statement that the construction work at the said Barley Malt Plant at Jatusana, continued up to the year 1990, that though he was working against the permanent post and had completed more than 240 days of service his services were terminated without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
The third respondent has also alleged that even after 1990, the construction work continued at Konsiwas Oil Mills at Rewari for two years and that at present, the construction work is continuing at Panchkula.
The third respondent further alleged that he was not working on a supervisory post.
According to him, his duties and responsibilities were like a Helper or a Peon.
5.
We have heard the counsel for both sides and find that on facts, the learned Industrial Tribunal found that there was no evidence to show that the third respondent herein was working in a supervisory capacity but, found that he was a workman.
On the admissions made by the witnesses examined on the side of the management, the Industrial Tribunal also found that the third respondent had worked continuously from 341986 to 29.12.1987; that no notice or pay in lieu of notice or retrenchment compensation was paid to the third respondent, and also that there was construction work up to 1989.
The petitioner, though contended that the work was suspended, but was again resumed in the year 1988, admitted that somebody else was appointed in place of the third respondent.
But there is nothing on record to show that the work was suspended.
On the contrary, the learned Industrial Tribunal found that the work continued up to 1989.
Therefore, on the basis of the findings of the Industrial Tribunal on these questions of facts we have now to consider whether the provisions of Section 2(oo), (bb) or Section 25-F of the Act will apply to the case of the third respondent.
Of course the petitioner gave successive letters of appointment with notional breaks, specifying that the third respondent herein was appointed with reference to a particular work, but it is clear that the conduct of the petitioner amounts to unfair labour practice.
Item No. 10 of Schedule V to the Act, while enumerating as to what amounts to unfair labour practice, provides that employing workmen as Badlis, casuals or temporary and to continue them as such for years with the object of depriving them of the status and privileges of permanent workmen, amountsto unfair labour practice.
If we go through the appointment letters issued to the third responddent by the petitioner, it is found that the petitioner had been appointed for specified periods.
One such appointment letter is Annexure P9 wherein there is a foot-note appended to it in the following terms :-  "The SDO Hafed, Jatusana, for information and necessary action.
He is further directed to ensure that the period of official engaged for the purpose of supervision of the const.
work, does not exceed 220 days otherwise you will be liable for the consequences.
The services of the official may be dispensed with immediately before the completion of 280 days."
Therefore, it is clear that notional breaks have been given and successive appointment letters have been issued to the third respondent, but, at the same time employing him for a period of more than 240 days in the year preceding the date of termination of his services.
If we consider this along with the foot note contained in Annexure P9, it will be clear that this is a case of unfair labour practice on the part of the petitioner herein whereby, in spite of the fact that there was work till 1989, the third respondent was issued appointment letters as if he was appointed for specified periods but at the same time continued in the job for more than 240 days in the years preceding his termination solely with the object of preventing him from getting the benefits of the beneficial labour legislations.
Under these circumstances we are of the view that the case of the third respondent is not one coming him the purview of section 2(oo), (bb) of the Act but squarely falling within the ambit of Section 25-F of the Act.
The learned counsel for the third respondent relied upon a decision of this court in Haryana State Federation v. Presiding Officer of the Labour Court, 1992(1) SCT 697 (P&H) (C.W.P.
12395/1991) in support of his contention.
That was a case where the workman was allowed to continue for 240 days and the management wanted to get rid of him and also started employing other persons.
The management contended that the workman was employed for a fixed period and was given five extensions in service, and that when further extension was not allowed, his services automatically stood terminated.
Therefore, the management contended that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act will not be attracted.
But, the workman contended that he had put in 240 days' during the 12 months preceding the termination of his services; that he had a right to continue in service till it was legally terminated at least by following the procedure laid down under Section 25-F of the Act.
In these circumstances, it was held that the provisions of Section 2(oo), (bb) have to be read along with Section 25-F of the Act and when the management had allowed the workman to continue in service with notional breaks after the workman had put in 240 days in service, it amounts to unfair labour practice if his services are terminated.
It was also held that in such a case, Section 25-F(ii) of the Act shall cover the case.
It was further held that if the services had been terminated within a period of 240 days, the contention of the management could be accepted; that it was a case of contract and his service stood terminated on the expiry of the contract, and that after the workman was allowed to continue for 240 days and the management wanted to get rid of him and started employing other persons, it amounted to unfair labour practice, as has been held, on similar facts, in Kapurthala Central Coop.
Bank Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (1984 LIC 974).
This decision certainly supports the case of the third respondent herein.
6.
Of course, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the Division Bench decision of this Court in C.W.P.
3827 of 1994 (Karnal Coop.
Central Bank v. The State of Haryana and others), 1994(4) SCT 664 (P&H).
in support of his contention.
That was a case where the workman was appointed for a period of 89 days and on the expiry of the said period and on his applications, he was twice appointed for another such periods of 89 days.
The order also specifically stated that his services could be terminated at any time without notice before the expiry of the said period.
The management terminated the services of the workman before the expiry of the period specified in the last order.
When the workman questioned his termination, the Labour Court passed an award setting aside the order of termination on the ground that the provisions of Section 25-F have not been complied with.
The management approached this Court by filing a writ petition and this Court found that the workman was admittedly appointed for a fixed term of 89 days on contract and, therefore, his services could be terminated at any time without notice before the expiry of the said period.
This Court also found that the services were terminated strictly in conformity with the terms of appointment.
This Court also found that the workman had worked for a period of 210 days only.
In these circumstances, this Court held that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not attracted.
The Court also found that there was nothing on record to indicate that the management was guilty of adopting unfair labour practice.
In those circumstances, the award of the Labour Court was set aside negativing the claim of the workman and holding that the termination was not in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
But the facts of the present case are quite different from the facts of the case in C.W.P.
No. 3827/1994 (supra).
In the present case, the appointment order did not contain a provision that the services are liable to be terminated any time without notice.
Although, the appointments were made for a specified period, they were extended from time to time with notional breaks.
The intendtion of the petitioner-management that the workman shall not be allowed to complete 240 days is also evident from appointment order Annexure P9.
The Industrial Tribunal has held that there was work up to 1989.
In spite of that, if the petitioner-management issued orders employing the third respondent for specified periods and extended the appointment for further periods, with notional breaks, but allowed the workman to continue for more than 240 days, the action of the petitioner-management amounts to unfair labour practice.
In these circumstances, we are of the view that the case of the third respondent is covered by Section 25-F of the Act.
When, admittedly, no notice or pay in lieu of notice or retrenchment compensation was either given or paid in terms of Section 25-F of the Act, the termination of the services of the third respondent becomes illegal.
Therefore, the learned Industrial Tribunal rightly ordered reinstatement of the third respondent into service with consequential benefits.
There is no ground for interfering with the order of the Industrial Tribunal.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon three decisions namely, Satpal Singh v. Union of India (1990(2) CLJ (C Cr.
& Rev) 664); JJ Shrimali v. District Development Officer, etc. (1989 LIC 689) and K Rajan v. Kerala State Electricity Board (1992 LIC 1208).
In our opinion, these decisions do not apply to the facts of the present case.
In Satpal Singh's case (supra) the workmen did not at all raise the plea that the work for which they had been employed was continuing or that their repeated appointments were a mere device to deny them regular or permanent status.
In those circumstances, the claim of the workmen was negatived.
The decision in JJ Shrimali's case (supra) related to a case where the workmen were issued appointment orders which in terms provided that the appointment was being made on purely ad hoc and temporary basis and was to last till scarcity works were in progress and the services will be liable to termination without notice.
It was held that the stipulation that the services of the workmen will end as soon as the scarcity relief work is wound up or ceased clearly brought it under section 2(oo), (bb) of the Act.
Therefore, this decision also will not be applicable to the facts of this case.
In K Rajan's case (supra), the question whether the workman had completed 240 days preceding the termination of the services and whether the work continued after his termination did not specifically arise for consideration.
Therefore, this decision also does not help the petitioner herein.
8.
Therefore, taking into account all these factors, this writ petition is dismissed but, in the circumstances of the case, without costs.
Petition dismissed.