RL Anand, J - This is a defendants' appeal and has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 6.5.1991 passed by the court of Shri MS Lobana, Additional District Judge, Chandigarh who allowed the appeal of plaintiff-respondent Shri NK Joshi by reversing the judgment and decree of the trial court and granted a decree in favour of the plaintiff-respondent against the defendant-appellants to the effect that the order of the defendant No. 2 dated 7/17-12-1984 was without jurisdiction, inoperative and defendants were also restrained from causing any enquiry against the plaintiff in pursuance of the said order.
It was also observed by way of clarification by the Ist Appellate Court that it would be open to the Disciplinary Authority to take appropriate action on the report submitted to it by the Enquiry Authority Shri SS Salodkar in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that NK Joshi, Senior Sales Officer of Coal India Ltd filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order of the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of Coal India Ltd, defendant No. 2 issued vide No. CIL/X1(E) 05292/92/1908 dated 7/171284 and served upon the plaintiff through defendant No. 3 at Chandigarh vide No. CIL/CMO/Chd/COFD/ENRY/PA/46 dated 2211995 was unconstitutional, unlawful arbitrary, unwarranted, without jurisdiction, mala fide, motivated and inductive with colourful exercise of powers in violation of the service bye- laws and instructions governing the service condition of the plaintiff and was contrary to Rules of natural justice and fair play and these were null and viod, ineffective and inoperative for all intents and purposes and the plaintiff was exonerated from the charges levelled against him vide charge sheet No. CIL/X/E/05291/26/885 dated 3151982 by defendant No. 1 company.
The plaintiff also prayed that defendants be restrained from holding fresh enquiry as ordered vide impugned order dated 7/17-12-84 quoted above.
The case set up by Mr. Joshi was that he was originally appointed as Junior Sales Officer and was promoted as Sales Officer and then to Senior Sales Officer and at that relevant time he was working as Regional Sales Officer at Chandigarh.
The plaintiff was elected Vice President of Coal Mines Officers Association of India and he started participating in all lawful activities of the Association.
In order to stop the plaintiff from participation in these activities defendant No. 2 started victimising the plaintiff and started transferring him from one place to the other.
Defendant No. 2 served upon the plaintiff a charge sheet dated 3151982.
The plaintiff submitted an application on 781982 for the inspection of the documents and submitted interim reply to the charge-sheet vide registered letter dated 2091982.
Defendant No. 2 appointed Shri SS Salodkar, an Enquiry Officer and Shri BN Sinha as the Presenting Officer.
The said Enquiry Officer held a detailed enquiry and recorded evidence of both the sides.
He concluded the enquiry and submitted his report to defendant No. 2.
The plaintiff alleges that he understands and believes that Mr. SS Salodkar exonerated him of the charges as not proved.
The services of the plaintiff are governed by Coal India (Executive, Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1978.
It was further pleaded by the plaintiff that in accordance with the provisions of said service Rules, no order of fresh enquiry could be passed in respect of the charges which had already been enquired into a competent officer and about which the report has already been submitted.
However, defendant No. 2 quashed the report of Mr. SS Salodkhar and ordered for a fresh enquiry and applied Shri AV Brahma as enquiry officer.
The plaintiff states that this order of defendant No. 2 was without jurisdiction and he had no right or authority to quash the enquiry report submitted by Mr. SS Salodkar and to order for fresh enquiry.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants who took preliminary objections i.e. that the suit was not maintainable in the present form; that the suit was bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of necessary parties; that the suit was not maintainable in the present form; that bad by the principles of waiver or acquiscence.
On merits, the stand of the defendants was that the plaintiff was appointed as Junior Sales Officer and was promoted as Sales Officer and then to Senior Sales Officer.
The work of the plaintiff was not satisfactory.
The defendants denied that defendant No. 2 started victimising the plaintiff by ordering frequent transfers from one place or the other in order to deprive the plaintiff from participating in the activities of the union.
The defendants admit that the charge sheet was issued upon the plaintiff according to rules.
There was no vindictive attitude on the part of defendant No. 2 when he issued charge-sheet.
The first Enquiry Officer Mr. SS Salodkar failed to conduct the enquiry in a proper manner.
The defendants admit that vide order dated 7/17.12.1984 the report of the first Enquiry Officer Mr. SS Salodhar was quashed and it was in the competency of defendant No. 2 to do so.
He had also powers to hold fresh enquiry according to rules.
Lastly it was submitted by the defendants that the suit of the plaintiff had no merit and the same may be dismissed.
The plaintiff filed rejoinder to the written statement of defendants in which he reiterated his allegations made in the plaintiff while denying those in the written statement and from the pleadings of the parties, the trial court framed the following issues :-  1) Whether the orders dated 171284 and 22.1.1985 are illegal, of so, its effect?
OPP 2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction as prayed for?
OPP 3) Whether the suit is not maintainable?
OPP  4) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of necessary parties?
OPD 5) Relief.
Both the parties led oral and documentary evidence in support of their case and on the conclusion of the proceedings, the trial court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants.
Issue No. 3 was also decided against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 4 was decided against the defendants and finally on the basis of the findings given to issues No. 1 and 3, the plaintiff was non-suited.
While disposing issue No. 3, the trial court held that the Coal India Ltd being a statutory body, being only a private registered company registered under the Companies Act could not give any benefit to the employees equivalent to the employees posted in the statutory body; hence the suit was not maintainable.
Under issues No. 1 and 2, the trial Court held that the order dated 7.12.1984 passed by defendant No.2 was illegal and that the plaintiff was not entitled to injunction.
4.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial court Mr. NK Joshi filed an appeal before the court of Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, who reversed the findings of the trial court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff in the terms stated in the earlier portion of this judgment.
It was held by the learned Ist Appellate Court and rightly too that the defendants company is controlled by Central Government.
Applying the test laid down by the Supreme Court in case in Ajay Hasia v. Khalil Mujib, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 487, the defendants company was held an instrumentality of the Central Government and consequently an 'authority' within the meaning and interpretation of of Article 12 of the Constitution.
This court is also of the view that the trial Court did not decide this aspect of the case properly and the first Appellant Court rightly held that the employees of the defendants- company had the right to maintain an action against the company in the courts of law if and when their statutory or fundamental rights under the Constitution were violated or infringed.
The first Appellate Court also reversed the findings of the trial court by interpreting Rules 29.2 and 30 of the Service Rules and stated in para No. 9 of the judgment that in the punishing authority the powers do not vest to appoint some other officer as enquiry authority nor the punishing authority has the jurisdiction to direct the holding of fresh enquiry by some other officer other than the one appointed initially for this purpose.
In other words, according to the first Appellate Court, the appointment of Mr. Brahma was not permissible under the Rules after the submission of the report by Mr. Salodkar.
As per observation of the first Appellate Court, the punishing authority could refer back the matter to Mr. Salodkar alone for further enquiry but not appoint a fresh person for holding a fresh enquiry.
The first appellate Court also observed in para No. 10 of the judgment that the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as KR Dev v. the Collector of Central Excise Shillong, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1447 are applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 6.5.1991 passed by the first Appellate Court, this time defendants have filed the present R.S.A.
I have heard Shri JS Kher, Sr. Advocate on behalf of the appellants with Shri Sumit Malhotra and Shri RL Sharma, Advocate on behalf of plaintiff- respondent No. 1 and with their assistance I have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The plaintiff was non-suited on two grounds that he could not file the suit against defendant No. 1 as it was not a statutory body.
The reasons of dismissal of the suit I have already reproduced above and I am of the considered view that the trial court was not justified in holding that defendant No. 1 was not instrumentality of the State.
The controversy has been set at rest with the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Ajay Hasia v. Khalil Mujib, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 487 wherein it was held that company like defendant No.1 being controlled by the Central Government and therefore, was an instrumentality of the Central Government and consequently it is an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
Even otherwise, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants did not challenge or advance any argument on this aspect of the case.
6.
The second ground for the dismissal of the suit taken by the trial court was that the punishing authority had the powers to appoint new officer for holding fresh/further enquiry according to Rule 30 and therefore, the orders dated 7/171284 were valid.
At the cost of repetition this reason did not prevail upon the mind of the first Appellate Court who was of the view that Rule 30 gives powers to the disciplinary authority, if it is not itself the enquiry authority, as in this case, for reasons to be recorded by it into writing, power to remit the case to the enquiry authority for fresh or further enquiry and report but does not vest it with jurisdiction or power to appoint other officer as enquiry authority or to direct the holding of a fresh enquiry by some officer other than the one appointed initially for the purpose.
I am not in agreement with the reasons advanced by the first Appellate Court while decreeing the suit of the plaintiff nor I am in agreement with the reasons given by the trial Court when it dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
I am of the considered view that both the Courts below did not examine the relevant Rules in a proper manner.
Both the parties admit that Rule 30 of the Disciplinary Rules is guiding rule under which fresh or further enquiry could be conducted and I too would like to reproduce the said Rule 30 of the Conduct, Discipline & Appeal Rules, 1978 in extenso :-  "The Disciplinary Authority, if it is not itself the Inquiry Authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing remit the case to the Inquiring Authority for fresh or further inquiry and report and the Inquiring Authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of Rule 29.3 as far as may be."
A perusal of the above would show that the Disciplinary Authority in this case which was defendant No. 2 could hold further or fresh inquiry even appointing of different officer than the one who earlier enquired into the allegations, but before doing that it was mandatory and obligatory on the part of the punishing authority to record reasons in writing as to why he was taking such action.
This was not done by defendant No. 2 when he issued the orders dated 7/17-12-1984.
The relevant document in this regard is Ex.P6 on the record (also Ex.D.2) which is reproduced as follows :-  "Whereas an inquiry under Rule 29 of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1978 of the Company was held against Shri NK Joshi Senior Sales Officer, Regional Sales Officer CIL, Chandigarh, on the basis of the aforesaid Charge-Sheet.
And WHEREAS the undersigned considers that for sufficient and valid reasons the inquiry so far held should be quashed and a fresh inquiry should be held against the said Shri NK Joshi, Senior Sales Officer, Regional Sales Officer, CIL, Chandigarh, on all charges as contained in the Charage-sheet mentioned above.
NOW THEREFORE, the undersigned, in exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 29.2 of the said Rules, hereby appoints Shri AV Brahma, Chief of Personnel, Coal India Limited, as Inquring Authority to inqure into the charges framed against the said Shri NK Joshi, Senior Sales Officer, Regional Sales Office, CIL, Chandigarh, and by Rule 29.5 of the said Rules, the undersigned hereby appoints Shri R Bhaskaran, Dy.
Chief Mining Engineer, Coal India limited, Calcutta, as the Presenting Officer to present on behalf of the Company, the case in support of the articles of charge farmed against the said Shri NK Joshi, Senior Sales Officer, Regional Sales Office, CIL, Chandigarh".
A perusal of the above would show that no reasons are incorporated.
The bare mention that for sufficient and valid reasons the first enquiry report has been quashed is not enough.
Those sufficient and valid reasons were not produced before the trial Court by the defendant.
Moreover, even the plaintiff was not called upon before the issuance of the orders as contained in Ex.P.6./D.2.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that Ex.P.6/D.2 is a communication of the decision which was taken on the file.
I am not in a position to subscribe to the view of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.
Even no office noting has been produced before the trial Court and it will be difficult for me to agree with the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant, who also submitted that the plaintiff did not attack Ex. P.6./D.2 on the ground that the punishing authority did not record the reasons in writing.
This submission on behalf of the appellant is also deviod of merit.
The plaintiff has specifically challenged that the orders Ex.P.6./D.2 has been passed against the Rules and principles of natural justice.
7.
Now I would also like to discuss my reasons why I am not in agreement with the reasons advanced by the first Appellate Court.
There can be several eventualities when the punishing authority can appoint a new officer as enquiry officer substituting the one earlier appointed by him such as the first inquiry officer might retire from services, might become unable to discharge his duties or might attain the age of superannuation or in any unforeseen eventuality he could be placed under suspension or in the event of his death.
Keeping in view these circumstances Rules 30 was framed giving the power and jurisdiction to the punishing authority to appoint a new enquiring authority holding fresh or further enquiry.
The only mischief of this Rule is that before doing so the punishing authority was duty bound to record the reasons in writing which admittedly have not been proved on the record and for this reason the orders contained in Ex.P.6/D.2 are held void, illegal and inoperative vis-a-vis the rights of the plaintiff-respondent No. 1.
Thus I decide issue Nos. 1 and 2 and 3 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants, also like issue No. 4 which too was decided by the trial Court in favour of the plaintiff.
The net result is that the appeal is without any merit and is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
8.
Before I part with this judgment I would like to make it clear by observing that it would be open to the disciplinary authority to take appropriate action against the plaintiff by applying the provisions of Rule 30 and it will not be obligatory upon the Disciplinary Authority to take action only on the earlier report submitted to it by the enquiry authority Mr. SS Salodkar.