TS Doabia, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the proceeding taken by the respondents under Section 116 of the Army Act, 1950 hereinafter referred to the Army Act are being challenged.
Before noticing the specific ground taken in this behalf, it would be apt to notice a few facts.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Army in the Corps of Electrical & Mechanical Engineers, Army No. 14523234 was allotted to him.
According to him, he was receiving intimation from his village regarding the fact that his mother was seriously ill.
He had applied for Casual Leave.
His request was being denied by the Army Authorities.
The petitioner submits that he had taken advice from his colleagues in the Army that he can leave the Unit even in the absence of sanctioned leave and this can be condoned later on.
(Such submission has been made in para 16 of the petition).
After taking aforementioned advice from his colleagues, the petitioner left his unit on 1st January, 1984 and returned on 7th April, 1984.
As per the petitioner he was not allowed to report for duty at Chandi Mandir Cantt.
He was treated as a deserter.
He was asked to report to the Officer Commanding, Electrical & Mechanical Engineer Depot, Bn.
Secunderbad.
The petitioner thereafter was brought to Chandi Mandir.
It be seen that Union of India has denied this assertion of the petitioner that he was not allowed to join at Chandi Mandir Cantt.
The case of respondent Union of India is that the petitioner did not report at Chandi Mandir and reported at Secunderabad only.
The further fact is that the petitioner was treated as deserter.
Proceedings were taken against him.
A Summary Court Martial as envisaged by Section 116 was conducted against him.
The Summary Court Martial found that this was a case where the petitioner was required to be punished under Section 72 of the Army Act.
Sentence of three months rigorous imprisonment was imposed and he was sen to Civil Prison.
It was also decided to dismiss the petitioner from service.
The value of articles which were found missing were also assessed and order to this effect was also passed on 14th June, 1984.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has argued :-  (i) That there is a breach of Section 116(2) of the Army Act.
According to him two other persons who should be Officers or Junior Commissioned Officers should have been present in the proceedings conducted by the Summary Court Martial.
(ii) That the petitioner having reported for duty, he could not be treated as deserter.
(iii) That proceedings were conducted in breach of the provision of Section 161 of the Army Act.
According to the petitioner, the Officer who conducted the Trial was having less than five years of service and therefore, the sentence could not be given effect.
Accordingly, approval of Officer Commanding who should not be less than a Brigadier was required to be taken.
(iv) That the friend of the accused was not allowed in terms of Rule 129 of Army Rules.
It be seen that last two points sought to be urged have not been taken in the petition.
The question as to whether the person who was holding Summary Court Martial was having less than five years service or not cannot be determined in this writ petition.
The same is the situation vis-a-vis point No. (iv) In the absence of pleading it would not be possible for this Court to go into the matters.
So far as Section 116(2) of the Army Act is concerned, it appears that it was duly complied with.
I have gone through the original file.
It is indicated that two other officers were present during the Summary Court Martial proceedings.
A specific order was passed to this effect on 10th May, 1984.
This indicates that the Summary Court Martial was held in accordance with the Army Act.
It be sent that the proceedings indicate that the petitioner had admitted his guilt.
This is so recorded in the proceedings conducted by the Summary Court Martial.
The petitioner also made a statement that he does not wish to make statement.
This fact has again been recorded in the Summary Court Martial proceedings.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that this record had been prepared at a later state.
I am of the view that this is a case where the petitioner had admitted that he was absent.
As a matter of fact, this is the plea taken by him even in the Writ Petition.
If that be the position then it could not be said that the Officer who conducted the Summary Court Martial had erred in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty.
Enquiries was required to be held qua absence by the petitioner.
Above was the only question which was required to be gone into.
Further question was as to what punishment is required to be awarded to him for the lapse which was admitted.
The Summary Court Martial has awarded three months rigorous imprisonment and also passed an order that the petitioner should be dismissed from service.
This opinion has been formed keeping in view the fact, the petitioner belongs to a disciplined force and any lapse in this regard would effect the Army discipline.
Had there been some dispute vis-a-vis the absence of petitioner, something could have been said in his favour.
The stand taken by him was that he was absent.
He has taken a stand in the Writ Petition that he took advice of his colleagues and therefore, he had absented himself.
In this situation it cannot be said the Officer conducting Summary Court Martial has committed any error.
This court can examine this matter at its own level also.
See Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad etc. etc. v Karunakar etc. etc., in AIR 1994 SC 1074.
I am accordingly of the view that the decision taken by the Army Authorities cannot be faulted.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the punishment of the imprisonment and dismissal from the service could not be imposed.
According to him the petitioner has been visited with double punishment for the same lapse.
This argument cannot be accepted.
Section 71 indicates what punishments can be awarded.
In addition to other punishment Section 71(e) indicates that dismissal from service can also be ordered.
If this be the position, then the argument that punishment of dismissal from service could not be awarded.
This petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
There would be no order as to cost.
Security if paid be refunded as per rules.