JC Verma, J. (Oral) - Late Sh. Om Parkash Juneja, petitioner in the present writ petitioner has challenged the order dated 1881989 (Annexure P- 6) of the Labour Court passed on his applications under Section 33(2)(C) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 awarding subsistence allowance at the rate of 50% of his normal wages for the period from 2.7.1969 to 21.9.1970 and at 25% for the period from 22.7.1970 to 3091977.
The petitioner moved three applications claiming subsistence allowance on different dates i.e. claim application No. 25-C of 1977 for the period relating to 2271969 to 31.12.1976, claim application No. 255-C relating to the period from 1.1.1977 to 3061977 and claim application No. 281-C of 1977 relating to the period from 171977 to 3091977 respectively.
2.
The petitioner has died on 17.9.1981 (now being represented through his legal heirs i.e. widow Promila Juneja and three minor daughters and one minor son brought on record as per order dated 25.1.1982 in Civil Misc. No. 17 of 1982).
3.
The facts are not disputed.
The petitioner was serving in Northern Railway.
He was placed under suspension on 2271969 and right upto September 30, 1977 he was not paid any subsistence allowance.
He was suspended because of disciplinary proceedings which could not be started against the petitioner even after more than one year of his suspension.
It is also not disputed that under Rule 2043 of (F.R.
53) of the Indian Railway Estt.
Code II, the petitioner while under suspension was entitled to subsistence allowance at the rate of 50% of the salary for the first 12 months.
The subsistence allowance can be increased after 12 months and could also be reduced to the extent of 25%, if it is found that the delinquent official was responsible for prolonging the disciplinary proceedings against him.
Rule 2043 (F.R.
53) has been reproduced at page 5 of the writ petition which is admitted in the written statement.
My attention has been invited to the statement of Mr. AK Dewan, Divisional Safety Officer, Northern Railway, Amritsar, Annexure P-3 which was recorded on SA by the Presiding Officer, Central Labour Court, Amritsar on 1491977 as A.W.-1.
This witness of the Railway had categorically stated before the Labour Court that late Om Parkash, petitioner had been attending the enquiry proceedings regularly and the enquiry was delayed because concerned witneses to be examined by the Railway had been retired and their whereabouts were not easy to ascertain.
He has also admitted that the petitioner was not at all responsible for prolonging of the enquiry.
It is interesting to note that even when this statement was recorded on 1491977, the enquiry had not been concluded (this statement has been recorded in the 1st application i.e. application No. 25-C of 1977).
It shall be quite relevant to reproduce the statement of Sh. AK Dewan in toto :  "The petitioner has been attending the enquiry pending against him regularly but the enquiry proceedings had been protracted because of the concerned witnesses who have since been retired from the railway service and whose whereabouts are not easy to ascertain and their attendance is also equally difficult to procure.
All efforts are, however, being made to expedite the proceedings and to cause their attendance in this enquiry.
The petitioner is not responsible for the prolonging of the enquiry.
Most of the witnesses have in fact been examined in the enquiry and it is likely to be concluded in the near future".
4.
In his statement Sh. SB Bargoojar, Senior Divisional Commercial Superintendent (A.W.
2) has categorically stated that no order in regard to the payment of subsistence allowance as required under rule 2043 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code Volume II was made by the competent authority.
The statement is reproduced as under which he had deposed before the Labour Court on 2741978 :-  "The petitioner was placed under suspension by the Divisional Commercial Supdt.
which is the disciplinary authority over this witness.
I do not know if any order regarding payment of subsistence allowance as provided under rule 2043 of the Railway Establishment Code Volume II was made by the competent authority in regard to the petitioner after he was placed under suspension.
No order was passed for payment of such allowance to the petitioner."
5.
The Labour Court vide impugned order had consolidated all the three applications.
The Labour Court has reduced the findings in favour of the petitioner by holding (i) that the Labour Court has jurisdiction to determine the amount under Section 33-(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, (ii) that the petitioner was not gainfully employed during suspension period, (iii) that no subsistence allowance for the period in question was ever paid to him.
But the Labour Court while reducing subsistence allowance at 25% for the period 21.7.1970 to 3091977 has completely by misdirected itself.
No reason whatsoever has been given for reducing the wages of the petitioner.
On the other hand, wages of subsistence allowance were to be increased from 50% as petitioner was not held responsible for prolonging the enquiry.
Rule 2043 inter alia provides that subsistence allowance is to be increased to the extent of 75% after 12 months of suspension provided the delinquent official is not held responsible for prolonging the enquiry.
The relevant part of Rule 2043 is reproduced as under :-  "2043 (F.R.
53).
Pay during suspension :- (1) A Railway Servant under suspension shall be entitled to the following payments namely :- (i) in the case of a Commission Officer of the Indian Medical Department or a Warrant Officer in Railway employ who is liable to revert to military duty, the pay and allowance to which he would have been entitled had he been suspended while in military employment.
(ii) in the case of a Railway Servant other than that mentioned in Clause (i) - .
A subsistence allowance at an amount equal to the leave salary to which the Railway Servant would have drawn if he had been on leave or on half average pay or on half pay and in addition to dearness allowance, if admissible, on the basis of such salary.
Provided that where the period of suspension exceeds 12 months, the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order of suspension shall be competent to vary the amount of subsistence allowance for any period subsequent to the period of the first twelve months as follows:-  (i) the amount of subsistence allowance may be increased by a suitable amount, not exceeding 50 per cent of the subsistence allowance admissible during the period of the first twelve months, if in the opinion of the said authority, the period of suspension has been prolonged for reasons to be recorded in writing, not directly attributable to the railway servant; (ii) the amount of subsistence allowance may be reduced by a suitable amount, not exceeding 50 per cent of the subsistence allowance admissible during the period of the first twelve months, in the opinion of the said authority, the period of suspension has been prolonged due to reasons, to be recorded in writing, directly attributable to the railway servant."
6.
From the persual of the pleading of the parties and the order made by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, it is crystal clear that there was no fault whatsoever of the petitioner for prolonging the enquiry or proceedings.
The Railway Authority has admitted that the enquiry was delayed because the witnesses were not produced by the Railway Authority in time.
Not a single instance has been pointed out anywhere before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court to the effect that the late petitioner Sh. Om Parkash was at any time at fault for prolonging the proceedings.
7.
In view of the circumstances mentioned above and the evidence produced before the Labour Court, the order of the Labour Court for awarding 25% of the wages after 12 months of the initial suspension instead of 75% of the wages is perverse and not based on any evidence or on any rationale.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed and order dated 1881989 (Annexure P.6) is modified to the following extent :  (i) the legal heirs of the late petitioner Om Parkash shall be entitled to 50% of the normal wages of the period from 2271969 to 21.7.1970 (ii) that for the period from 22.7.1970 to 3091977, the petitioner (legal representatives of the petitioner shall be entitled to the subsistence allowance at the rate of 75% of the normal wages which would have accrued to him under the rules and all other allowances admissible at that time".
The order of the Labour Court is modified to the extent mentioned above with a direction to pay to the widow of the petitioner the entire amount within three months from the receipt of the certified copy to the Judgment and to pay interest on the difference of such amount at the rate of 12% per annum.
In case, the amount is not paid within the stipulated period, the interest shall be paid to 18% from the due date till realisation.
9.
Respondent No. 2 has not put in appearance despite service having been effected on it as per orders of this Court.
He is proceeded ex-parte.
10.
The writ petition is allowed as per decision mentioned above but without any costs.