SS Sudhalkar, J - This writ petition has been filed by the workman against the award of the Labour Court, Bhathinda, Annexure P-12, vide which the petitioner was held not entitled either to reinstatement or compensation.
The Labour Court, of course, had given a direction that in case any vacancy either of incharge Sweepers/Gardeners or of the nature of which the workman has done from time to time, he shall have preferential right over the same.
Feeling aggrieved by the award, this writ petition has been filed.
2.
When the matter came up for hearing none was present for the parties.
3.
We have perused the record of the case including the copy of the award produced.
The petitioner has contended that he was appointed initially as a Security Guard on temporary basis for 89 days but was allowed to continue on the said post without any break.
He was promoted and appointed as a Security Supervisor on 27121988 again on temporary basis.
His appointment as a Security Supervisor was further extended for another six months.
4.
It is contended that the post of Security Guard against which he was initially appointed and that of Security Supervisor to which he was subsequently promoted and appointed is a substantive post and are still in existence and the petitioner has a right to be confirmed against the said posts.
On 25121989 the petitioner was appointed as an Incharge of Sweepers/Gardeners on the same salary which he was already drawing.
This was again on temporary basis for a period of six months.
He accepted the appointment under protest and the submitted an application to the Chief Executive, protesting against his appointment because his service from its very inception belonged to the Security Section.
He also approached the Labour Law Officer, Abohar for protesting against the order.
The management started harassing him and his service was terminated by passing a cryptic order without giving any reason or proper compensation.
The order is at Annexure P-8.
With reference to his appointment order, the petitioner has been informed that his services are no longer required vide order dated 15.12.1990.
5.
The petitioner raised a demand notice and a reference was made to the Labour Court at Bhatinda.
The Labour Court held that the termination of the petitioner was justified.
The Labour Court has not considered the question of availability of the post and the continuous service rendered by the petitioner.
Moreover, the order of termination of service does not mention the amount of compensation.
Regarding the termination, it has been held by the Labour Court as under:-  "No doubt, the workman deposed to the contrary yet it may safely be said that he simply failed to wriggle out either from the appointment order dated 2891990 or the factum of deposit of above referred amount in his account in the bank."
It has been further observed by the Labour Court that :-  "Without elaborating further, this issue is decided in favour of the applicant holding that termination of the workers by it was justified and in order particularly in view of the fact (as mentioned in Ex. M/1/A) that post which the workman was holding at the relevant time was abolished on account of financial constraint."
6.
The post on which the petitioner was appointed and which he was holding at the time of termination are different.
The Labour Court award is cryptic.
We find that virtually no reason has been given by the Labour Court in arriving at its finding.
The award of the Labour Court, therefore, deserves to be set aside.
We, therefore, set it aside and remand the case to be decided by the Labour Court, Bhathinda afresh after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to the parties and also recording further evidence as may be produced by the parties.
This writ petition stands allowed on the above terms.
Petition allowed.